 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 268 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 178 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 3 of 178 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 21 SEPTEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Good morning DCJ.  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I believe you need to deal with 
certain issues before we begin? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes before we – yes before we proceed 
with today’s business, I just want to deal with a matter that 
as quite correctly attracted the attention of the public and 
10 
the media a lot.   
 
Previously I determined that today up to Friday 
would be the week when the former President Mr Jacob 
Zuma would appear before this commission. 
 
He was notified thereof and after some time his 
attorneys wrote to the commission and said that he would 
not be appearing before this commission during this week. 
 
The reasons they gave include that he was busy 
preparing for his criminal trial that his doctors have 
advised him to limit his movements because of his age and 
20 
Covid-19 and that he is – he was seeking legal advice on 
the 
implications 
of 
the 
recent 
amendments 
to 
the 
Regulations of this commission. 
 
I do not want to comment at this stage on his 
reasons for deciding that he would not appear before this 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 4 of 178 
 
commission this week.   
 
The media have sent a number of enquiries with 
regard to him including a question such as whether this 
commission will issue a subpoena to compel him to appear 
before it and whether there are other dates which have 
been determined when he should appear. 
 
Since his attorneys informed the commission that 
he would not be appearing this week in order for the 
commission to use its time optimally arrangements were 
made for the matter that we are going to hear this week to 
10 
be heard this week.  This was a matter that was going to 
be heard later in the year.  So the commission had to 
rearrange its plans so that we could use this week properly 
which otherwise would be wasted. 
 
I decided after receiving – the commission had 
received his response through his attorneys to fix the date 
for the hearing of the commission legal team’s application 
for an order authorising the issuing of a summons against 
Mr Zuma. 
 
I have determined that that date will be the 9 
20 
October at 09:00 am.  He and his lawyers have been 
informed that unless I am satisfied on that date that there 
are good grounds for them not to appear if they do not 
appear that application will proceed without them. 
 
They have been informed that should they wish to 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 5 of 178 
 
make use of a virtual appearance before the commission 
and if they inform the commission timeously arrangements 
will be made for them to appear virtually before the 
commission.  But that application will proceed with or 
without them unless I am satisfied that there are good 
grounds for them not to be here. 
 
I have also determined new dates for Mr Zuma’s 
appearance before the commission since becoming aware 
of the letter from his attorneys.  Those dates are 16 to 20 
November 2020.  Those are the dates that I have 
10 
determined.  I know that in their letter they – his attorneys 
said dates should be negotiated with him or with them.  No 
dates will be negotiated with them or with him.   
 
This commission has made it clear to the attorneys 
who represented him before that this commission does not 
negotiate dates with witnesses.  The commission fixes the 
dates and people are supposed to appear and if they have 
got good grounds for not appearing then they make an 
application – a necessary application and show that they 
have got good grounds.  And if I am satisfied that they are 
20 
good grounds other dates will be determined. 
 
But we will not negotiate dates with witnesses.  So 
the position as it stands is the application brought by the 
legal team of the commission for the authorisation of a 
summons – the issuing of a summons against Mr Zuma will 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 6 of 178 
 
proceed on the 9 October at 09:00 and the dates of 16 to 
20 
November 
2020 
have 
been 
determined 
for 
his 
appearance. 
 
That is all I wanted to say about that matter and 
now we may proceed.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair the 
evidence contemplated for this week concerns matters 
related to the Department’s – in the Free State dealing with 
housing.  And in particular a series of events that took 
place during 2010 and 2011 concerning certain pre-
10 
payments over half a billion Rand made to suppliers in 
order to avoid forfeiting funds to the fiscus. 
 
What has been described as a fraudulent scheme of 
payments to suppliers causing great prejudice and loss to 
the department?  And that really is the focus of the 
evidence this week. 
 
Now Chair the witnesses who will testify will firstly 
be Mr Mokhesi who came onto the scene later than the 
relevant period but brought an application on behalf of the 
department or the department to review its own decisions 
20 
and that application summarises most of the relevant facts 
which are common cause between a number of parties – 
not all the parties but the relevant parties.  Mr Mokhesi will 
take you through the events Chair to deal with the matters. 
 
Mr Mokoena was the Head of Department at the 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 7 of 178 
 
time.  He will testify to certain issues and then a Mr 
Mkhatshwa will also testify in relation to certain issues. 
 
But Chair there have been a number of reports and 
investigations into this matter.  The Special Investigations 
Union – Unit have dealt with the matter. There have been 
forensic reports – the number of forensic reports and there 
has been of course the application for – by the department 
which involved a great deal of research into the events that 
happened. 
 
There was also a very, very thorough disciplinary 
10 
inquiry which is the focus of certain factual investigations 
that have been conducted for that purpose and that too is a 
matter of record. 
 
So Chair it is not the intention of the evidence 
leaders in this matter to rehash all those investigations it 
would be a matter of repetition. 
 
But what we would like to do with your leave Chair 
is focus on two issues?  One is the issue of accountability.  
Who was held accountable for what happened and why 
were certain people not held accountable?  That will be the 
20 
first focus. 
 
The second focus would be to show that this 
prepayment scheme to suppliers that was devised in order 
to allow the department to spend over a half a billion Rand 
for little or no value under a – what has been termed by 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 8 of 178 
 
the court in their application as a fraudulent scheme is – 
took place within a context and that context was an entirely 
irregular background of the irregularities in relation to 
procurement.   
 
From the start in 2010 matters went wrong or 
deliberately were caused to go wrong in an entirely 
irregular scheme and that is – that context in the housing – 
housing settlements – Human Settlements Department will 
be placed before you. 
 
Those two issues important as they are seemed to 
10 
have really escaped notice and whilst it is important to tell 
the whole story for the purposes of the commission which 
we will do it is those two issues upon which we will focus. 
 
Chair there are a number of bundles that have been 
prepared.  They contain the statements of nine witnesses 
not necessary to deal with the evidence of all nine 
witnesses as will become apparent.   
There 
is 
a 
file 
containing 
transcripts 
of 
the 
interviews with certain of the witnesses.   
Then there is a file which deals with the court 
20 
proceedings and contains the judgment of a full bench of 
the Free State Division. 
Then there is a file containing a number of forensic 
reports which it is not necessary to detail but we will refer 
to certain aspects of those forensic reports. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 9 of 178 
 
And 
there 
is 
a 
file 
containing 
the 
relevant 
legislation and prescripts and then importantly there is a 
file which contains the disciplinary records.  The full 
disciplinary record which is there then for – and the 
findings 177 pages of findings parts of which we will rely 
on as well Chair to complete the picture which would 
otherwise not be complete.  That – those records are 
before you for purposes of the commission, submissions, 
your findings Chair and any other purpose to which they 
may be put in due course. 
10 
And then similarly to the Asbestos matter Chair we 
have 
together 
with 
the 
investigators 
compiled 
an 
investigators report which sets out from beginning to end 
all the detailed facts which is there as a matter of record 
again for submissions and the final report.   It is supported 
by documentary evidence and again it is not necessary to 
go through that. 
So Chair if by your leave I can just deal with a few 
matters by way of opening and then summarise the 
important events to which reference will be made in 
20 
evidence and then if we may deal with the evidence of Mr 
Mokhesi who brought the application on behalf of the 
department – for the Department to review its own 
decisions in relation to the prepayments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is in order. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 10 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair there were two applications 
or perhaps still are two applications for cross-examination 
of Mr Mokoena.   
 
Mr Mokoena the HOD at the time in his statement 
made certain allegations concerning a Mr Mkhatshwa and 
Mr 
Koloi. 
 
They 
both 
filed 
applications 
for 
cross-
examination but after correspondence with the attorneys 
and given the evidence that is to be led, they have put 
those applications on hold.  So it is not necessary to deal 
with them at this stage and they will in all probability not 
10 
be preceded with. 
 
I have dealt with the bundles and documentation 
that is before you and I have dealt with what we will focus 
on in opening and in the evidence.  The three witnesses 
have been named and then a Mr Zwane who in a sense 
devised this scheme the evidence will be – it was 
apparently and I stress the word apparently not held 
accountable for any of the outcomes of that scheme and its 
illegality – manifest illegality will be asked to explain his 
position in relation to that. 
20 
 
In essence what happened here is a number of 
junior employees were disciplined and I say junior with 
respect they 
were not mere functionaries they were 
officials of some seniority but the people who were 
ultimately 
responsible 
for 
the 
scheme 
and 
its 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 11 of 178 
 
implementation no consequences followed. 
 
Chair the – the background is important because it 
is 
important 
to 
understand 
the 
impropriety 
of 
the 
prepayment scheme within its proper context. 
 
In 2010/2011 there were actually regular contracts 
entered into with contractors.  And at a stage during that 
financial year the normal properly procured contracts were 
ready to be implemented.  Then there came a change the 
Premier at the time Mr Magashule decided that there would 
be a change in the whole system, bigger houses would be 
10 
built, disputes arose with the contractors and a new tender 
process had to be commenced. 
 
The new tender process was indeed commenced 
during the 2010/2011 financial year.  But what happened 
was that by the time the bid adjudication committee came 
to consider the bids the period of validity of the tenders 
had expired.  Instead of regularising the position by 
extending the validity of the period or the period of validity 
of the tenders – instead of simply regularising that and 
there are various ways that are required to do that it was 
20 
just abandoned. 
 
The – those who qualified in terms of the bids and 
those who were disqualified including those who were 
declared incompetent to build were all put on a data base.  
And that data base certain officials including Mr Zwane the 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 12 of 178 
 
evidence will be merely selected who they wanted to – to 
do the work. 
 
So the contractors that were appointed during this 
whole process who received goods from the suppliers 
which accounts were prepaid were there irregularly in the 
first place.  Instead of going through a proper tender 
process the relevant departments simply abandoned the 
process, threw it overboard and put qualified, disqualified 
on a data base and then just subjectively selected who 
they wanted to appoint.  Huge contract 500 000 houses in 
10 
Municipalities in the Free State. 
 
So in the original process Chair 361 bids were 
received.  105 were disqualified for basic bid compliance 
reasons; not properly registered, no tax returns or other 
formal 
reasons 
but 
important 
reasons. 
 
147 
were 
disqualified because they did not meet the minimum 
functionality 
threshold. 
 
In 
other 
words, 
were 
not 
competent to do the work.  There were 109 who qualified.  
81 established contractors and 28 emerging contractors.  
That was the situation when the whole bidding process was 
20 
thrown overboard because of the – expiry of the validity 
period. 
 
So instead of reinstating the process and there are 
ways to do that which will be dealt with Chair all those 
qualified and disqualified were put onto a data base and 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 13 of 178 
 
then at the discretion of officials subjective discretion of 
officials people were appointed to do work. 
 
Of course, this had alarming consequences at the 
end which is the subject matter reports.  Contractors 
simply could not do the work.  They walked off site.  
Monies 
disappeared 
and 
all 
that 
is 
the 
subject 
of 
investigation in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 And 
of 
course 
putting 
the 
service 
providers on the data base implies that as far as the 
department is concerned they can be given jobs. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct.  So it opens the door for 
subjective allocation of work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is putting… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At a discretion of an official. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if you put onto the data base service 
providers that have been found to be incomp – not 
competent to do the job it means you could be giving jobs 
to service providers who are not competent to do the job. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is exactly what happened Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In fact the outcome of this whole 
process began here.  It was disastrous for those people in 
the Free State who needed housing – low cost housing.  
There was a huge national project for the development of 
low cost housing originally and in its conception but 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 14 of 178 
 
ironically it was designed to avoid mismanagement and 
corruption but that is precisely what happened in the Free 
State. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So the first in the 2010/2011 year 
the first issue that has really not received much attention 
was that the foundations – well there were not very many 
foundations at the end of the day but the foundation of the 
project 
– 
the 
housing 
project 
was 
fraught 
with 
irregularities. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Quite simply a whole lot of qualified 
– disqualified people were put on the data base and from 
that data base people were then selected subjectively at 
the instance of particular officials. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The detail of how the matter should 
have been regularised will be dealt with in evidence Chair 
but for the moment suffice it to say that it was not a lawful 
option simply to abandon the process simply because a 
20 
particular time period had expired.   
 
We 
will 
deal 
with 
the 
regulatory 
framework 
governing both the appointment of contractors on the one 
hand and suppliers to contractors on the other.  But what is 
clear from the start Chair is neither contractors nor 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 15 of 178 
 
suppliers of materials to contractors were subject to any 
competitive bidding process which as we have dealt with in 
the Asbestos matter is clearly unlawful and inexcusable. 
 
So we will deal with the Section 217 of The 
Constitution; 
we 
will 
deal 
with 
the 
Public 
Finance 
Management Act Provisions; the Treasury Regulations and 
we will deal with the division of Revenue Act.   
 
This money that was allocated by the National 
Fiscus to the Free State for the construction of houses was 
allocated in terms of an Act colloquially called DORA the 
10 
Division of Revenue Act.   And that act is quite explicit.  It 
says that we are going to allocate money to the Province 
for 
a 
particular 
express 
purpose 
in 
this 
case 
the 
construction of low cost housing.   
 
The Act is very clear that if any of that money is to 
be paid to third parties such as contractors or suppliers it 
has to be done in terms of the regular procurement process 
– open bidding process which complies with the Supply 
Chain Management requirements of the Province.  That did 
– simply did not happen. 
20 
 
That fact it is clear was concealed from National.  
So not only must goods be procured or services be 
procured from third parties in accordance with Supply 
Chain Management Policy or Procurement Policy of the 
relevant Province and for which adequate documentation 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 16 of 178 
 
for payment has been received.   
 
So not only that but the – the purpose must be 
complied with.  So it is only for housing in terms of the Act 
and in accordance with proper procedures. 
 
But 
then 
there 
is 
a 
third 
provision 
which 
is 
important in this case.  It says you cannot make advanced 
payments to anybody.  You have to have received the 
goods or the services have to have been verified and done 
before you pay money out.  For obvious reasons to avoid 
precisely what happened in the Province. 
10 
 
That 
can 
only 
happen 
in 
two 
circumstances 
according to DORA.  The first is the Receiving Officer in 
the Free State who receives the money has certified to the 
National Treasury that the transfer is not an attempt to 
artificially inflate its spending estimates and that there are 
good reasons for the advanced payment or transfer.   
 
That it is clear on the department’s own version 
subsequently was precisely the purpose.  What happened 
was that by – towards the end of the financial year the 
Free State had not spent over a billion Rand of its income 
20 
and had to devise a fraudulent scheme or well a scheme 
which turned out to be fraudulent in order to spend that 
money.  And all sorts of mechanisms were devised to 
ensure that that money could be spent completely irregular 
schemes and that will be – that story will be told and 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 17 of 178 
 
placed before you. 
 
But the second thing is that National Treasury must 
approve the advanced payment.  It did not and in fact it 
was told something completely different and that – that 
evidence will be placed before you. 
 
So this scheme that was devised Chair by the Free 
State Human Settlements Department in order to spend the 
money before the year end otherwise the money goes back 
to Treasury was devised at the highest level.  It was 
devised at the level of the MEC in a War Room – Mr 
10 
Zwane.  He devised it and executed it and that War Room 
supervised the execution of the scheme; the detail of which 
will become clear in the evidence of Mr Mokhesi. 
 
Not only did they devise it but they ignored 
warnings from National that this was illegal and should not 
be proceeded with and notwithstanding those warnings the 
scheme was in fact proceeded. 
 
The matter was done without proper legal advice 
being taken perhaps for obvious reasons because the – the 
advice had already been given by National that this 
20 
scheme was illegal and on the face of it was manifestly 
illegal. 
 
There are various elements of this scheme that will 
emerge in evidence.  Not only were payments made to 
suppliers before goods were even supplied but payments 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 18 of 178 
 
were made to suppliers and then on paid to contractors as 
so called bridging finance is not the business of the Human 
Settlements Department at all.  And then in addition and in 
order to ensure that as much money was spent as fast 
possible retainer agreements retentions which would be 
kept back by the department to compensate for work poorly 
done or work not done those rights were abandoned 
entirely.  So even the retainer amounts were paid out 
prematurely.  Of course, they had serious consequences 
because as matters turned out, the result was all but 
10 
hopeless and that retention money was needed but that had 
been foregone to insure it.  The details of that will be put 
before you. 
 
The agreements that were entered into as part of the 
scheme, which the court found to be a fraudulent scheme, 
are quite complicated but we will do our best to explain them 
so that they are accessible to those who have an interest in 
following it. 
 
But essentially, there were three levels of contract.  The 
first is the contract with the construction entity, the builder.  
20 
That contract with the builder was clear in its terms, was on 
the face of it regular insofar as the contents of the contract 
concerned. 
 
We have already said that the selection was entirely 
irregular but once the contract was entered into, it was the 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 19 of 178 
 
duty of the contractor to source the materials, to pay for the 
materials, to put the materials into the building. 
 
And then on three milestones being achieved, would 
invoice the department and the department would paid the 
contractors.  So the contract in itself was, on the face of it, 
quite regular. 
 
But in order to spend the money before the year-end 
because, 
of 
course, 
these 
buildings 
would 
only 
be 
constructed and these milestones would only be reached in 
the next financial year, but the money had to spend in the 
10 
2010/2011 year, a scheme was devised to pay suppliers 
upfront even before goods were delivered to the builders. 
 
So a scheme was devised to pay the suppliers sums of 
money.  With that money, the suppliers not only paid 
“bridging finance” to the contractors, which was not the 
business of the Housing Settlement Department Fraud. 
 
But the suppliers would enter into agreements with the 
department to receive monies and eventually to deliver 
goods but those were all prepayments.  R 600 million Chair 
was spent in this ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That way... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...fraudulent way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the whole idea was to avoid a 
situation 
whereby 
the 
end 
of 
the 
financial 
year 
the 
department had not used this money for housing? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 20 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there had to be... a scheme had to be 
arranged in terms of which it would be appear as if they had 
used the money properly ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Properly 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...for housing. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But actually, they had not used the money 
properly. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct.  And that was the essence 
10 
of the fraud found by the high court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So the question is, who was 
accountable for that and how did accountability follow?  The 
facts which I have just related Chair are in a sense common 
cause.   
 
Mr McKenzie was the deponent to the founding affidavit 
where these facts were placed before the court and they are 
fully set out and we will go through them in some detail and 
try and unravel them.  They are quite elaborate in some 
20 
ways but quite clumsy in other ways.   
 
So for example, in order to make this appear regular and 
in order to provide documentation to the Provincial Treasury 
on which monies could pay out, there was a scheme that 
took some time to... for the legal team to understand, let 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 21 of 178 
 
alone communicate sensible to anybody else Chair, which I 
will attempt to do, of sessions entered into. 
 
So what... there had to be a paper trail ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Were those sessions spelt with an s-e-s-s-
i-o-n-s? [laughing] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, sometimes it is spelt with a C 
but you will see Chair that right up to the end they are spelt 
with an s and that is... I suppose not to give them the 
qualification of a real cession.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you will recall Chair that we 
pointed out that the... any claim by the builder against the 
department would only arise when a milestone was reached 
which would probably be in the following financial year. 
 
But what the scheme was devised whereby that claim 
against the department or materials as part of the work was 
seeded through the supplier.   
 
Of course, there was no such plan upon which the 
supplier then as part of the prepayment scheme invoiced the 
department and got paid its money. 
20 
 
And of course, even further, quite ironically, of course 
there would no claim because the supplier had already been 
paid by the time the cession came to operate but it is 
complicated now and try to explain it properly in due course. 
 
But that whole scheme of cessions was the third layer of 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 22 of 178 
 
agreements which were entirely nonsensical in a way.  Then 
of course Chair, there were two other methods devised for 
getting rid of money quickly. 
 
The Free state Housing Settlement Department became 
involved in the job of bridging finance.  And it emerged in the 
investigations that what the suppliers were doing with the 
monies they received is they were handing it on through the 
builders before anything had happened as part of bridging 
finance. 
 
That is dealt with in a certain way and I will deal with it 
10 
with Mr Mokhesi who describes that whole scheme as quite 
frankly bizarre and uses those particular words. 
 
And then of course the abandonment of the right of 
retention.  If the department has got 5% of all the 
expenditure on construction it needs that money and in 
particularly needed in this case to remedy defect. 
 
But decided because we need to spend this money, we 
are going to pay that money and not rely on the retention.  
So that money was also part of the scheme.   
 
That does not arise out of the application.  That came 
20 
out of further investigations but that will be dealt with.  It 
was dealt with in the disciplinary inquiry.   
 
So Chair, there are a number of investigations too that 
have taken place.   
 
The Commission simply would not have the capacity to 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 23 of 178 
 
go into hundreds and hundreds of individual contracts to 
show why those particular persons benefited on an irregular 
and unlawful basis from the distribution of monies in haste 
during the 2010/2011 financial year. 
 
But we will highlight some matters which have been 
highlighted 
in 
the 
investigations 
and 
which 
require 
investigation and Mr Mkhatshwa will give evidence in relation 
to certain of the matters that concerned him. 
 
He was, in fact, relatively low down in the seniority 
hierarchy but he was one of the people that were dismissed. 
10 
 
It is stated Chair that there and quite interestingly, and 
perhaps a matter of concern in itself, were... there was an 
overdose of forensic reports in this matter.  
 
The Auditor General, quite properly of course, conducted 
its investigation and report.  There was an entity called Open 
Waters Advanced Risk Solution that was employed to 
conduct forensic audits. 
 
The Special Investigations Unit did its own.  Nurcha (n-
u-r-c-h-a) 
Finance 
Company 
Limited 
did 
an 
expensive 
investigation as well. 
20 
 
And the outcome of all that has yet to be realised.  That 
in 
itself 
is 
a 
matter 
of 
concern. 
 
How 
matters 
are 
investigated, who is appointed to investigate matters and 
what is the outcome of that.  And we will deal with that 
submissions in due course. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 24 of 178 
 
 
So Chair that is a very brief overview of the evidence 
that will be lead and if we may take you through the 
application that was brought subsequently through that 
series of events by the department itself and Mr Mokhesi will 
hopefully help us in that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  Does that mean he 
is ready to be sworn in? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Before that is done.  I did not deal 
earlier on with a matter that I should have dealt with when I 
10 
responded to some media queries with regard to Mr Zuma.   
 
I think the media queries at different times have been 
about his appearance before the Commission but also about 
the fact that he has not filed any affidavit before the 
Commission to help the Commission put his side of the story.  
I did not deal with the last part.   
 
I just want to deal with that immediately because it is in 
the public interest that the public knows what is happening, 
particularly about somebody who was president of the 
country.   
20 
 
And I just want to say that towards the end of August I 
issued a directive in terms of Regulation 10(6) of the 
regulations of this Commission, compelling Mr Zuma to 
depose to an affidavit or declaration to answer certain 
matters relating to Eskom with special reference to the 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 25 of 178 
 
affidavits submitted by Mr Zola Tsotsi, who was chairperson 
of Eskom at some stage, as well as, the affidavit of Mr Nick 
Linnell with regard to a particular meeting that they both said 
had been held in Mr Zuma’s official residence in Durban 
where, according to them, had a discussion relating to the 
removal of certain executives at Eskom was discussed or a 
discussion took place relating to the removal or suspension 
or certain executives.  That was towards the end of August.   
 
And I have issued another 10(6) directive against Mr 
Zuma in regard to another matter.  The Commission might 
10 
not compel him to respond to all the affidavits that have 
been filed but certainly there are certain affidavits that the 
Commission believes are very important for him to deal with 
and in regard to those as the legal team makes a request for 
me to issue directives to him to submit affidavits.   
 
I will consider those requests and make a decision on 
the basis of each application or request.  I thought I must 
just add this because I did not deal with it earlier on and it is 
a matter that the public has an interest on.  Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, before 
20 
proceeding with the evidence of Mr Mokhesi.  He is legally 
represented.  May his counsel place themselves on record? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes sure. 
COUNSEL:   May it please you Chairperson.  I appear on 
behalf of Mr Mokhesi together with my learned junior, Mr 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 26 of 178 
 
Manye(?), instructed by Ms Bhavani Miranjani of the State 
Attorney, Bloemfontein. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
COUNSEL:   We understand he is merely a witness and I 
doubt that you will hear from me again ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
COUNSEL:   ...in this matter.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Okay.  Administer the oath or 
furnish, please. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
10 
WITNESS:   Nthimotse Mokhesi. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   No, I do not. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes, I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence you are 
about to give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
else but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and 
20 
say, so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
NTHIMOTSE MOKHESI:  (d.s.s.) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  You may be seated Mr 
Mokhesi.   
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 27 of 178 
 
EXAMINATION BY ADVOCATE PRETORIUS SC:   Morning, 
Mr Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:   Morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are happy that you are back Mr 
Mokhesi.   
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Pretorius, are you only going to 
deal with the housing matter in regard to him at this stage 
and deal with the remainder of his evidence relating to the 
asbestos matter on another day?  Or are you ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair that is the intention.  Mr 
Mpho did appear this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In the expectation that Mr Mokhesi 
would also be dealing with asbestos matters.  Unfortunately, 
in our preparations we were not in a position to deal with 
both matters today.  Alternative arrangements will then be 
made in consultation with Mr Mpho, the attorneys and Mr 
Mokhesi.  But I can give Mokhesi the assurance that that 
period of questioning will be very short.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it could take place either 
Monday or Tuesday next week. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
All 
parties 
or 
even 
other 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 28 of 178 
 
arrangements could be made.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, you just sat in consultation 
with Mr Mpho. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  After consultation with Mr 
Mpho. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When I just said we do not negotiate dates 
with lawyers and their clients, witness and their clients.  
[laughing]  Okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Although ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   If it is short notice, we can talk because it 
10 
is short notice but if it is reasonable notice... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Unfortunately, we did 
inconvenience Mr Mpho. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughing]  Yes.  Okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But that will be sorted out in the 
spirit of collegiality and it will be after consultation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, as I say, if they are given 
reasonable notice, there is no need but if you seek have 
short notice then it is understandable. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because they will complain of short 
notice.  But if they are given reasonable notice, then there is 
no need because, otherwise, we would never get anything 
done if we got to negotiate dates with lawyers and 
witnesses. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 29 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I understand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Mokhesi’s other evidence should 
be dealt with pretty soon. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it will be Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It must be and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   If at all possible. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
...I 
think 
that 
at 
least 
is 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Next week if at all possible. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you will have a look.  Okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi, there is a file FS14.  Is 
that the file in front of you? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, FS14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This file Mr Pretorius, I guess should be 
marked Bundle FS14? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Your... 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or not? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it should be. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the file marked Court 
Proceedings. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 30 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that the file marked Court 
Proceedings? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It should be.  If it has not, that was 
part of the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...file that were given this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Okay bundle... it will be referred to 
as Bundle FS14.  That is the file marked Court Proceedings, 
10 
Exhibit UU11. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I understand, and 
there is no dispute about this Mr Mokhesi, that during 2013 
the Free State Department of Human Settlements brought an 
application before the High Court in Bloemfontein to review 
and set aside certain contracts that had been entered into 
with a number of suppliers.  In fact, a 106 of them. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you were instrumental in doing 
the necessary investigation and research, reading the 
20 
necessary documentation in preparing the papers for that 
application.   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I was. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you would please go to page 95.  
You will see Mr Mokhesi and you are fortunately an old hand 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 31 of 178 
 
at this, that there are two numbers, two sets of numbers at 
the top of each page.  We will be dealing with the black 
numbers in the top left-hand corner.   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I am on page 95. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now that is a founding affidavit.  If 
you would go to page 173, please.  At the bottom of that 
page, whose signature is that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, that is my signature. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that the founding affidavit then 
that was brought during these court proceedings attested to 
10 
by yourself? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it appears from page 95 to page 
174. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, it is.  That is the one. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The notice of motion appears before 
that 
after 
divider 
2. 
 
One 
can 
ignore 
the 
summons 
proceedings in the first divider.  But if one could go to page 
60.1, please.   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I am on 60.1. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that was the application to 
review and set aside the agreement with suppliers listed as 
respondents, a 106 of them.  And to set aside the decisions 
made by the Free State Department of Human Settlements to 
make the payments listed in Annexure 3 to the notice.  Is 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 32 of 178 
 
that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say page 60 point something? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   60.1? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not look like I have got 60.1.  I 
10 
have got 61.  And at 61 is the list of respondents.  That is 
Annexure 1 to the notice of motion.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright Chair.  May I... there is a 
divider marked 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   A cardboard divider. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The first page after that divider, may 
I ask what page...? 
CHAIRPERSON:   61. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   61? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  It is supposed to be 60.1? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   60.1.  Is that 60.1 or 61? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is 61. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, then it is the incorrect page.  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 33 of 178 
 
Chair, perhaps this is a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   A mistake. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I may run for cover. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  [laughing] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we will return after the short 
adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Let us take the tea 
adjournment and we give you a chance to have this attended 
to. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, it looks like the pagination has 
been corrected. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, for the present, thank you, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Let us continue then.  If you 
would go to page 60.1 please, Mr Mokhesi of FS14. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, I am on page 60.1. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the notice of motion 
preceding the affidavit to which we have just referred the 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius, there is quite 
some noise I think from the air con which was not there 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 34 of 178 
 
before tea at least I did not notice that.  It looks like quite 
– it is loud.  Did anybody ask for it to be put on? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you did.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But it can be put off, we would 
warned that it would be noisy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  It seems quite – I do not know if 
there is a way of reducing the sound so that it is not too 
noisy.  I think somebody will look at that.  Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair.  Otherwise 
10 
we could just have it on during the breaks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That might be a way of solving the 
problem but it is pretty hot down here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, that is fine, we will just have to 
see how we strike the balance.  I do not want you to feel 
too hot.  Okay, alright, I think they have reduced it.  That 
should be fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mokhesi, 
that is the notice of motion about which we have been 
20 
speaking, is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it seeks to set aside certain 
agreements with persons listed in the annexure of 106 
contracting parties and it also seeks to set aside decisions 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 35 of 178 
 
of the Free State Department of Human Settlements to 
make payments in terms of those agreements, is that 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The date of that notice of motion, I 
did refer to a document dated 2013 but this application was 
brought, as I understand it, in 2016. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Some years after the events in 
question which took place in 2010 and 2011.   
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If one could go please to FS14 at 
page 96.  
MR MOKHESI:   Page 96? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, paragraph 4.  Do you have 
that?   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There you set out the sources of 
the information relied upon by you in this affidavit.    
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Many of those sources are not a 
matter of great controversy, they may be in certain cases 
in relation to certain person but generally speaking, those 
are the facts upon which you relied.  Would you tell the 
Chair please what you relied on for the preparation of this 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 36 of 178 
 
affidavit? 
MR MOKHESI:   First, as I have indicated in my affidavit, 
the thing, the disciplinary records because I think the 
disciplinary process was completed around about that time, 
2016, and also the – ja, the findings as well as the SIU 
finding in respect of our communication.  Also taking into 
consideration, Chair, that the report of the SIU is a report 
of the President.  However, in the process we have been 
working together with the SIU and also getting some 
information of which made us to rely on this – for us to 
10 
compile this motion. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, we will talk about the SIU 
report in due course, briefly, but just for the record, Chair, 
the transcript of the disciplinary hearing relied up by Mr 
Mokhesi is in bundle FS16, 17, 18 and 19.  The findings 
are in bundle FS19 at page 612 to page 788 and the SIU 
report is in bundle FS15 at page 384, it is a report dated 
August 2015.   
Subject to that and as far as you are aware are the 
facts contained in this affidavit true and correct? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Of course many of the facts that 
are contained in this affidavit were summarised in heads of 
argument which we also have available, Chair, prepared on 
the basis of the papers by Adv Budlender and those facts 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 37 of 178 
 
were found by the court, Pohl AJ, largely to be reliable and 
correct.  Do I understand that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And we will deal with his judgment 
insofar as it is relevant in due course, is that correct?  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now we have told the Chair that 
the events relevant to your evidence today, Mr Mokhesi, 
took place in the 2010/2011 financial year within the Free 
State Department of Human Settlements. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who was the head of department of 
Free State Human Settlements at the time? 
MR MOKHESI:   It was Mr Mokoena.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And who was the MEC for Human 
Settlements in the Free State Province at the time? 
MR MOKHESI:   It was MEC Zwane. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If one could go please to 
paragraph 8, if I may just put that on record.  In paragraph 
7, just by way of introduction, you say in the affidavit that 
20 
this application arises from a set of agreements concluded 
in late 2010 and early 2011 between the department and a 
number of building contractors and suppliers of building 
materials and to payments made by the department to the 
suppliers.  Is that a correct summary of the application? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 38 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Or the subject matter of the 
application. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Would 
you 
raise 
your 
voice, 
Mr 
Mokhesi? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then you explain in paragraph 
8, the agreements relate to the construction of low cost 
housing in the Free State Province.  
“The 
department 
received 
a 
large 
conditional 
10 
funding allocation from National Treasury to build 
low cost housing.” 
That is a correct statement of fact, I understand. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do raise your voice, Mr Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the legislation which governed 
that funding allocation from National Treasury was the 
applicable Division of Revenue Act, DORA, is that correct? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You continue in the affidavit to say: 
“The agreements form part of a fraudulent scheme 
which was conceived by the department to disburse 
very substantial sums of money mainly to the 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 39 of 178 
 
suppliers in order to avoid the funds becoming a so-
called unspent conditional allocation and therefore 
reverting to the National Revenue Fund.” 
Is that a correct statement of fact? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would you explain it please to 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   This also I must also be very careful 
because not everything that looks like fraud is fraud and 
also to – because the sole purpose of this affidavit also 
10 
taking into consideration that the SIU was also on it, was 
really to try and plea(?) with the court to give us a 
favourable judgment to recover the money.  So that was 
really the whole purpose of this court proceeding in the 
main. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if – you simply have to describe 
matters as you believe them, genuinely believe them to be 
so.  If you genuinely believe that this was fraud.  That is 
what you say.  It may be that you are mistaken but if that is 
your genuine belief, that is what you say.  If you do not 
20 
genuinely believe so, you do not say so, you do not say 
you believe it to be fraud.  If you say it appears to me to 
be fraudulent, that is what you say.  So I am just explaining 
that …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 40 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...because I seem to detect that you 
think that there may be aspects in the affidavit where 
maybe you put statements in a certain way and you just 
want it to be understood in a certain context.  Or Mr 
Pretorius may be putting certain propositions to you and you 
are not sure whether they – it is something you can agree to 
completely or whether you need to qualify it.  So I am just 
explaining that in the end whatever you say must reflect what 
you genuinely believe to be the position. 
MR MOKHESI:   I think what I can say with utmost 
10 
commitment it is that they were irregular in that way because 
in the manner that they were done, you know, and one cannot 
conclusively say it is fraud because, you know, my adviser also 
informed that, you know, there must be an element, an proven 
element of intention as well.  It certainly looked like that but, 
you know… 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are quite entitled to say this is how it 
looks to you or this is how it looked to you at the time.  You 
are quite entitled to say well, it looked like that at the time but 
since then I have had an opportunity to reflect, I do not think it 
20 
looks like that.  So nobody wants you to say something that 
you do not genuinely believe to be true.  Okay? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so as Mr Pretorius puts questions to 
you, just bear that in mind.  Okay.  Mr Pretorius? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 41 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let us deal with that briefly.  
We will get into the detail in due course as to why you 
would have said in this affidavit it was a fraudulent scheme 
and it said more than once, Mr Mokhesi.  Why the judge 
would have found it a fraudulent scheme and why your 
counsel presented extensive heads of argument describing 
the scheme which was fraudulent.  That scheme, what was 
its purpose? 
MR MOKHESI:  It is mainly – I think as you have also 
articulated, it was one meant to spend the money because 
10 
it came up – I am informed that at that particular time the 
department – I think expenditure of the department was 
around about 10% and there was issues of concern that 
they will not be in the position to spend the money, a full 
allocation by the end of the year.  So it came as a result of 
that to try and spend what has been allocated because 
there was also – it came clear that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it your analysis of what happened, 
that the purpose was to avoid this money being taken back 
to National Revenue Fund, the National Revenue Fund if it 
20 
had not been spent by the end of the financial year? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, ordinarily it will be reallocated to other 
provinces, that is what ordinarily happens. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, so basically ordinarily the 
province would forfeit the funds that had not been spent. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 42 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, a certain portion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A certain portion. 
MR MOKHESI:   And it will be allocated and reallocated to 
other provinces. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Who are spending, and that is how 
normally it works.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And what must happen before the 
province forfeits such money?  What is required to have 
happened 
before 
the 
province 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
10 
simultaneously] 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, there will be reports that are 
presented to – of all the provinces in terms of where they 
are, how much they have spent up to particular point.  
Normally after half year you are expected at least to be as 
close as possible to 50% and the projects that are running 
and the level of commitments that you have.  And then you 
are given an opportunity to say particularly for those who 
are under spending.   
Then you are given an opportunity to make a case 
20 
as to why your allocation or certain funds should not be 
taken away from yourselves and reallocated elsewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be correct to say as a province 
or a department you would forfeit those funds or a portion 
of those funds if either it is National Treasury or National 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 43 of 178 
 
Department, I do not know which one, concludes that you 
have failed to spend the funds sufficiently during that 
financial year for the purpose for which they were allocated 
to you? 
MR MOKHESI:   Will be correct …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be correct to say as a 
department you would forfeit such funds or a portion of 
such funds if either it is the National Treasury or the 
National Department, I do not know which one, you would 
know, concludes that you, as a department, have failed to 
10 
sufficiently spend the funds that were allocated to you for 
the purpose for which they were allocated to you? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, you will forfeit – two stages – you 
know, the first part is a report provinces that have not 
spent or that have not reached a specific milestone in their 
expenditure will then be identified.  You know, it can be 
one or two, a number of, and those provinces will then 
have to make a sort of a recovery plan.  Expenditure 
recovery plan that will indicate, for example, how you 
would be – how you would recover and, you know, be on 
20 
track with the rest and that is informed by the projects that 
are running and with all that information, then the National 
Department will either say no, we agree with you or no, we 
do not agree with you and therefore we are taking money 
anyway. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 44 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And allocate, you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MOKHESI:   It is a question of a discussion between 
that relevant province and the National Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in the end you are not going to 
forfeit any money if the National Department believes that 
you are spending the money appropriately. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, you will not – if they believe – if you 
have made your case …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you persuade them. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, you …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if despite whatever you say they are 
convinced that you are not spending the money sufficiently 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   They take it and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then they take it away. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Pretorius?  So if I want to 
avoid that, that consequence, whatever I do, I would have 
20 
to create the impression at least that I have sufficiently 
used the money for the purpose for which it was given to 
me, is it not? 
MR MOKHESI:   Chair, maybe I am I misunderstanding 
your question. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 45 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, if I do not want the 
National Department to conclude that I have not sufficiently 
used the money for the purpose for which it was given to 
me… 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would have to create the impression 
that I have sufficiently used the money for the purpose for 
which it was given to me during that financial year.  Then if 
I persuade them that that is the position, they will not take 
it away from …[intervenes] 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   They must believe in your plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MOKHESI:   They must believe in your plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   That you are putting forward.  They have 
to believe in your plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   If they do not believe in your plan they will 
take the money anyway. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   And how they take the money, is that you 
will not receive your next allocation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   For example, if you are receiving, just by 
way, 100 000 per month which goes to 1.2 million.  I am 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 46 of 178 
 
just making an example.  The last two, they will decide and 
say right, you are not going to receive – for February and 
March you will not receive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   They may decide to take 200 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Or 300 000, whatever the case might be. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MOKHESI:   So that is how it works. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It works, ja.  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi, you have told 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I hope that has clarified something. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am saying I hope that has clarified 
something. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, it is mainly for the 
clarification, if I may, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But by all means continue if you seek to 
have more clarification. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  You have told the 
Chair, Mr Mokhesi, of the sources that you relied on to 
prepare this affidavit. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   They included the disciplinary 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 47 of 178 
 
hearing transcript, the evidence that was given, an order to 
dismiss certain employees of the department, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The findings of the disciplinary 
hearing 
which 
resulted 
in 
the 
dismissal 
of 
certain 
employees, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the investigation carried out 
by the Special Investigating Unit, right? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You looked at those documents and 
you reached certain conclusions which led you on behalf of 
the department to attest to this affidavit for review, 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say in paragraph 8 in this 
affidavit: 
“The agreements…” 
Which you seeked to set aside. 
“…formed part of a fraudulent scheme which was 
20 
conceived by the department to disburse very 
substantial sums of money mainly to the suppliers 
in order to avoid the funds becoming a so-called 
unspent 
conditional 
allocation 
and 
therefore 
reverting to the National Revenue Fund.” 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 48 of 178 
 
Now when you attested to this affidavit did you believe that 
to be a correct statement? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I believed so. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Has anything happened for you to 
change your mind? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, to change my mind?  Simply that 
was – you know, the process was unlawful. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay.  Well, you know the process 
was unlawful, we will go into the detail of that. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You accept the process was 
unlawful? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And you accept that certain 
representations had to be made to National in order to 
persuade them not to take your money away, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And many of those representations 
were not true, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And as a result the law that should 
have been carried out, the forfeiture, was not carried out, 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   The...?  Can you repeat that, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In other words, you were required 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 49 of 178 
 
to explain to National why they should not forfeit the 
money. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Or why you should not forfeit the 
money. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Explanations 
were 
made, 
documents were put up, statements were made, many of 
which were false, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, many – yes, many of …[intervenes] 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will come to the detail. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I do not want to hold you to 
generalisations, we will come to that.   And, as a result, 
what should have happened in accordance with the law did 
not happen, the money should have been forfeited, but was 
not, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, the money should have been forfeited 
because the National Department did not accept that 
expenditure 
recovery 
plan 
of 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
20 
simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, we will come to that, the 
expenditure recovery plan. 
MR MOKHESI:   On that basis to forfeit the money. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because that in itself is a gross 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 50 of 178 
 
misrepresentation but we will come to that.  And you say 
so yourself.  So I am not taking things further than what 
you say in this affidavit. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But let us move on, if we may, 
because it is all in the detail.  You say it was a fraudulent 
scheme in your affidavit.  You say it again in paragraph 10, 
you say: 
“The agreements and payments formed part of a 
fraudulent scheme and are tainted by fraud.” 
10 
You say that yourself, correct?  It is not just a passing 
comment 
in 
one 
paragraph, 
you 
say 
it 
repeatedly 
throughout, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Were you in court when your 
counsel argued the matter? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I was not in court. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let me just tell you that your 
counsel 
argued 
strenuously 
that 
the 
scheme 
was 
a 
fraudulent scheme.  Did you take note of the judgment of 
20 
the court? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I have seen the judgment. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I can just take you to FS14 at 
page 599.  It is right at the end of the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 599? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 51 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
MR MOKHESI:   599. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 9.  You would have read 
this and no doubt accepted the finding because you acted 
on it.  If you look at paragraph 9 on page 602. 
MR MOKHESI:   Paragraph 9. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This is the judgment of the court, 
was presided over by Loubser J and Pohl AJ.  The matter 
was heard on the 26 August 2019, according to this, even 
10 
though the application was brought three years prior to 
that.  The judgment was delivered on the 26 August 2019 
and in paragraph 9 the following is said and I am referring 
to page 602: 
“The department was not able to spend the funding 
referred to in paragraph 6 supra fast enough and 
within the fiscal year to avoid the situation that 
most of it would revert back to the National 
Revenue Fund in terms of DORA.” 
You have already told the Chair about that.  The judgment 
20 
continues to read: 
“The department therefore conceived an illegal 
scheme to facilitate the advance payment of very 
substantial amounts of money mainly to suppliers 
within the fiscal year so that the funds would not 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 52 of 178 
 
revert back to the National Treasury Fund.” 
Judgment continues: 
“The agreements that from the subject matter of this 
application were a key part of this illegal scheme.  
The 
agreements 
were 
unlawful 
for 
two 
major 
reasons.  They were concluded without any proper 
procurement process having been followed and the 
agreements and the payments made under them 
formed part of a fraudulent scheme to avoid the 
consequences of DORA.” 
10 
That is the finding of the court and it continues in 
paragraph 10: 
“This illegal scheme was devised to allow the 
department 
to 
pay 
material 
suppliers 
very 
significant sums of money over a short period of 
time, in total more than R630 million over the period 
2010 to 2011.” 
That is the judgment that arose and was granted or relief 
was grant in accordance with the application that you 
brought.   
20 
Now if we could go back to page 10 – oh it is at page 98 of 
the bundle, paragraph 10, there your affidavit reads: 
“There 
are 
two 
major 
grounds 
on 
which 
the 
department seeks its relief; the first is that the 
agreements were concluded and the payments were 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 53 of 178 
 
made in breach of Procurement Law.  The second is 
that the agreements and payments form part of a 
fraudulent scheme and are tainted by fraud.” 
That – those observations there in paragraph 10 are 
mirrored in the judgment and the portion I have just read.  
Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Let us go to the 
components of the scheme if we may in paragraph 22 of 
your affidavit.  Once again your make reference in 
10 
paragraph 22 to a fraudulent scheme and if I can just read 
what you say in paragraph 22.  
          “I have said that this application relates to a set of  
          agreements which the department concluded in 
          late 2010 and early 2011 with contractors and 
          suppliers.  I have also said that the agreements 
form 
          part of a fraudulent scheme conceived by the 
          department to pay out funds from its conditional 
          funding allocation in order to avoid the funds 
20 
          becoming an unspent conditional allocation and 
          reverting to the National Revenue Fund.”   
That is at least the third reference to a fraudulent scheme 
it does not seem to be an error on your part.  Correct?        
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 54 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then you describe the nature 
features of the scheme in paragraph 23.  You say firstly 
that:  
          “The department concluded some 125 written 
          building contracts with contractors.”   
Are you able to say when those were concluded, that was 
before the pre-payments were made to suppliers.  Is that 
correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, ja.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what did those building 
10 
contracts provide in relation to who would purchase 
materials or supply materials and who would pay for them?  
MR MOKHESI:    Ja the – you know it is a standard 
contract, supplier – the contractor is responsible to 
purchase material and also to build, to covert that material 
into a product.  A product referring to different milestones 
whether it is foundation, all plates of completions and then 
upon that then the contractor will then if he has completed 
the first milestone like your foundation P5.1 he can then 
claim.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  
MR MOKHESI:    That is the basics, that is the contract, 
terms of that contact.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now these are standard building 
contracts 
that 
comply 
with 
the 
regulatory 
framework 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 55 of 178 
 
applicable to construction.  Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is important about that 
scheme that you have just described is that the contractor 
sources the materials in accordance with the needs of the 
contractor.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The contractor can then certify that 
those have been delivered.  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes that is it.  
10 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
And 
the 
contractor 
then 
incorporates those materials such as they are into the 
building.  
MR MOKHESI:    The normal contract is the contractor, if I 
did not understand your question you can – the normal is 
that the contractor is responsible for procuring material.  
That is basically how it works and he must convert that 
material into a product the foundation and then he must – 
once he has completed the foundation that is the first 
milestone he then can claim that foundation subject to the 
20 
certification and the signing off by the engineer and so on.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, of course. 
MR MOKHESI:    So that is the normal process.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So the process you have described 
has a number of checks and balances in it.  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 56 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That can put the client, the 
Department of Human Settlements in a position of some 
comfort 
that 
materials 
have 
been 
ordered, 
supplied, 
incorporated into the building and then certified that have 
been so placed in the building.  Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, we do not buy material we buy a 
complete product.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, well however we describe 
them but in the normal course and in terms of the contracts 
10 
that you entered into or the department entered into with 
the contractors, the builders that was the scheme that was 
to be followed.  Am I correct?     
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct, right.  But then further 
agreements were entered into – by the way it will become 
clear later that even those contractors were not appointed 
in accordance with a proper procurement scheme, you say 
that later.  Is that correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will just flag that for the 
moment and deal with it later.  But then further agreements 
were entered into, you say in paragraph 23.2:  
          “That despite the supply of materials or whatever  
          being dealt with in the contracts with the builders or  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 57 of 178 
 
          the contractor ’s further agreements were entered  
          into.”   
The department you say in paragraph 23.2:  
          “Also concluded some 112 written tri-partake 
          supplier agreements with contractors and building 
          material 
suppliers. 
 A 
material 
term 
of 
these 
supplier 
          agreements was that the department would pay 
          suppliers for building materials which the supplier 
          suppliers supplied to contractors.”   
10 
So now instead of the original scheme that you have just 
described to the Chair taking place we have a different 
scheme.  Is that correct? Which differs entirely from the 
first scheme, right? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So here the department was going 
to pay the suppliers for the building materials which the 
suppliers would then supply to the contractors.  Correct?            
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Why was it necessary to do that? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:    It was not necessary; I do not know why it 
was necessary at the time to…[intervene] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You do know Mr Mokhesi because 
you say so but anyway would you just tell the Chair please.  
MR MOKHESI:    Look there…[intervene] 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 58 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I could help you if you would like 
but I do not want to lead you on.  
MR MOKHESI:    Ja, the supplier – the first there was a 
second, what is it – the material supply agreements that 
we entered into with I think it says 112 agreements.  Now 
this agreement – this material supplier will then supply 
materials to the contractor which in way contradicts the 
first part because the responsibility of acquiring material is 
not 
the 
responsibility 
of 
the 
department 
it 
is 
the 
responsibility of the contractor.  So that the contractor can 
10 
at a later stage claim.   
          Now here we have an instance where it now 
becomes a responsibility that which is the responsibility of 
the 
contractor 
becomes 
the 
responsibility 
of 
the 
department and this is where part of the problem also is.  
But it can only mean that you know by acquiring material 
then you show a better expenditure per say.  So that is 
basically…[intervene]           
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well let us explain it because it is 
important and it is fundamental to the substance of your 
20 
affidavit and what happened afterwards Mr Mokhesi.  If one 
goes back to the original scheme the way, it was originally 
planned to happen in the normal cause.  The contractor 
enters into a contract with the department to build a house.   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 59 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is the contractor ’s responsibility 
to source the materials.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And to use them in the house and 
to pay the supplier.   
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There are three stages, three 
milestones.  The first milestone is the foundation.   
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The second is the…[intervene] 
10 
MR MOKHESI:    Wall plate.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   …the walls of the building, correct, 
and the third is the roofing.   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At the completion of each stage 
once 
the 
work 
has 
been 
checked 
and 
verified 
the 
contractor can then claim the money from the department 
and the department will pay it if everything is in order.   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And included in those charges that 
20 
the contractor bills the department with is the materials 
that it has bought.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 60 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now if the house has not been built 
yet this would only happen sometime in the future.  
Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It will only – that money would only 
be paid when the foundations are built or when the wall is 
built.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the department had to find a 
way of spending money quickly.  Correct, in order to avoid 
10 
its reversion to the fiscus.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And so this scheme was devised to 
make sure that money could be spent before the year end.  
Is that correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say as much.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Please I am not putting words in 
your mouth and it was done through a devise a series of 
20 
agreements which as you yourself say made very little 
sense and let us go into the detail then, in paragraph 23.2:  
“A second set of agreements the tri-partake supply 
agreements a 112 agreements were entered into 
and in terms of those agreements it was agreed that 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 61 of 178 
 
the department would pay the suppliers for building 
materials 
which were to be 
supplied or were 
supplied to the contractors.” 
Correct?     
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Even before the foundation was 
built, even before the walls were built and especially even 
before the roof was put on.  Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then there was a third set of 
10 
agreements 
and 
these 
are 
the 
so-called 
session 
agreements sometime spelt with a C, sometimes spelt with 
four S’s instead of just three.  Now do you know what these 
agreements were can you try and explain to the Chair 
because it is quite complicated?   
MR MOKHESI:    Ja, the – what give rise to a session is 
you know you sent your claim to a third party.  Now there 
cannot be a cost for payment if there is no claim.  Now and 
this is also part of the problem because in that particular 
process you know there was no claim or course for 
20 
payment against a claim because there was no claim to be 
ceded in the first instances because all those three 
agreements in my view contradicted each other you know 
they did not make sense on one process.     
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us try and explain that in a way 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 62 of 178 
 
that those who are following the evidence can understand 
because it is elusive.  You have told the Chair that the 
contractor would have a claim against the department once 
the foundations were set or once the walls had been built 
or once the roof has been put on.  Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Of course when these session 
agreements were entered into that had not been done.  
Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Ja, there were no foundation, there was 
10 
no claim.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, so at that stage when the 
session agreements were entered into, in other words when 
the claim of the contractor was given to the supplier that is 
the session there was no claim because the house had not 
been built.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So at that stage the contractor had 
no claim to cede.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But nevertheless entered into a 
session agreement giving its claim against the department 
to the supplier for the materials.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At a time where no such claim 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 63 of 178 
 
existed.   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct.  And even later of course 
there would be no claim to cede because the suppliers 
would already have been paid.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So there were problems with this 
session, not so? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As you say it was part of the 
10 
problem.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But as you point out later in the 
affidavit these very sessions were used as part of the 
documentation even to Provincial Treasury to persuade 
them to pay.  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Anyway prior to the claim of the 
contractors even arising and pursuant to the sessions the 
department made payments to the suppliers in excess of 
20 
R500million.  Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say in paragraph 23.5 as 
you have just said to the Chair: 
“There was no lawful cause for the payments.” 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 64 of 178 
 
Correct?  Now that is a general statement because of 
course some materials might have been delivered and 
some not.   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the detail of that would depend 
on the detailed investigations being done by various bodies 
in relation to particular contracts and we are not going 
there in this hearing.  Do I understand the position 
correctly?    
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  But in 23.6 you say:  
“The tri-partake supplier agreements between the 
department and the suppliers and the contractors 
did not give rise to a course for the payments 
because the suppliers had not supplied materials to 
the contractors before being paid.” 
And that was correct as far as you were concerned at the 
time. 
MR MOKHESI:   As far as I am concerned at the time, that 
was correct.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you have continued to say: 
“The payment structure in the supply agreements  
requiring supply before payment was not followed.  
The invoicing and certification requirements in the 
supply agreements were not complied with.” 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 65 of 178 
 
Correct?    
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now just to get back to the fraud, 
nowhere in the documentation and in fact the contrary 
appears does it appear that the Free State Department 
said to national listen do not take our money back because 
we are going to spend it in this way but we must warn you 
that it is completely irregular and we must warn you that 
these requirements are not being followed and they all pre-
payments, nowhere was national told that.  Correct?    
10 
MR MOKHESI:    Ja, no.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct. 
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Am I correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then in paragraph 23.7 you 
deal with the sessions.  You say: 
“Nor did the sessions of claims by the contractors 
to the suppliers give rise to a cause for payments.  
This is because the claims which were being 
20 
purported ceded that is claims by the contractors 
against the department had not yet arisen.” 
You have just told the Chair that, is that right?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 66 of 178 
 
“The contractors had not executed the construction 
works or portions of the construction works nor had 
they provided materials to the department.  The 
contractors 
therefore 
did 
not 
have 
claims 
for 
payment against the department.”   
You have told the Chair that.     
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And I take it nobody told national 
in writing or otherwise look there is a problem with all 
these contracts because we pre-paying and nothing is 
10 
being done and the sessions really are not worth the paper 
they written on.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Nobody told national that? 
MR MOKHESI:    No.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you say in paragraph 23.8:  
“The 
department 
nonetheless 
paid 
more 
than 
R500million to various suppliers over the cause of 
2009 to 2011.  It did so purportedly on the strength 
of 
the 
session 
agreements. 
 
In 
other 
words, 
20 
department officials used the deeds of session as 
the paperwork justifying the instruction to their 
accounting staff to pay out.  Department officials 
also manipulated the housing subsidy system to 
make it look as if construction work had been 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 67 of 178 
 
executed and that payments were therefore due 
when in truth this was not the case.”   
Those are correct statements of fact are they?         
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So not only were the sessions that 
ceded claims that did not exist or purported to cede claims 
that did not exist used to persuade accounting staff to pay 
out.  But it is a complicated arrangement that was entered 
into but milestones were inserted into the agreements.  
Correct?   
10 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And those milestones really were 
not regularly inserted.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now I do not want to go into the 
detail now if necessary we could go later.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the system was unlawfully or 
irregularly manipulated to put a milestone in the agreement 
which did not really exist.  
20 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well I asked you earlier Mr 
Mokhesi why the department implemented the scheme 
which was clearly irregular, deceptive and in your own 
words fraudulent and you deal with that at paragraph 24 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 68 of 178 
 
and following.  If you could just tell the Chair, please in 
your own words why, what the reason was for this scheme 
to be implemented?    
MR MOKHESI:    Well Chair I think it is simple the reason 
why it went this way it was to ensure that you know the 
department does not lose money back to the fiscus and 
therefore to the other provinces.  So the acquisition of 
material or paying or buying material resulted in this 
particular type of process or scheme.  That was in the 
name why it went – it was because you know there was a 
10 
possible loss to other provinces of the money of the 
conditional grant.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  In other words, it was 
necessary to persuade the National Department of Human 
Settlements and National Treasury to do what they would 
not have done had they known the true facts.  Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Ja.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say yes? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say:  
20 
“That there was a threat that the unspent allocation 
would revert to National Revenue Fund.” 
You say that in 24.2: 
“To be relocated to provinces with better spending 
record.”   
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 69 of 178 
 
And then in paragraph 24.3 you say: 
“In the face of that threat the department proceeded 
to implement the scheme dispersing funds to the 
tune of more than R500million from its conditional 
allocation with no lawful cause for the payments to 
be made.”   
Now the department faced a difficulty you have literally 
hundreds of contractors and over a hundred suppliers each 
with their own arrangements in relation to the supply 
materials and its dealings with the department.  Correct?       
10 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Were you able at this time to do 
sufficient 
investigation 
to 
examine 
each 
and 
every 
contract? 
MR MOKHESI:    All the 100 and…[intervene] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:    It was extremely difficult.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right you appointed several 
investigators to that.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Ja, in general we could not do it, yes.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we have an examples of what 
happened.   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For example, examples of charges 
being levied against the department with nothing being 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 70 of 178 
 
delivered.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, we have examples of that, yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And fraudulent charges.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But in paragraph 26 you make an 
estimate which I think is worth putting before the Chair.  
What do you say there in paragraph 26?   
MR MOKHESI:    You wanted me to read it out? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well you can read it if you like.  
Let us just establish that you signed this affidavit in 2016.  
10 
Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   By that time had all these houses 
been built? 
MR MOKHESI:    No, not all, not all has…[intervene] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is five years later so let alone 
in 2010, 2011. 
MR MOKHESI:    It is?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry five years later not all the 
houses were built.  
20 
MR MOKHESI:    Not all the houses were built.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In 2010, 2011 how many of the 
houses had been built? 
MR MOKHESI:    2010, 2011? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Virtually none.  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 71 of 178 
 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 That 
I 
do not 
know, 
2010, 
2011 
...[intervene]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well the reports will tell us what 
had been done that is not a matter of great controversy 
here.  But the point is you had spent in advance of the 
building of the houses something like R600million.  
MR MOKHESI:    Okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright but you say here:  
10 
“The department however has however obtained 
reports which indicate how much more it will cost to 
procure that the housing which the contractors were 
contracted to build.” 
The 14 769 units to which I referred to above is built.   
“It will cost the department an estimated further 
approximately R500million.”   
Then you say: 
“The calculation is not straight forward but the 
department’s best estimate is that it has lost 
20 
approximately R400 866 000”.   
That was your best estimate at the time.      
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:    So it is R400 866 000.  I do not know if 
you got the number right.  Do you want to; you may have 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 72 of 178 
 
got it right.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   R400 866 000.  
CHAIRPERSON:    R400 866 000.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja, okay.  You may have got it right first 
time around I might have just heard something else.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I could easily have got it wrong 
Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us just say that almost half a 
10 
billion rand was spent before anything was done.   
MR MOKHESI:    Okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   More than half a billion rand and 
the ultimate loss to the department was in the region of 
half a billion rand.  
MR MOKHESI:    The ultimate ja, 400 and …[intervene]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, so and this is in relation to 
building houses for people who need houses to be built 
delivered, it is for low cost housing.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, this is for low cost housing.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is what the money should 
have spent on.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, this is for low cost housing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So this money that was paid out to 
contractors about R500million was paid out.  Is that right?  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 73 of 178 
 
And then – but you say the loss is R400 866 000.  Is that 
right? 
MR MOKHESI:    Ja Chair it is - I think the estimate is the 
equivalent number of houses.  How much is it going to cost 
…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:    …the department to build. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes.  
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
That 
is 
where 
the 
R500million 
…[intervene] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:    And that will also…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:    The actual amount that was paid out 
would be, is how much?  
MR MOKHESI:    No we are not there okay the actual 
amount that was paid out I think …[intervene]. 
CHAIRPERSON:    We have not dealt with that I thought 
we had. 
MR MOKHESI:    But I think what is being tried to be 
explained here is that the houses that was supposed to be 
20 
built that part of 14 769 this is the estimate …[intervene]  
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:    …of how much it will cost R500million.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:    But already we had made advanced 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 74 of 178 
 
payments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  And that 408 – 40866 million is probably 
what has not been accounted for in respect of the advanced 
payments that were made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Because it is not in all instances where 
material were not delivered and houses were not built. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  There are instances – there are houses that 
10 
were built but…. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  But as to the extent of the view that we have 
received it was a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  To say – and that is why we had also had to 
– I think we did two actions.  One as they say it is before the 
review application the action proceedings just to force the 
contractors to give us invoices delivering notes and so on 
and so on. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as things presently stood at the time of 
your affidavit and I guess maybe even now but certainly at 
that time your estimate was that the department has lost – 
had lost more than R400 million. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja we could not properly know… 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 75 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Be accounted for. 
MR MOKHESI:  Accounted for as to…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Because of this particular… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But money had been paid out to people. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some houses had been built. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some that were not – some were not and it 
looks like there were many which were not. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And your estimate was the department had 
lost more than R400 million. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja.  Which might well have changed over 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But at that time when you deposed to 
the affidavit. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was your estimate. 
MR MOKHESI:  Because I am aware of – even though I am 
20 
not exactly sure what the amounts that were recovered by 
SIU. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  In the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  But by whatever account it was 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 76 of 178 
 
substantial amounts. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That were not accounted for. 
MR MOKHESI:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well we know that – and Chair the 
figures vary by R100 million at times but we know from your 
affidavit that approximate – well more than R500 million was 
spent as part of this scheme – this irregular scheme of 
prepayments to suppliers.  That much we know. Correct? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We know that there are examples and 
these examples emerged from the various investigations that 
have taken place of unqualified builders just walking off site 
and that money being therefore lost, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And there are many other examples 
of losses but the first point is that the – this unlawful 
irregular scheme of prepayments and we will describe it yet 
again in your own words in a moment cost the department in 
20 
the Free State over R500 million, correct?  You then .. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just make sure Mr Mokhesi your responses 
get  - ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You then did an investigation and you 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 77 of 178 
 
estimated how much more have we got to spend in order to 
complete the building of these houses and you say that that 
would have been over R500 million you say that in paragraph 
26 of course an estimate. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes it is an estimate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct.  And you say in the last 
sentence: 
“The calculation is not straightforward but 
the department’s best estimate and that is 
best estimate in 2016 is that it has lost 
10 
approximately R400 866 000.00.”  
Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Substantial amount of money.  Now 
at R50 000.00 per house I have just been told by someone 
who has done the calculation that could have built over 
8 000 houses.  That is a substantial amount of money. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In – on any calculation.  Now of 
course as you point out that this was difficult to establish 
20 
because you have got hundreds of contracts; hundreds of 
transaction each one different in its own way.  Many 
fraudulent; many suppliers did not supply; many claims were 
overstated but it is a massive job to investigate each and 
every single contract and that you have employed people to 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 78 of 178 
 
do. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then in paragraph 27 if we may go 
there?  You made a submission.  You said: 
“I submit that the department scheme was a 
fraud 
on 
the 
National 
Government 
specifically on the fiscus.  It was also a fraud 
on the public on all who expect state funds to 
be spent regularly or properly including on 
improving the standard of living of the poor 
10 
on those in the Free State and in other 
provinces with an expectation of receiving 
state funded housing and on all tax payers.” 
That I understand was your belief at the time. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Anything to change your mind? 
MR MOKHESI:  No not really. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Not really.  Then in paragraph 28 you 
say: 
“I 
have 
described 
the 
above 
– 
I 
have 
20 
described above the fraudulent aspects of 
the department scheme.  It is important to 
point 
out 
that 
the 
contracts 
were 
also 
unlawful because the department did not 
follow any lawful procurement process before 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 79 of 178 
 
concluding them.  This is in itself a ground 
on which the contract should be declared 
void.” 
In case we have not made it clear already Mr 
Mokhesi the selection of the suppliers to which payments 
were made – we will come in due course to how those people 
were selected perhaps not in your evidence but in the 
evidence of witnesses to come.  But what we do know there 
was no open tender and bidding process that preceded the 
appointment of suppliers.  We know that as a fact.  Correct? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You give the factual background and 
it is not necessary to go into too much details here Mr 
Mokhesi because we have dealt with it in some respects 
already.  But what was the – it is in paragraph 30 and 
following of your affidavit at page 105 and following of FS14.  
What was the Breaking New Ground Project of the Cabinet 
announced in September 2004? 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
Sustainable 
– 
sustainable 
human 
settlements.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Ja it was comprehensive plan for the 
development of sustainable human settlements, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Which included the building of 
houses? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 80 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:  It is including the building of houses and it is 
a whole comprehensive plan. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The infrastructure required. 
MR MOKHESI:  You know it has got infrastructure; building 
houses, amenities, social amenities. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  And so on.  And not only about houses but 
also to understand that when you – when you – and that is 
why they changed from housing to Human Settlements 
because then it takes into consideration the entire … 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The entire community. 
MR MOKHESI:  Community whether it be social amenities, 
infrastructure and so on as and when we get there.  That is 
what it was about. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So that was a comprehensive and 
ambitious plan to provide sustainable human settlements for 
poor people. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And you say in the last 
sentence in paragraph 30: 
20 
“Among the ways it tries to retrieve that aim 
are easing delivery constraints, increasing 
building capacity and rooting out corruption 
and maladministration.” 
 
At least that was the intent, correct? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 81 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then in paragraph 31 and following 
you set out certain facts and it is necessary to deal with 
those in paragraph 32.  You say: 
“In pursuance of this scheme the Breaking 
New 
Ground 
Low 
Cost 
Housing 
Project 
Scheme funds are allocated in terms of the 
Division of Revenue Act to Provinces each 
year.” 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You have told the Chair that.  But 
paragraph 32 is important.  That allocation you say in 
paragraph 32: 
“Is 
a 
specific 
purpose 
and 
conditional 
allocation. 
 
In 
other 
words 
a 
Province 
receiving funds is not unconstrained in how it 
spends those funds.” 
 
In other words when the money is allocated to you by 
National Treasury in terms of DORA that is the Division of 
Revenue Act is the Province free to spend it as it likes? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  No.  You – you have to spend it first you 
know in terms of the housing code where you can spend it 
and in terms of the approved business plan.  So you cannot 
just spend it as [talking over one another]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right there is a housing code that 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 82 of 178 
 
governs … 
MR MOKHESI:  That governs that funds ja.  To make sure 
that you fall within the policy framework and also of course 
the business plan also approved by National Department and 
then determines what – how you are going to spend money 
where and in whatever. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now we know in relation to the 
business plan that National – the National Department under 
Minister Sexwale at the time said you must give me a plan 
otherwise this money is going to be lost to the Province and 
10 
that was the expenditure recovery. 
MR MOKHESI:  Recovery Plan. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Plan.  We will come to that in a 
moment because that was a representation to National which 
we will see was completely misleading.  But let us first deal 
with the points you make in 32.1 to 32.3 Mr Mokhesi.  The 
money is given to the Province.  The Province obviously has 
to disburse that money to contractors, to suppliers and to 
other parties.  People who build infrastructure and the like, 
advisors and the like.  Those are third parties. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now in relation to third parties what 
are the restrictions in the Division Of Revenue Act?  You 
deal with those in 32.1 to 32.3.  Those are important for the 
purposes of this evidence. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 83 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  There is a standard we – of – when 
money is allocated.  You must spend on the approved 
business plan and approved projects.  They will have been 
identified.  Each project.  You also – you should have 
planned before. You know you do not do your planning in the 
year 
you 
are 
supposed 
to 
implement 
the 
planning.  
Implementation 
precedes 
planning 
and 
those 
particular 
projects that you are going to spend the money on will have 
then been pre-approved through a process before you know 
before we start the financial – financial year.  And you know 
10 
that is how the process works in terms of different programs 
within.  You know we – infrastructure and as well as housing. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So you would tell National how you 
are going to spend the money.  They would then give you the 
money.  You would be obliged to spend it in accordance with 
those plans. 
MR MOKHESI:  With those particular plans and you will also 
have an opportunity halfway you know through say through 
half yearly to either revise your business plan because 
certain projects are not performing as they should and that 
20 
becomes a matter of discussions. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja.  That in a certain year.. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But in all times the way that the 
allocation is managed in terms of the Division of Revenue 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 84 of 178 
 
Act is that there must be complete transparency between the 
Provincial Department and… 
MR MOKHESI:  And the National. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the National Department. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And Treasury, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  They must be informed exactly what 
is being done with that money. 
MR MOKHESI:  Correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct.  Right and in relation to 
payments to third parties for example contractors there are 
special restrictions in the Act, am I correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There are special restrictions in the 
Act, am I correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The first is that the Province must 
have entered into a payment schedule with the third party.  
In other words, there must be a schedule which says 
20 
precisely when and how much must be paid to the third party 
and on what performance, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes it is based on your contractual 
arrangement between yourself.  You know if it is obviously if 
it is houses that payment schedule will be per milestones. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 85 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  As per the contract.. 
MR MOKHESI:  The first contract. 
MR MOKHESI:  The first contract that we spoke about with 
the contract? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But that did not exist with the 
suppliers? 
MR MOKHESI:  No it did not.  And insofar as what we have 
seen as material supply agreements. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Which I think are problematic. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well you make more explicit 
statements later that we will come to that.  Paragraph 32.2: 
“The payment must be for services rendered 
by or goods received from the third party.” 
 
That is the first thing. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Services must have been performed 
and the goods must have been received. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No prepayments? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   
“And those services which must have been 
properly procured in accordance with Supply 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 86 of 178 
 
Chain Management requirements.” 
 
In other words, you cannot spend a DORA allocation 
unless you spend it in accordance with a proper Supply 
Chain Management process, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And we know that in relation to 
contractors and suppliers in this case those simply did not 
exist – that did not happen.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then 32.3: 
10 
“Advanced payments to third parties i.e. 
where services have not yet been rendered 
or the goods not yet delivered are subject to 
specific requirements including the approval 
by National Treasury.” 
 
So before the Province can make any prepayment 
you have got to tell National Treasury and get their 
permission, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja that is a [00:16:32] that – that clearly 
indicates how prepayments are to be done. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  And they must be part of the contract first 
and foremost. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And that did not happen in this 
case.  Well certainly approval by National Treasury was not 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 87 of 178 
 
obtained. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja I think you – you do not necessarily need 
approval of National Treasury but the framework has been 
laid by National Treasury that this is how you know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well firstly you say here that one of 
the specific requirements includes approval by National 
Treasury.  I must say on our understanding of the law that is 
correct.  That statement is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is [Chair and Mr Mokhesi and Adv 
Pretorius all speaking at once]. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Because National Treasury has laid out the 
framework. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am saying that is in 32 – paragraph 32.3 
of your affidavit. 
MR MOKHESI:  32.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  National Treasury has laid out the 
framework under which we can make advanced payments.  
That framework is there in terms of Treasury Regulations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So are you saying in other words… 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  I must – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That by putting up or prescribing that 
framework 
National 
Treasury 
has 
given 
approval 
that 
provided you act within this framework then you have our 
approval. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 88 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what… 
MR MOKHESI:  That is the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It means 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MOKHESI:  If it is prescribed you cannot move outside 
that particular framework. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  So – so in other words what 
you are saying is it might not – you might not be required to 
10 
obtain separate or specific approval from National Treasury 
provided you have acted within that framework. 
MR MOKHESI:  That frame. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That National Treasury has approved. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  If there is – if for some other reason 
there is any – because of circumstances or whatever the 
case might be you are unable to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Comply with the framework? 
MR MOKHESI:  To comply with the framework because of 
good reasons that might be there. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  Then you will have to go back to National 
Treasury and make your case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  So what you are saying in 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 89 of 178 
 
paragraph 32.3 you now say must be qualified? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  By the words all and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The framework. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Compliance with the framework. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Laid down by National Treasury. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  There is a framework. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  We will look at that and I will 
come back to you on that because the evidence of persons 
10 
from National at the disciplinary inquiry was somewhat 
different but let us not deal with that now.  I will come back 
to it. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say in paragraph 33 clearly: 
“If a conditional allocation has not been 
spent by the end of the financial year it 
reverts to and must be repaid to the National 
Revenue Fund.” 
 
That we have established, right? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then you say in paragraph 34 for the 
third or fourth time now: 
“The agreements at issue in this application 
form part of a fraudulent scheme contrived 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 90 of 178 
 
by the department and the respondents to 
circumvent the provisions of DORA and avoid 
the 
Department’s 
unspent 
conditional 
housing allocation reverting to the National 
Revenue Fund.” 
 
Do I understand it that you believed that to be true 
and correct at the time? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And nothing has happened to change 
your mind? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is important Mr Mokhesi that you – 
you answer particularly to that question be heard because I 
think that some – somewhere much earlier anybody listening 
might have thought you have – you have second thoughts 
about describing the scheme as fraudulent.  So I am just 
saying [interrupting] that you say nothing has changed your 
mind it is important that it comes out clearly. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja I think – okay.  No I think you have 
clarified for me Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Earlier on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  To say whether I believed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 91 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:  It is not that it actually is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  You know and that is – to me gives me…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is still your … 
MR MOKHESI:  Comfort because I am not competent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  To say something is fraud or not but if it 
looks like fraud it does not mean that it is fraud. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay no that is fine. 
MR MOKHESI:  You know so… 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well let us – because that is a 
qualification that you have not placed before the Chair 
before in very clear terms in answer to my questions and 
perhaps I should be fair to you to allow you an opportunity to 
explain.  You have said not once but several times in this 
affidavit that the scheme was fraudulent, right? 
 
We will go into the details provided by you to show 
that it was in fact fraudulent.  We can leave that for the 
moment. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But we are dealing with a conclusion 
that you reached here.  Right.  At the time I take it because 
this is a statement on oath that you believed it was 
fraudulent on all the research that you had done, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 92 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Can you now give any reason why it 
was not fraudulent? 
MR MOKHESI:  I say I believe that it was fraudulent and I 
think I have said I cannot say with – let me put it this way.  I 
believe it was fraudulent. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay.  Ja.  And I think the Chair has sort of 
indicated to me to say the fact that you believe does not 
necessarily mean it was. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The Chair has suggested nothing to 
10 
you Mr Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  This is your evidence. 
MR MOKHESI:  But do you not know… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is not your – no suggestion of any 
sort of that to you.  All the Chair said to you. 
MR MOKHESI:  What did the Chair say? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Was that you are free to give 
evidence as you now believe to be the case. 
MR MOKHESI:  I said – I said so.  I said I believe that it was 
20 
at the time I believe that it was – it was fraudulent at the 
time and I still believe that it is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you still believe so. 
MR MOKHESI:  I still believe that it is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct so.  Alright there is – there 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 93 of 178 
 
has been no revelation to you outside of the reports that you 
referred to earlier that would persuade you that you were 
completely wrong or partially wrong, correct?  No new 
information has come to your attention. 
MR MOKHESI:  No new information has come to my attention 
yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright let us just go please if you 
would to paragraph 35 of your affidavit on page 107.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page – 107? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  107 Chair.  Paragraph  35.    
“The total allocation however it is made up 
we need not go into that detail for present 
purposes for housing in the Free State for 
the 2010/2011 year was R1.42 billion.”   
Substantial amount of money. 
MR MOKHESI:  Where are you – where are you reading?  
135 for the last … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry I cannot hear you. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  No I was saying where are you reading 
from? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 35. 
MR MOKHESI:  Which paragraph 35? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Second last line. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 94 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct.  And the plan was during the 
course of 2010/2011 and 2011/2012 to build 21 050 low cost 
houses apart from everything else that you have just 
mentioned.  Correct?  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You see that in paragraph 36 third 
last line. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay yes.  Yes I see it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct.  Now we know that was not 
10 
achieved.  The extent to which it was not achieved is the 
subject of investigations, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then in paragraph 37 you give the 
detail of what we have summarised for the Chair earlier that 
the 2010/2011 financial year ended on 31 March 2011.  By 
late 2010 it was very clear that the Department would not be 
able to spend the Breaking New Ground allocation or even a 
meaningful portion of the allocation by the end of the 
financial year.  Correct? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now there were several things that 
happened to cause the delay in spending.  One of them was 
that the plans for the sizes of the houses were changed, 
correct?  You had contracts or the department had contracts 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 95 of 178 
 
to build 40 square meter houses.  The idea was changed to 
build 50 square meter houses and a number of contractual 
disputes arose.  You say that in paragraph 38, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  And you say in paragraph 
39: 
“In addition a tender which the department 
had put out in early 2010 for the construction 
of low cost houses lapsed and was cancelled 
as I explain more fully below.” 
10 
 
Now those circumstances Mr Mokhesi preceded the 
prepayment scheme. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you describe it fully later on.  
And we believe it is important as a legal team to go through 
that in some detail because the whole housing arrangement 
in the Province from the very beginning – from the 
appointment 
of 
the 
contractors 
right 
through 
to 
the 
prepayment to suppliers at the end of the financial year was 
completely irregular with the result that the housing scheme 
20 
in the department was to put it at its lowest a total failure 
and it is important to place that context before the Chair 
because 
that 
context 
has 
not 
really 
been 
given 
any 
prominence in the material to date.  So that is something 
new that we could put on the table for the Chair.  Chair could 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 96 of 178 
 
we do that after the adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes we can do that after lunch.  We will 
take the lunch adjournment now and resume at two o’clock.  
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES:    
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mokhesi, if 
you go to page 117 of Bundle FS14, you will see that we deal 
10 
there with ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...with the matter of cancellation of 
the housing tender ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius.  The volume of 
the aircon has gone up.  So somebody will attend to it.  Okay 
alright.  Let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you at page 117? 
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 117? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You deal there with the lapse and 
cancellation of the housing tender.  In paragraph 75.1, you 
record that in early 2010 the department by means of a 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 97 of 178 
 
public tender invited bids for the construction of houses to 
be funded by the housing allocation.  That tender closed on 
the 16t h of April 2010.   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The department’s Supply Chain 
Management Directorate and the Bid Evaluation Committee 
dealt with it and prepared a report for the Adjudication 
Committee.  That says you record in paragraph 75.2.  Do you 
see that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then at paragraph 75.3, you record, 
and this important for future judication, that 361 bids were 
received.  A 105 were disqualified for basic bid compliance, 
for example, no valid tax clearance certificate.  And 147 
were disqualified because they did not meet the minimum 
functionality threshold.  Do you know what is meant by the 
minimum functionality threshold. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, the minimum score to bid on the next 
level. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja.  Basically, in terms of the 
20 
scoring, they could not do the work. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And 28 bids from so-called 
established contractors and 81 bids from so-called emerging 
contractors. 
 
The 
Bid 
Evaluation 
Committee 
then 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 98 of 178 
 
recommended that only 109 qualifying bids be adjudicated 
on 
price. 
 
Then 
at 
75.4, 
you 
record 
that 
on 
the 
28t h July 2010, the Bid Adjudication Committee 
met to 
consider the tender.  Do you know why they delayed for so 
long? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I do not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You do not know? 
MR MOKHESI:   Honestly. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is fair enough.  But at that 
meeting, the Bid Adjudication members acknowledged that 
10 
the tender validity period had lapsed.  And then the BAC did 
something ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius.  The tender 
validity period, does that... what does that refer to?  What 
period is that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ordinarily, it will refer to the validity of the 
tender price because if that period passes, then they have to 
go back to the bidder to say are they still on the same price.  
In other words ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Does that mean when a bidder submits 
20 
their bid they would say we will do this job for this price? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that is... this price is valid only up to a 
certain date. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 99 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that what they talk about? 
MR MOKHESI:   Normally, 60 to 90 days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   60 to 90 days? 
MR MOKHESI:   90 days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that period is fixed by the bidder 
individually or is it fixed by the department? 
MR MOKHESI:   It is prescribed to say that would be the 
validity period.  In an event that it goes beyond that, you will 
then have to go back to the bidders and say are you still on 
that price. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So it is prescribed in terms of the 
regulations? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of the National Treasury 
Regulations? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you invite bids, the invitation to 
bid would include something that says the period will be X. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you referred to the tender 
validity period having lapsed, that is the period we are 
talking about? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 100 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKHESI:   And hence the earlier statement by Mr 
Pretorius to say, it could... you know, the regulation means 
you ask the tenderers ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   ...to say are you still on that price. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  And if they say yes, you continue. 
MR MOKHESI:   You continue.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, then you can continue. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Thank you.  We will get there 
Mr Mokhesi.  The decision, however, that the BAC made was 
to say:  Well, we must cancel the tender and we must take 
all those who qualified and all those who were disqualified 
and include them in a database as service providers.  Is that 
as you understand the decision that was made? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, in terms of the documents and that... 
yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That was... the decision that is 
20 
recorded in the following paragraph 75.5.  But what is 
interesting is the minute of that meeting which reads: 
“The chairperson indicated to the committee that the 
tender has been evaluated but due to the fact that 
the validity of the tender has expired and they 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 101 of 178 
 
cannot adjudicate, they have to cancel the tender.” 
 
But as you pointed out, that is not correct.  There is no 
obligation to cancel the tender.  You can regularise. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, it is a... you can.... you know, it 
depends.  You can cancel.  You can decide to ask whether 
they will simple, you know ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   It is really that was what you will have to 
make  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You can cancel but then the 
10 
obligation to have a proper procurement process still 
remained. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So you cannot cancel for the reasons that 
they gave.  Is that right?  Or... 
MR MOKHESI:   No, you cancel because it has expired but 
also because the validity period has expired.  You can do 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but what I am saying is.  They 
20 
cancelled because of certain reasons as I understand it.  
They still wanted to use the money from what I read here, to 
still use the money.  They say appropriately... spend the 
money appropriately.   
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 102 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Spend the money appropriately without a 
tender on a matter that required a tender.   
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, the best way that they could... that 
could, you know, given that everything was okay, the only 
issue was the validity period.  It is simply to communicate 
with the bidders and say are you still on that price.  You 
know, if they are still on that price you continue with the 
evaluation and the hour, et cetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Well, we have done a little 
10 
investigation ourselves into the matter Mr Mokhesi.  The first 
point is that the only option was not to cancel the tender.  
They had other options.  We agreed on that. 
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Oh, you have to say. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mokhesi... 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In the first place, they might have 
20 
taken the trouble to complete the process timeously and 
without delay.  That was the first option.  We know that did 
not happen.  The second option is that before the expiry of 
the tender period they could have extended it unilaterally.  
Before its expiry they could have extended it unilaterally.  Is 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 103 of 178 
 
it ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that correct Mr Mokhesi? 
MR MOKHESI:   No.  Remember the issue, particularly the 
price issue.  To be fair to the tenderers, you... you know, you 
must actually indicate to them.  Because you can only hold a 
price for so long. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOKHESI:   You know, the fixed price.  Taking into 
consideration that because you are dealing with construction 
here, prices are not status quo.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MOKHESI:   You know, they are rising. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MOKHESI:   So to be fair to them, you must indicate to 
them:  Are you still on that particular price, yes or no? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  So you can do that ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   That is the practise, you know.  Whether you 
can do that unilaterally... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   You know... 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might not be sure about that. 
MR MOKHESI:   I am not sure about that but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In practise. 
MR MOKHESI:   You know, in other instances, issues have 
been taken whether you are doing that.  You have to inform 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 104 of 178 
 
the tenderers to say:  Are you still on that particular price?  
Because that price, ordinarily, it will be valid for a period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we will keep track on this and to 
the DCJ.  To the Chair and due course.  But you are quite 
correct that there is another step that must be followed.  
Before the expiry of the period, the department could have 
initiated a process to extent the period.  It would then have 
required some communication with the tenderers that would 
either say extent your bid at the same price or bid again.   
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, depending... yes, depending on what is 
the outcome of that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Because I would imagine, even on the 
tender documents themselves, the period or that period 
would have been specified. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  So ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   To go back to them to say, we have 
extended.  Are you still on that price, yes or no? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So a bidder could have said:  Look, 
20 
you are extending it but I am withdrawing my bid.  Right.  Or 
it could have said:  I am agreeing to the extension.  My bid 
remains the same. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This happens... this should happen 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 105 of 178 
 
before the period expires.  But even after the period expires, 
you could, for example, cancel the old process and start a 
new process. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, you could cancel.  You could cancel and 
start the new process but also again, you also have to 
indicate that you have cancelled. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Well, you could say to the 
bidders, and that is one of the options that is allowed, you 
could say to the bidders:  Listen, the period has expired.  We 
want to continue with the process.  Will you maintain your 
10 
price? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Or do you want to give us a new 
price? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So that option is also there.  But 
what you cannot do Mr Mokhesi, where you are required to 
have an open tender process, is just forget about the 
process and establish your own database at your own 
discretion.  You cannot do that. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   No, you cannot.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Anyway, so that decision was 
approved, according to your statement or your affidavit at 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 106 of 178 
 
paragraph 75.7.  That decision to cancel the tender and to 
establish a database in the discretion of the department was 
approved on the 30t h of July 2010 by Mr Mokoena.  And we 
will ask him about that.  Do you see that in paragraph 75.7? 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, seven...  okay.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you are looking at this whole 
thing Mr Mokhesi, did it appear like the Bid Adjudication 
Committee said:  Look, the tender validity period has expired 
but we do need to do what we were going to do through a 
tender period.  So we will just do it in a different way.  We 
10 
will put everybody on the database and then we will choose 
who will be getting the job.  Is that the impression you got 
when you ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...were going through this whole thing to 
understand what was happening? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, but you cannot do that because certain 
of the bidders were disqualified anyway. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, no.  That is a different point.  
I am just asking your own understanding as you were looking 
20 
at this whole thing before preparing the affidavit.  Is that the 
impression you got that this Bid Adjudication Committee 
said:  Look, the tender validity has expired. 
MR MOKHESI:   Has expired. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We want to achieve a certain objective 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 107 of 178 
 
through the tender process.  We cannot do that now or we 
are not going to do that now but we will do what we are 
going to do through another process, namely put everybody 
into the database and then we will choose who will get the 
job from ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   No, but that is just a... that is not the 
choice.  Irrespective of what the circumstances are, you 
have to follow the... you know, you cannot decide your own 
process.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, no.  But listen to my 
10 
question. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. [laughing]  My question is, looking 
at what your own understanding was as to what this Bid 
Adjudication Committee sought to do when they found that 
the validity period had lapsed. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was your impression that they decided 
that the way to achieve what they wanted to achieve through 
a tender process was to put everybody into the database and 
20 
then choose the people who will get the job from the 
database? 
MR MOKHESI:   It seems like ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   ...you know, from the ...[intervenes]  
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 108 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   From the affidavits. 
MR MOKHESI:   ...the facts and the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   It seems that was their ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, their approach. 
MR MOKHESI:   Like their approach. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay let us just summarise that Mr 
Mokhesi.  And I understand that that is what you are saying.  
In the first place, the department must appoint contractors 
10 
through an open tender process.  That is obligatory. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So when something happens, such 
as what happened here at the data of the period expired, one 
must rectify it. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But one is still bound to have an 
open tender process. 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, assuming there was an open tender 
going towards that.  Remember, this is about the extension 
20 
of the validity period.  So the process of open tender would 
have happened because you simply indicating to the bidders:  
Are you prepared to, you know, to remain at the same price? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes or no. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 109 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  So if the remedy had been 
applied, if the process had been remedied through an agreed 
or extension or whatever it was ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...then that would have been an open 
tender process, is what you are saying? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It would have been a continuation 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   It would have been a continuation, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   of ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   It would be continuing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  Assuming that everything was done, 
there was an advertisement and the specification and 
evaluation and so on.  And then had a valuation point.  Then 
there is the validity period expires and you go back to the 
very same tenderers and say:  Right, are you okay with the... 
can you hold on that particular price?  Yes.  And then you 
continue.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   The adjudication and all. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, because in that case, the 
remedy would have been put in place.  The same process 
would have been continued to its conclusion and then there 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 110 of 178 
 
would have been a proper assessment of the bids. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Proper and fair assessment of all the 
competing bids, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What one cannot do, however, is 
throw the whole process overboard and simply select your 
own database. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that is what you say here.  You 
10 
say in paragraph 76: 
“The department thus decided to award contract to 
contractors on various databases as well as to the 
contractors 
who 
had 
bid 
for 
the 
tender 
notwithstanding that a 105 of the bidders were 
disqualified for basic bid compliance reasons and 
that a further 147 were disqualified because they did 
not 
meet 
the 
minimum 
functionality 
threshold.  
Those 252 disqualified bidders were simply allowed 
back into the process.  And then some decision was 
20 
made and we are not sure how that decision was 
made.  We will inquire at questions as to who would 
get contracts.” 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you know who in particular 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 111 of 178 
 
decided that particular contractors would be appointed? 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You concede, however, as the Chair 
has already pointed out earlier this morning, that process is 
flawed with danger because people can be appointed for the 
wrong reasons. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja.  Yes.  It leaves too much discretion to 
then in delivering and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Were you able to understand how anybody 
could do this Mr Mokhesi?  I cannot understand how anybody 
10 
could do that.  I mean, you know that there are people who, 
they are service providers who have been found to be 
disqualified to do this kind of job.   
 
And during the open tender process that you have now 
decided to ditch.  And then you say now, all of you must 
come back, qualified or disqualified.  You will... we will see.  
You are now all eligible to be given the job.  I cannot how 
understand how anybody could do that. 
MR MOKHESI:   No, it should not have been like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But were you able to... is there anything, 
20 
any information you got that made you understand how 
anybody could do that kind of thing? 
MR MOKHESI:   Unfortunately not.  I do not know why they 
would do it in that particular fashion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not know.  I am just thinking... 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 112 of 178 
 
thinking of a situation where you need teachers for a school.  
They... people apply.  You select.  You say:  Okay, these 
ones 
have 
qualifications. 
 
These 
do 
not 
have 
any 
qualifications.  Or these are under qualified.  Because 
something has happened about the period within which they 
had to apply.   
 
You say:  No, all of you come.  Qualified or not qualified.  
You can be appointed to teach whatever class.  I just cannot 
understand how anybody could do that.   
 
And maybe there is something that I will still hear that 
10 
will make me understand but I just cannot understand.  I 
mean, if they said:  Well, those that were eligible that 
qualified, we will take only those.   
 
Then subject to the legalities, you know, one would say, 
at least they are looking for people who are qualified.  But to 
then say:  We will bring everybody, whether they were 
qualified or disqualified, we will now bring them together.  
We will choose.  It just does not seem to make sense at all. 
MR MOKHESI:   No, it should not have been like that Chair.  
I agree. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  H’m.  Yes, Mr Pretorius.  Maybe you 
have worked with this thing for quite some time.  You are not 
shocked like I am.  [laughing] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There is no acceptable explanation 
Chair. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 113 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  [laughing] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the simple answer.  But the... 
Chair, 
the 
various 
investigations 
have 
produced 
some 
examples of contractors who were not equipped to do the 
job, having been given contracts to do the job and utterly 
failed in the execution of the project or simply walked off 
site.  There are several examples of contractors just 
deciding well they have got the money.  They ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   They took the money and left. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  So there are examples of that.  
10 
And that is why each particular contract and arrangement 
should be investigated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because there are somewhere the 
allegations of the links between illegitimately appointed 
contractors and the thresholds. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will come to some allegations in 
that regard in the evidence in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And of course, whilst all that was 
happening, a number of relatively junior employers get 
disciplined and dismissed and those who should be held 
accountable are not.  And that will come clear in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 114 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you summarise in paragraph 78 
Mr Mokhesi.  You say in the second sentence of that 
paragraph: 
“None of them...” 
 
And you are talking of the building contracts that were 
concluded in and around July 2010. 
“None of them was concluded pursuant to any 
proper 
procurement 
process. 
 
The 
department 
simply gave the contracts to contractors on its 
databases or to contractors who have submitted bids 
10 
for the lapsed cancelled tender.” 
 
So they were simply handed out.  What we do not have 
in this affidavit is, who made the decisions to distribute 
contracts and on what basis those decisions were made and 
thirdly, what the consequences are of that type of decision 
making process.  But we will come to that in due course and 
other evidence.   
 
And perhaps references will be made to that in the 
course of the... with your evidence.  But as far as you are 
concerned, do you know who selected the contractors who 
20 
were to be given contracts? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I do not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we will give detail of the 
example in due course Chair.  A disqualified contractor was 
indeed appointed and according to the Nurcha performed 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 115 of 178 
 
miserable.   
 
What is important too, in paragraph 80.2, and remember 
we putting together the whole jigsaw facts here Mr Mokhesi, 
is that in terms of these contracts, it was the contractor’s 
obligation to provide “all of the necessary materials, labour, 
plant and equipment to erect the project”. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That was the building contract. 
MR MOKHESI:   That was the building, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then in 80.4 just to give chapter 
10 
and verse to your earlier evidence: 
“The contractor was entitled to payment to the 
amount set out in Appendix 1 per milestone and date 
as set out in Appendix 1 read with appendix 3.” 
 
That would be the sort of payment plan that was 
provided for the Division of Revenue Act, I presume. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Which said before you can pay 
money to a third party out of this store or grant, you must 
have a payment plan or schedule. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that identify the work that you have to 
do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  What must be done and 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   How many needs, how many foundations, 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 116 of 178 
 
how many... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then the contractor was required 
to deliver to the department a claim for payments of all 
amounts it considers to be due which shall be verified by the 
department prior to processing and payment.  So there would 
be a claim.  You would say for 200 foundations of the 500 
houses to be build. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That claim would be put in after the 
work has been done and after the materials had been 
supplied and it would have to be verified on inception by the 
department.  Am I correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So in other words, the expenditure of 
the state is safeguarded by processes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let alone the process of appointment 
in the first place by a fair and open tender.  But even the 
20 
execution is closely guarded. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   None of those provisions were 
applied to the R 600 million in this case.  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 117 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Remember you are talking to me Mr 
Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  Oh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I need to hear what you are saying. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So Appendix 3 which is the project 
plan and what is required by Dora as the payment schedule 
10 
is dealt with in paragraph 81.   
“There must be details of progress, milestones and 
financial projections.”   
 
Do you see that in paragraph 81? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you summarise that in paragraph 
83 Mr Mokhesi.  You say: 
“The 
basic 
structure 
of 
the 
agreement 
is 
nonetheless clear.  The department would make 
payments to the contractor against completion by 
20 
the contractor of particular stages or milestones of 
the works with the works claimed for to be verified 
by the department.” 
 
Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 118 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you make the point in paragraph 
84 that that accords with construction industry practise.  And 
also in paragraph 85 the housing subsidy system.  What is 
the housing subsidy system?  If you would just tell the Chair, 
please.? 
MR MOKHESI:   It is a project management system that the 
sector uses and it records all the milestones and you know, 
for housing and whether it is infrastructure and so on.  So 
that is the housing subsidy system that we are using for all 
the provinces.  In fact, the sector as a whole.  But the 
10 
Department of Human Settlements uses that and their 
reports of how many of what you have done come out of that 
system, basically what the system is, basically your project 
management system. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you again summarise it and you 
provide some detail in paragraph 85.5 on page 123, Mr 
Mokhesi, also consistent with the evidence you are giving 
now.  You say: 
“I emphasise that achieving a milestone involves 
construction work.  For example, the foundations 
20 
milestone 
involves 
digging 
the 
foundations, 
throwing 
the 
appropriate 
slab, 
installing 
the 
necessary piping for services such as sewerage, 
water and the like.” 
And then you say, importantly: 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 119 of 178 
 
“The materials relating to a particular milestone 
must be used 
by 
being incorporated into the 
construction work before the milestone is met.  The 
milestone is not met if the materials are standing 
loose 
on 
site. 
 
The 
principle 
behind 
this 
is 
expressed as the requirement that government 
achieve 
value 
for 
money 
before 
it 
makes 
a 
payment.” 
So there are two things that emerge from that, Mr Mokhesi, 
I take it that that is a correct summary of the position? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The first is that before the 
contractor 
has 
a 
claim 
for 
the 
first 
milestone, 
the 
foundations, all that work must have been done and 
verified. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, before it …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the second thing is before the 
supplier would receive any payment from the contractor all 
the materials would have to be in those foundations. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then you make the point in 
paragraph 85.6: 
“A contractor ’s work must be checked before the 
department or other organ of state feeds into the 
housing subsidy system the information that a 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 120 of 178 
 
particular milestone has been reached and that 
payment can therefore be made.” 
And that is a complex and controlled process in terms of 
various regulations and provisions, is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then in 85.7 you say: 
“A contractor on a government funded housing 
project is thus only entitled to an interim payment 
against his or her having achieved a properly 
verified milestone.” 
10 
Now that you say in paragraph 86 accords with National 
Treasury requirements, DORA requirements as well as all 
the building regulations that exist and including the 
housing subsidy system, is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If we could go back then please to 
paragraph 40.  I will give you a page in a moment.  It is on 
page 108.  Are you there? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 40 records that the 
20 
National Department of Human Settlements as a practice, I 
presume, monitored what the provinces were spending of 
their DORA allocations.  That was its duty, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in October 2010, six months in 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 121 of 178 
 
to the financial year the monitoring exercise indicated that 
four provinces, including the Free State, had not met their 
monthly spending targets nor their monthly targets for the 
delivery of low cost houses.  That was a fact in 2010 in the 
Free State. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Minister Sexwale, who was then 
the Minister of Human Settlements raised concerns with 
the various provincial MECs and issued a notice and said 
to the Free State and the other provinces, I want to see 
10 
your expenditure recovery plan, what is referred to in your 
affidavit later as the ERP.  Do you see that?  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In other words he was saying show 
me how you are going to fix this. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You make a representation to me 
as to how this situation of understanding is going to be 
remedied, otherwise you forfeit. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the money will be differently 
allocated.  Is that light bothering you? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, not really. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is it okay?  So in paragraph 42 you 
say the MEC, you have told that that was Mr Zwane, and 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 122 of 178 
 
the department senior officials met to develop a plan to 
improve expenditure and you say in paragraph 42: 
“The 
expenditure 
plan 
which 
the 
department 
developed, and which I describe in more detail 
below, projects a very high rate of expenditure over 
the period November 2010 to the end of March 
2011.” 
We will look at the plan in a moment because the plan 
itself, as you will probably recall, is quite remarkable for 
what it says and what it does not say, but we will get there.  
10 
Paragraph 43 – well, let us first deal with one issue.  The 
name is instructive, expenditure recovery plan.  Manifestly 
the whole object of the plan was to make sure that the 
money, the 1.4 million, was not taken away from the 
province. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So what the purpose of the plan 
would have been was to persuade the National Department 
and Treasury not to take the money away. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, not to take a certain portion of the 
20 
money, not all of it, you know, and this is measured against 
the performance to say this is what you are likely going to 
achieve and, you know, as it later turned out, only 200 
million I think – or 200 – ja, 263 million …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   236 million. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 123 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:   36, sorry.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, that depends on what you 
told them but we will come to that.  The corollary to that is 
that if you did not manage to persuade them they would 
have put the money to lawful and in their minds better use 
by giving it to performing provinces. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that is normally what will happen – 
that is what happens. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   You know, money is reallocated to other 
10 
provinces that are performing. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And, of course, if the department, 
the National Department and the Treasury is persuaded on 
false information, they are then prevented from doing their 
job in terms of the legislation by allocating the money 
appropriately. 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not know.  National Treasury – ag 
sorry, the National Department was not convinced of the 
recovery plan, they give the money anyway. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, we will come to that, what 
20 
they were told and what they were not told.  Right? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And where they – and on basis of 
what information they finally made their decisions.  But let 
us go to paragraph 43 and what you raise is important 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 124 of 178 
 
because they warned the provincial department about 
noncompliance and you say that in your affidavit, not so? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 43 you say: 
“By the time the department developed that plan…” 
That is the expenditure recovery plan. 
“…October 2010, it had already started making 
unlawful payments from its fiscal allocation to some 
contractors 
and 
suppliers. 
 
The 
high 
rate 
of 
expenditure projected in the plan for the period 
10 
November 2010 to March 2011…” 
Those are the remaining months after the plan was 
developed. 
“…was premised on and depended 
upon 
such 
unlawful payments continuing.  Furthermore, by the 
time the department developed the plan it knew 
because 
it 
had 
been 
told 
by 
the 
National 
Department that such payments were unlawful and 
must stop.” 
Correct? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, the – ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So the unlawful payments were 
unlawful in several respects, you pointed out.  Firstly, they 
were 
made 
to 
persuade 
the 
National 
Treasury 
and 
department that money had been properly spent and that 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 125 of 178 
 
always in order, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And, furthermore, they were 
unlawful because there had been no proper procurement 
process. 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
Yes, 
there 
was 
no 
procurement 
…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that was unlawful too because 
they 
were 
advance 
payments 
which 
had 
not 
been 
processed in accordance with the requirements of DORA, 
10 
correct?  And Treasury regulations.  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct?  Yes.  So you say in 
paragraph 44 that: 
“The department knew that the plan was unlawful 
yet continued to make the payments.” 
Do I understand your statement correctly here? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you say the payments were 
unlawful because no contracts were in place with the 
20 
suppliers, 
no 
proper 
procurement 
process 
had 
been 
followed and neither the National Department nor the 
National Treasury had authorised or indeed even knew 
about the payments, those are the advance payments. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 126 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct?  So National Treasury 
was not told look, we have made a whole lot of payments, 
they are advance payments and that they are probably 
unlawful because no procurement process was followed.  
That information was not given to National. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It came to learn of the situation 
through other means, which we will come to in a moment.  
Paragraph 44.2: 
“Neville Chaney, who was Chief of Operations of the 
10 
National Department had learned…” 
And I emphasise the words had learned. 
“…that 
the 
department 
was 
making 
unlawful 
payments.” 
Now, as you say, Mr Mokhesi, that information would have 
been gleaned by you in the disciplinary proceedings that 
took place after 2010/2011.  Am I correct?  Do I understand 
the position correctly? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What he said in those proceedings 
20 
was no, no, I was not told this or the National Department 
was not told this by the province, we learnt by – through 
our Chief Financial Officer picking up the payments on the 
housing subsidy scheme ledgers, is that correct?  Is that in 
accordance with what you recall? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 127 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that is how they will pick it up. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, they picked it up, were the 
very words used, correct.  You recall that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And he says or he said and 
you record this at the top of page 110: 
“Chaney discussed this with officials from the 
National Department and the National Treasury.” 
In other words, his discovery or his information that 
payments were being made. 
10 
“The 
officials 
agreed 
that 
the 
department’s 
payments were unlawful.  The officials also agreed 
that had the department…” 
That is the Free State department. 
“…approached 
the 
National 
Department 
or 
the 
National Treasury for permission to make such 
advance payments permission would have been 
refused.” 
In any event that was Chaney’s evidence.  For the record, 
Chair, it is in volume 17, Free State bundle 17 at page 253 
20 
and following.  I can go there if you wish. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine.  Thank you, I have 
noted. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It seems at least from Mr Chaney’s 
evidence that he was of the understanding that permission 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 128 of 178 
 
from National Treasury had to actually be given before 
advance payments could be made.  That was at least his 
view.  No framework here, permission.  
MR MOKHESI:   No, I think let us clarify that.  In 
circumstances like this, for example, which clearly will fall 
outside the framework, you will then have to go to National 
Treasury of Treasury so that you can also outline how you 
are going to manage, you know, because the issue here is 
not to lose money, how you are going to implement this 
particular scheme, if I may call it that way.  But there is a 
10 
standard 
framework 
that 
says 
yes, 
prepayments 
are 
allowed – ag, advance payments are allowed provided they 
are part of a contract.  But clearly this is an exception 
here.  That we are dealing with here is an exception, it will 
require outside permission from Treasury.  You know, it is 
not like me and you, one contractor, advance payments or 
prepayments and simply apply that particular framework 
and then you agree on a specific milestone.  For example, 
it is a small contractor, he does not – he is not able to, you 
know, execute because he is an SMME and so on.  In that 
20 
instance, you do that particular advance payment but it is 
part of the contract which might also include that the 
department must co-sign with you at the bank account, for 
example, you know?  All those particular controls were 
then [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 129 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I understand, if we could just 
summarise then.  I am sorry, I interrupted you, had you 
finished? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, I am done. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The framework you talk about 
makes provision for advanced payment provided certain 
conditions are met. 
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The circumstances that we are 
dealing 
with 
in 
this 
case 
clearly 
fall 
outside 
that 
10 
framework. 
MR MOKHESI:   And the sheer magnitude of it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the sheer magnitude, right, fall 
outside that framework. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So we can put that framework 
aside.  In this case it would have been necessary to get 
the permission of National Treasury. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay and that permission was not 
20 
obtained.   
MR MOKHESI:   No, it was not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay.  You say in paragraph 44.3: 
“The National Department and National Treasury’s 
main objection to the payments was that they were 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 130 of 178 
 
advanced payments.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius, I am sorry.  
Now were there situations, practical situations such as 
these where the existing framework was not used but 
National Treasury was approached for approval as to what 
should be done and if so, would the – did the National 
Treasury give approval for that situation in effect saying 
you can work outside the existing framework or did 
something like that never happen practically? 
MR MOKHESI:   I cannot recall any of those circumstances 
10 
that they ever existed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   You know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
Because, 
you 
know, 
the 
advance 
prepaying or advance payments are more of an exception 
rather than the rule. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   The rule is, you know, you pay – ag, work 
gets done and you pay. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Or in certain instances where there might 
be some sort of a prepayment particularly in big contracts 
in 
huge 
contracts, 
you 
know, 
what 
they 
call 
site 
establishment. 
 
Site 
establishment, 
it 
is 
a 
sort 
of 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 131 of 178 
 
prepayment, if you look it, but it will have been contracted 
upfront to say – to have the contractor to set up site, you 
know, he need money because they have not started 
working as yet.  So it will be a certainly percentage, 10% 
of the value of the contract and that but it is within the 
framework to say it must be contracted to, it must be a part 
of it, but not at this scale that you are talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But apart from the question whether at a 
practical level you know of any situations which arose in 
terms of instruments, regulations, is there a provision that 
10 
says if you cannot work or if you do not work within this 
framework, existing framework, you can approach National 
Treasury outside of that framework or something for 
approval to be given outside of that framework? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, not that I am aware …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or something just …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   Not that I am aware of.  Remember, 
Treasury is the custodians of the financial rules and 
regulations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Now where there is uncertainty around a 
particular issue you will always go to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And solicit their view and request their 
support or approval and so on. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 132 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   That is normally what you will do, 
particularly if you are no certain. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so when you say approval could 
have been – or the National Treasury could have been 
approached for approval, if I understood you correctly, you 
are simply – you are not basing that on any specific 
provision in any regulation. 
MR MOKHESI:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You just think that because they are the 
10 
custodians of these regulations and if you have difficulty 
working within the existing framework you might have to 
approach them.  What they will say to you is something you 
do not know.  They might say hard luck if you cannot work 
with [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR MOKHESI:   If you cannot work with it, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or they might devise something for you.  
You do not know whether they would be able to. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, they might come up with a better 
solution. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Of how to approach this particular, you 
know... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   So you never know because obviously 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 133 of 178 
 
they will be evaluating the risk in terms of what you want 
to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Thank you, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, again this is a matter and law 
regulation, we will provide with chapter and verse. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There is also a judgment of His 
Lordship Mr Justice Plasket dealing with the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Which we will also provide.  
10 
Paragraph 44.3 on page 110, Mr Mokhesi reads: 
“The National Department’s and National Treasury’s 
main objection to the payments was that they were 
advance payments.  Monies were being transferred 
to contractors or suppliers without any work having 
been done or materials having been received.” 
That was their complaint, as I understand it. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And then you say – and in 
fairness to yourself you explain it a little more thoroughly 
20 
here, you say in paragraph 44.4: 
“One of the basic features of the State’s policy on 
state 
funded 
housing 
schemes 
– 
and 
this 
is 
reflected in various regulatory instruments – is that 
payment may only be made against value actually 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 134 of 178 
 
received and only on the achievement of set 
milestones.” 
You have told the Chair about that. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In other words, the State, as 
employer, 
will 
only 
pay 
a 
contractor 
for 
a 
construction job once the job has actually been 
completed. 
 
Interim 
progress 
payments 
are 
permissible but only for predetermined defined 
sections of the job and then only once those 
10 
sections of the job have actually been completed.  
The 
department’s 
payments 
to 
suppliers 
and 
contractors 
breached 
these 
basic 
requirements 
because 
the 
suppliers 
had 
not 
supplied 
any 
materials and the contractors had not done any 
work.” 
That is the summary of the situation, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, correct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But, of course, the money has now 
been spent.  And it may seem obvious but it is perhaps 
worth emphasising, the whole purpose of these controls 
and provisions is to ensure that the people who need the 
money and the services provided by the money get those 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 135 of 178 
 
services properly paid for and fairly spent, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us look at this expenditure 
recovery plan, if you will.  If you could go please to page 
226 of FS14.  Now to make clear the context once again of 
this plan, this is now in October 2010.  Half the year has 
already gone and this is an expenditure recovery plan to 
take place in the remaining six months of the year, 
October, November, December, January, February, March.  
This is the plan at page 226 of bundle FS14.  Do you see 
10 
that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you recognise this document? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I see it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  It contains various 
provisions, it is actually a slide presentation but if I could 
ask you please to go to page 229.  I am sorry, it is page – I 
am confusing myself with red and black numbers.  My 
apologies.  Go to page black number 232. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is actually over the page that I 
wanted you to go but - in fact I was not confused, please 
go back to page 229.  
“Ten 
point 
plan 
on 
expenditure 
recovery 
plan 
continued.” 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 136 of 178 
 
Are you at page 229? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, 229. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The plan says that: 
“Projects must be classified into two groups.  Group 
A, ready to run.  Focus on all projects that are 
ready to run…” 
It should read. 
“50 projects with 4 844 housing units. Focused 
approach on costing of foundations, wall plates and 
finals.” 
10 
That would include the roof, I presume? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In other words, what this plan was 
saying to National Treasury and the National Department is 
we are going to actually build the houses. 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And if one goes to – well, at 
least 4 800 of them.  If one goes to page 233 one sees the 
20 
cash flow projections. 
CHAIRPERSON:   233? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  In other words, what the Free 
State department is saying to National Treasury and to the 
National Department, in order to “recover the expenditure”, 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 137 of 178 
 
in other words to avoid the loss of the expenditure is that 
this is our cash flow projection, this is what we are going 
to spend in the various months remaining this year.  I 
understand that document correctly, do I? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, to say up to the end of the financial 
year this is how …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So it says November 2010 and 
then there are various items of expenditure under that 
10 
heading, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Totalling R256 million. 
MR MOKHESI:   November? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I have rounded the figure, look at 
the total at the bottom. 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, okay.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct?  In other words, what the 
department was telling National Treasury and the National 
Department was that in November 2010 we would do 8 500 
20 
foundations, we would expend R170 million and wall plates 
on 
the 
foundation’s 
walls, 
3 500 
and 
then 
another 
expenditure figure of R86 593 500.  So there would be 
8 500 foundations, 170 million, 3 500 wall plates, 86.5 
million.  Do you see that? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 138 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And so it goes on.  In December 
2010 the cash flow projection, estimated in expenditure, if 
you look at the total at the bottom of R201 million, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Where are you? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you with me?  Look at 
December 2010. 
MR MOKHESI:    Oh, December 2010.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That column. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   2 500 foundations, 50 million would 
be spent. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Wall plates, 3500, R86.5 million 
would be spent. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There would be 3 000 completions 
and the expenditure there in relation to those completions 
would be R65 million.  But the total would be R201 million 
spent. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
January 
2011, 
the 
various 
components 
would 
result 
in 
a 
total 
expenditure 
of 
R149 059 500, do you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 139 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   February 2011 it was projected that 
R220million would be spent on the various components 
listed in the cash flow projection schedule, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   March R170 004 300, and the title 
in the – the figure in the bottom right-hand corner, for all 
that work for the remaining six months would be an 
expenditure on work actually completed of R1 038 230 900, 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So this is the expenditure recovery 
plan that the National Minister says to the Department, 
give me information as to how you’re going to spend the 
money by the end of the year in order to persuade me not 
to forfeit the money or not to cause you to forfeit the 
money, to the Free State Department.  This is the 
representation or the answer it gets, it says, 
“By the end of the financial year we would have 
spent R1million – R1billion”, 
 
Correct? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now, it must have been obvious to 
the Free State Department at the time that this could never 
be achieved, you would agree? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 140 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In fact, this is a complete 
misrepresentation of the position because at the time there 
was a parallel project of advanced payments being made, 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, there’s – can you give any 
explanation, other than this is complete fraud on the 
National Department?  It’s a difficult question for you to 
answer, I know you account to people but there can be no 
other explanation, surely? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, so …[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You agree with me? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, it’s – ja, no it’s not practically 
possible to spend that amount of money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When they prepared this document, this 
would have been in which month of 2010, October? 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
Ja 
it 
would 
have 
been 
October…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think maybe saying October. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja to say for the rest of the financial year. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you recall – are you able to say 
roughly how many houses or units they had been able to 
build in the – from the beginning of the financial year to 
October? 
MR MOKHESI:   Chair, at that time it was even very 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 141 of 178 
 
difficult to reconcile because of this particular problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as you sit there now, do you – did 
you 
get 
to 
conclude 
how 
many 
houses 
they 
had, 
particularly, built and completed?  
MR MOKHESI:   I will have to, you know we – no I can’t 
say 
it 
off 
hand, 
there 
would 
have 
been 
some 
houses…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but it’s a figure you can find out? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, there would have been – because you 
can extract that information from the HSSC system. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   There would have been, perhaps, a few 
houses and work in progress in the form of milestones, 
foundations, so many and so on, there would have been. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   But…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The reason why I was asking is that one 
might be able to say, they themselves, would have known 
that if from, April, May, June, July, August, September, 
October, if in seven months that either, not built any 
20 
houses or they’d built houses that fall below a certain 
number, there was no way they could build so many houses 
within the time that was left in the financial year and given 
certain practicalities that they knew? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja I’m – normally, you know on a yearly 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 142 of 178 
 
basis there will be some houses that have not been 
completed that are only completed in the current financial 
year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   You know that move sort of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Where, at the end of the year you’ll have 
so many units and a certain portion will be work in 
progress, so many foundations and so on and so many wall 
plates but not completions and then you move this – you’ll 
10 
move with that in the …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Into the new financial year. 
MR MOKHESI:   In the new financial year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but of course you – in that situation, 
do you use the money of the new financial year to 
complete those or do you…[intervenes]. 
MR MOKHESI:   Well it’s a – remember the expenditure 
framework is three years.  So, you have to look at the 
three-year period to say, you know, on this particular 
financial year I’ll probably end up – you know you’ll have a 
20 
target. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   To say 3000 targets, you look at the 
budget yes, but it’s units and sites as well and then units, 
it’s across all programmes, you know, not necessarily 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 143 of 178 
 
RDP’s 
but 
it 
might 
also 
be 
affordable 
rental 
accommodation, so units and sites and that’s basically how 
it will roll and then, you know, in this particular – you can 
have instances where some of the projects flow into the 
current financial year and you also – and that’s why there’ll 
be roll-overs that are approved because you have existing 
projects that are running that you can show to say I 
request a roll-over, I did not spend but here are my 
commitments and then National Treasury will then approve 
and say, right, you have existing contracts that are running 
10 
now your budget in that particular year will have been – 
let’s say it would have been R100 000 but because of the 
approval of the roll-over maybe of R200 000 the budget for 
that project becomes R100 000. R200 000, the roll-over 
plus the budget for the current year, so it moves on like 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if I recall your evidence earlier, 
correctly, you said that as at October 2010, the National 
Department was saying that – or had determined that the 
Free 
State 
Department 
had 
not 
exceeded 
10% 
of 
20 
expenditure in the funds that had been allocated, is that 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, the report way saying, you know, the 
monetary report was saying you have only spent 10% 
of…[intervenes]. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 144 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, of the allocation. 
MR MOKHESI:   Of the allocation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, now what it means now when you 
look at this document at page 233 that Mr Pretorius was 
dealing with, is that – I mean the 10% of R1billion would 
have been about R100million more or less. 
MR MOKHESI:   Possibly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, they – effectively, they were saying 
even though in six/seven months we are only able to use 
10% in the balance of the months – of the financial year, 
10 
namely, November, December, January, February, March, 
that’s five months, and we know that there are holidays 
during December and the construction industry normally 
doesn’t work for some of that period.  They were saying, 
during those four or five months they were going to spend 
90% of the allocation.  It seems, that’s what they were 
saying. 
MR MOKHESI:   That’s what the recovery…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Something that was quite remarkable. 
MR MOKHESI:   Was attempting to say. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The provisions of the Divisions of 
Revenue Act, do I understand, also deals with the three-
year medium term expenditure framework but for the 
purposes of this matter it was saying that in the financial 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 145 of 178 
 
year ending – the single financial year ending March 2011, 
unless the allocation of R1.4billion was spent all or part of 
it would be forfeited, am I correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Repeat that again Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In other words, you mentioned a 
three-year medium-term expenditure framework provision 
that is provided for in DORA, as I understand. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   My recollection of DORA but what 
we were dealing with here is a single financial year. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, it’s a single financial year. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct, ending March 2011? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And what the National Treasury 
were 
saying, 
unless 
you 
spend 
your 
allocation 
of 
R1.4billion in that year, you’re going to lose all or some of 
it.  
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
Unless 
you 
spend 
and 
you 
can 
demonstrate by contract, you know, existing contracts that 
there are commitments for this money, it doesn’t mean that 
20 
you’ll have to – you’ll be able to spend and that will also 
allow you to get an approval for a roll-over because those 
projects are going to be running into the new financial 
year, so that you don’t use the money allocated for the 
subsequent financial year with the projects that comes 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 146 of 178 
 
from the previous financial year. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now if that – I’m sorry, yes I 
understand and in fact part of your R1.4billion or part of 
the Department’s R1.4billion was in fact, a roll-over from 
the previous year, the 2009/2010 financial year but that’s a 
detail that maybe, is in other information but the point is 
that the Department wasn’t saying, look we have contracts 
in place and we want to roll-over.  What it was saying as is 
now clear and you fairly conceded Mr Mokhesi is that we’re 
going to spend over a billion rand in the five remaining 
10 
months of the year from November to March and this is 
how we’re going to spend it, in all the details set out on 
page 233 and you fairly stated that it would have been 
impossible to achieve that, correct. 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well is it correct that, here in this 
document they just state, maybe what can be referred to as 
their targets or maybe their plans but I don’t know whether 
it can be called plans because, unless you draw my 
attention to something that I haven’t picked up it doesn’t 
20 
look like they show, in this document how they will achieve 
these targets within the timeframe that was – that they 
had? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, you know, for example, if you say 
3 500 wall plates I just make an …[intervenes]. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 147 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please raise your voice. 
MR MOKHESI:   If you say 3 500 wall plates for example 
where are they. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Right, because it means there must be 
3 500 foundations somewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And there must be contractors who on site 
who are working. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who are already working and there must 
10 
have been an assessment of what they are capable of 
doing within what time, that has enabled you to say, by a 
certain time they will have reached the – they would have 
done the walls. 
MR MOKHESI:   Because you can’t have wall plates 
without foundations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, ja, yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And you must also be in the position to 
pin-point it is in Bultfontein, in wherever, you know all 
these other areas to say this are the 3 500. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now when you look at this 
document and you know what you know now about what the 
position was, namely, what houses had been built, what 
houses had not been built, to what extent are you able to 
say that this document was really a misrepresentation 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 148 of 178 
 
because there’s no way you could talk about walls when 
there are no foundations? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, it was – I don’t know whether it’s a 
wish list, for lack of a better term but it would be highly 
unlikely that the National Treasury – ag sorry the parent 
Department 
Human 
Settlement 
will 
approve 
without 
knowing exactly because you have to provide details about 
where those houses or where those foundations are 
because we’re talking about the wall plates.  So, you’ll 
have to say they are in this particular area and this is how 
10 
– when you talk about the recovery plan you have to 
demonstrate that.  If that information is lacking there’s no 
way that it could be approved and also, on the face of it, it 
is improbable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I’m asking a different question.  
You are the HOD, you were the HOD who prepared the 
affidavit that we are dealing with. Now, to the extent that 
this document – was a representation to the National 
Department that the Provincial Department would achieve 
these targets by end of the financial year, namely March 
20 
2011. Are you able to say that there was enough progress 
that had been made by October in terms of the building of 
the houses and the foundations and everything for them to 
have 
been 
able 
to 
achieve 
this, 
are 
you 
able 
to 
say…[intervenes]? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 149 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:   If you think about the 10% that has been 
said this is where you were in terms of the expenditure, 
surely there were not enough, whether foundation or wall 
plates or whatever the situation might be at the time to be 
able to achieve this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But also as at that time, based on what 
you know, what you got to know when you became HOD, 
are you not able to say, there were not enough contractors, 
for example who were qualified who could have done such 
a job within such a short space of time, is that something 
10 
you are not able to say based on the reports you 
subsequently got when you became HOD? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I’m not able to – you know, I can 
only venture to say, you know, in order to pull this you’ll 
need contractors also – because it’s also about capacity to 
be able to – to pull – you know 3 500 also require a certain 
level of capacity and financial capital – financial capital 
and given the, you know, the contractors that we know or 
we have in the sector, your small contractors…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it would be good, if this information 
20 
is not already in the files here, it would be good if we can 
get information that tells me factually whether the progress 
that had been made in terms of the building of houses, at 
the time the plan was made, October 2010, what progress 
had been made and whether, by writing the targets that 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 150 of 178 
 
they were putting up here, it can’t be said, simply on that, 
that it was clear misrepresentation.  So if that’s not 
information that’s available I would appreciate it if you 
could work on getting that kind of information for us but it 
ought to be possible because we are in 2020 now, we’re 
talking about something that happened in 2010 at some 
stage in the years that followed  somebody ought to have 
said, let us see what was the position at that time but on 
the 
information 
that 
must 
be 
available 
within 
the 
Department it may be able to reach some conclusion as to 
10 
how much progress had been made, based on that, was 
this not a clear misrepresentation, yes Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but just to take a step back, I 
think you have fairly conceded that based on what you 
knew it would not have been possible to achieve these 
projections. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes but not if you are able to say 3 500 
wall 
plates 
there 
they 
are 
– 
or 
foundations 
sorry, 
foundations, there they are but whether they…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well your evidence is on record but 
20 
there’s another way to approach it because at this very 
time the Department was devising a pre-payment scheme 
which 
resulted 
in 
the 
expenditure 
of 
R600million, 
completely different parallel scheme.  So at the time it’s 
saying to National, we’re going to spend this amount of 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 151 of 178 
 
money on this amount of foundations, this amount of wall 
plates, this amount of completions for each month from 
November 2010 to March 2011 and we’re going to spend 
over a billion rand on this, at that very time, it is planning 
the expenditure of R600million by way of pre-payments to 
contractors and suppliers, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The two can’t sit together, we know 
the pre-payments of R600million happened, as a matter of 
fact and if that was being implemented at this time nobody 
10 
could have believed in the truth of that diagram, am I 
correct in that approach? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t seem very categorical on some 
of the matters Mr Mokhesi where I’d expect you to be quite 
categorical, you seem quite, very guarded in terms of some 
of the answers…[intervenes]. 
MR MOKHESI:   No where I agree, I agree, I said yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but it looks like there is a lot that 
you might need to refresh your memory on or what?  For 
20 
example, [intervenes]. 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I think what should be appreciated as 
well, Chairperson, is remember it’s – on some of what is 
being said here is possibly hearsay because I was not 
there but you know, as Accounting Officer you also account 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 152 of 178 
 
for things that happened before you came, I acknowledge 
that but also, you know, that Department lost money it’s a 
fact and this which I drew up or this affidavit was amongst 
others, mainly targeted at us trying to recover the money, 
firstly and secondly it’s an affidavit that has been – where I 
can’t say I have a first-hand experience or fist-hand 
information in terms of what happened, it’s because of all 
the documents that one collected over time and tried to 
draw up this affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well going back to this – I mean Mr 
10 
Pretorius is coming from an angle to look at this document 
to say, nobody could have believed that – could have 
believed this information. 
MR MOKHESI:   I agreed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, now – but surely you do, 
somewhere in the Department information as to how many 
houses had been built by end of that financial year, 
namely, end of March 2011 even if you might not remember 
it now. 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
I 
might 
not 
remember 
it 
now 
20 
but…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you’ve got it somewhere. 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
But 
the 
source 
of 
that 
particular 
information, as I’ve indicated will be the HSSC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well I would like that because, here 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 153 of 178 
 
is what was projected.  What I would like is, if possible, by 
October when this document was prepared, this was the 
state of affairs about this project…[intervenes]. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, well I think we’ll try…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You’ll try and do that. 
MR MOKHESI:   And go back, look also at – we’ll also have 
to go and source documents like – because ordinarily there 
would be reports, DORA reports on a monthly basis that 
indicate where the targets are, you know, how much and so 
on. There will be those particular reports that we’ll 
10 
compare and then we’ll have to go back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even if we are not able to say, even 
accurate number of units that had been built by October 
2010 but a reasonable estimate might do but from the mere 
fact that they spent 10%, about R100million that ought, on 
its own to give us an idea that maybe on the basis of 
R100million or so X number of units would have been 
completed, can’t be more – it could not have been more 
but out of whatever units they may have – they may have 
been working on some of them might not have been 
20 
completed. 
 
Maybe 
none 
of 
them 
would 
have 
been 
complete but it could not have been more than X number, 
simply from the money – the amount of money that had 
been spent out of the R1billion and then you look at what 
was the state of affairs as at the end of the financial year, 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 154 of 178 
 
how many units had been completed, how many units were 
not completed and in that way one could come back to this 
and be able to say, whoever was drawing this document, if 
they knew exactly what we’re talking about, they knew they 
were misrepresenting the position in a very serious way, 
okay, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  Just to complete the 
point that I was raising with you, Mr Mokhesi, we know that 
during or about October 2010 the Free State Department of 
Human 
Settlements 
was 
still 
contemplating 
spending 
10 
R600million 
on 
materials 
let 
alone 
completed 
work, 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So, I think the conclusions you’ve 
reached were, at the very least, not unfair or unreasonable 
conclusions.  Let’s move to another topic, and that was, 
what 
were 
the 
communications 
from 
the 
National 
Department 
Human 
Settlements 
to 
the 
Provincial 
Department of Human Settlements?  On the 29 t h of October 
2010 
there 
was 
what 
is 
called 
a 
Technical 
Human 
20 
Settlements MINMEC Meeting. Now there is MINMEC and 
there is Technical MINMEC, could you explain to the Chair 
what they are please? 
MR MOKHESI:   Technical MINMEC is Technokas officials 
and it’s Chaired by the DG and all the relevant officials will 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 155 of 178 
 
be there, primarily all the HOD’s and the CFO’s and 
perhaps certain support staff, that will be the Technical 
MINMEC.  The MINMEC it’s Ministers – Minister and 
MEC’s. So, the Technical MINMEC then feeds into MINMEC 
for approvals of whatever decision, whether it’s policy 
issues and so on.  So that’s, in short, what it is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right if you go to paragraph 44.5, 
what you say there is that at a Technical MINMEC of 
Human 
Settlements 
held 
on 
the 
29 t h 
of 
October 
2010…[intervenes]. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Paragraph? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry paragraph 44.5 on page 110, 
I’m sorry, go back to page 110 of your affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   110? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes Chair, paragraph 44.5. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, paragraph 44.5, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There reference is made to a 
Technical MINMEC [spelt into the record] meeting held on 
the 29 t h of October 2010, that would have been various 
officials from the National Department and various officials 
20 
from the Provincial Department of Human Settlements, 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say at that meeting Mr 
Chaney, on behalf of the National Department and Mr 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 156 of 178 
 
Makatswa on behalf of the Provincial Department were 
present and that Mr Chaney made it clear that payments 
wee unlawful and impermissible, you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What payments were being 
referred to there? 
MR MOKHESI:   I would – it could be the advance 
payments. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The advance payments.  Alright now 
we… 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Of the – for the purchase of material. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes you say in paragraph 44.6 you 
have relied for the account above on the evidence given by 
Chainey you had to – a disciplinary hearing on 20 June 2013 
and you give reference to the transcription of that evidence.  
We have looked at that evidence and to be fair to you Mr 
Chainey is not entirely clear of when information reached the 
National Department in regard to the payments and the 
status of those payments.   
He talks about various meetings.  There was an 
20 
October meeting; there was a November meeting, there was 
a meeting at Welkom, do you recall the Welkom meeting?  
But he is not entirely clear of precisely when National 
became aware of the irregularities.  And it is also was 
debated in the disciplinary hearing of what the National 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 157 of 178 
 
Department learned.   
On the one hand it was put to Mr Chainey that what 
the National Department learned from its Chief Financial 
Officer who had perused the housing subsidy scheme 
records that payments were being made directly to suppliers 
and that the complaint at that stage at least was that 
payments to suppliers is not a good idea.  In fact it is 
improper because there are no controls.   
You simply paying to suppliers and the suppliers can 
overcharge. They do not have - that system would not have 
10 
the control in the contract with the contractor who must 
receive, verify, put on site and the like.  On the other hand it 
may have been and it is not clear from Chainey’s evidence 
that the nub of the complaint was the advance payments.  
But as far as you are concerned the complaint was advance 
payments, is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes it – yes advance payments that is what 
we heard – that is what we are dealing with. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Alright if necessary we will 
deal with that in submissions Chair or in that – I think it 
20 
would not be fair to tax Mr Mokhesi on that issue.  It lies 
within the mouths of others.   
So Mr Chainey refers to various meetings; he was off 
ill for a long time; he talks about an October meeting, a 
November meeting and a meeting the following year.  He 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 158 of 178 
 
talks about the risks involved in paying suppliers directly 
without going through the contractors and he also talked I 
think about advance payments.  But the sequence and the 
detail is elusive on his evidence so let us leave that there.  
Okay.   
Your evidence is as I understand it is that National 
complained that the plans of the Province were unlawful and 
impermissible 
because 
they 
were 
advanced 
payments, 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Alright.  Then Mr Mkhatshwa 
also gave evidence of events around this time.  If I can give 
you the reference Chair it is Bundle FS17 at page 259.  What 
he said is that he conveyed this warning that he had 
received to the Head of Department Mr Mokoena and Mr 
Mokoena and later the MEC said you proceed nevertheless.  
Do you know anything about that? 
MR MOKHESI:  No I have seen it on the evidence of Mr 
Mkhatshwa – that is what – I do not know anything about 
that. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You do not deal with it here. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We will deal with that through other 
evidence Chair.  So the October meeting of MINMAC 
Technical you deal with – at paragraph 44.5 but there are no 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 159 of 178 
 
minutes attached. Do you see that?  You do not attach any 
minutes of that meeting when you deal with paragraph 44.5 
and 44.6.  You merely refer to Chainey’s testimony.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  The technical and the name MINMAC 
minutes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At paragraph 44.5. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You refer to the technical Human 
Settlements MIXMAX meeting of 29 October 2010.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And over the page you say what 
happened at that meeting.  And in paragraph 44.6 you say in 
saying that what you say in paragraph 44.5 you rely on Mr 
Chainey’s 
testimony 
transcribed 
in 
the 
record 
of 
the 
disciplinary hearing. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There was another meeting however 
that took place on the 18 November.  Another technical 
20 
MIXMAX meeting and you deal with that at paragraph 54.  
Well you deal with that at paragraph 50.  You say in the 
second sentence or you say in paragraph 50: 
“I referred earlier to the technical Human 
Settlements MINMAC meeting held on 20 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 160 of 178 
 
October 
at 
which 
Chainey 
advised 
Mkhatshwa that the department’s advance 
payments were unlawful.” 
MR MOKHESI:  Which paragraph Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  50. 
MR MOKHESI:  50. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  On page 112. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then you say: 
“A follow up technical Human Settlements MINMAC meeting 
10 
was held on 18 November 2010.” 
 
You see that?  And then you do attach a copy.  And 
there you say in paragraph 52: 
“Again Mkhatshwa attended on behalf of the 
department.  He presented he department’s 
expenditure recovery plan.” 
 
So it seems that that plan was actually presented at 
an official meeting according to this record. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He also –  
“That is in addition to presenting the plan 
raised 
the 
proposed 
use 
of 
tripartite 
agreements in the housing project.” 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 161 of 178 
 
 
Those are the agreements remember between the 
department, the supplier and the contractors. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That second level of agreement.  Not 
the cession agreements but the middle level of agreement.  
And you say in paragraph 53: 
“The technical MINMAC meeting rejected the 
department’s expenditure recovery plan.  It 
10 
warned the department not to implement it.” 
 
And over the page you say at paragraph 54: 
“There were two major problems.  First the 
plan did not demonstrate the department’s 
ability to spend its allocation in the few 
months 
remaining 
until 
the 
end 
of 
the 
financial year 30 March 2011.  Second the 
proposed tripartite agreements were rejected 
since 
suppliers 
would 
have 
to 
supply 
materials 
in 
bulk 
without 
the 
necessary 
20 
support 
to 
ensure 
quality 
and 
proper 
procurement proceedings.  Also there are a 
lot of risks with this arrangement.” 
 
Do you see that?  There were two issues discussed. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 162 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  As you say.  But what is clear that at 
least at that stage the department was not persuaded that 
the allocation could be spent.  You referred to that earlier in 
your evidence.  You recall that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Second however the proposed 
tripartite agreements were rejected.  So it seems there were 
two issues on the table. The one is the expenditure recovery 
plan which we have referred to particularly that cash flow 
projection and secondly another way of spending money 
10 
which would be to play – pay suppliers direct.  That was also 
rejected. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  Then it seems from paragraph 
46 that another meeting was held on the 19 November that is 
the next day. 
MR MOKHESI:  Paragraph 46? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Para 56. 
MR MOKHESI:  Oh 56. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  On page 113.  A Human Settlements 
20 
MINMAC meeting held on 19 November 2010.  Again Mr 
Mkhatshwa attended on behalf of the department.  You see 
that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now that is with the National Minister 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 163 of 178 
 
and the Provincial MEC of Human Settlements. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  As I understand your evidence.  
Correct?  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 58 the MINMAC meeting 
that is the one on the 19 November confirmed the approach 
adopted at the technical MINMAC meeting namely that funds 
would be shifted from non-performing Provinces.  That is the 
warning.  Correct? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 59: 
“Mr Mkhatshwa returned to Bloemfontein and 
advised the then Head of Department Mpho 
Mokoena 
that 
the 
department 
had 
been 
warned not to implement the expenditure 
recovery plan.  However Mokoena instructed 
Mkhatshwa to proceed with the plan.  I base 
this allegations on the – allegation on the 
findings of the disciplinary hearing where this 
20 
evidence is thoroughly dealt with and in 
detail.” 
 
But your conclusion I might say accurately reflects 
the proceedings in the disciplinary hearing.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 164 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is where you got your 
information. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes that is where I got it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Of course having followed the 
instructions of Mr Mokoena and Mr Mkhatshwa ultimately 
gets dismissed but that is a story for later on in these 
proceedings.  Paragraph 60 you say: 
“Mokoena’s instruction was formalised by an 
internal memorandum.  The memorandum 
was prepared by Moosa Tsometsi [?] who 
10 
was then the Deputy Director General of the 
Department. 
 
Mokoena 
signed 
the 
memorandum 
approving 
the 
recommendations it contained.” 
 
There is some evidence to the effect that Mr 
Mokoena requested Mr Tsometsi [?] to prepare a legal 
opinion on the legality of the issue but that document 
prepared by Mr Tsometsi [?] is not an opinion at all.  Do you 
know anything about that? 
MR MOKHESI:  No. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Of course the memorandum itself as 
you point out in paragraph 62 and following which served to 
implement the advance payment plan was itself not followed 
let alone had not been proper in the first place to even 
contemplate such a plan the plan that was contemplated was 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 165 of 178 
 
also not followed at all.   
And you detail that in paragraph 62 to 64.  Basically, 
the memorandum prepared by Mr Tsometsi said that the 
department would only pay material suppliers for material 
actually supplied to a contractor and invoiced with the 
invoices to be backed up certificate issued by the contractor 
confirming receipt of the material.  That is contained in the 
memorandum.  But that is not what happened am I correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes it is not what happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What happened in fact? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Well materials were either not delivered or in 
instances and this is what we – we also picked up they were 
either not delivered or instances where they were delivered – 
they were not delivered in the quantities that are required or 
they simply some of the contractors denied that the materials 
were ever delivered to them and then this was what we were 
faced with to say in certain instances we had suppliers just 
dropping materials on site without any supervision and so 
on.   
So that is basically what happened.  But in terms of 
20 
the certification of the material as contemplated in the 
memorandum it did not happen.  It happened only to a very 
lesser extent where it happened.  It did happen in certain 
instances but not in all instances. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You summarise that in paragraph 65 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 166 of 178 
 
and 66 on page 115.  If I may just read that and you can 
confirm whether it is correct or not.  Paragraph 65 on page 
115 reads: 
“The department’s decisions were in clear 
breach of the advice given to it by the 
National Department via Chainey and the 
technical 
MINMAC 
meetings. 
 
The 
department had been told that it expenditure 
recovery plan was not acceptable and that it 
should not implemented.  It had also been 
10 
told 
that 
paying 
suppliers 
without 
the 
suppliers 
having 
supplied 
materials 
was 
unlawful.” 
 
Is that your analysis? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Of the documentation that you looked 
at? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright we do not have a minute I 
must say of the expenditure recovery plan being rejected but 
20 
we do have a minute of supplier’s payments being warned 
against.  But that is part of the record that we can deal with 
with the Chair in submissions.  Paragraph 66 goes: 
“As I set out in more detail below the 
department proceeded to make payments to 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 167 of 178 
 
suppliers 
without 
the 
suppliers 
having 
supplied material i.e. it made payments in 
advance. 
 
No 
written 
agreements 
were 
concluded governing these payments.  The 
department 
did 
not 
follow 
any 
proper 
procurement process to identify the suppliers 
to which it paid payments. The total value of 
the payments made was nearly R1 billion.” 
 
Now that is in relation to the prepayment scheme.  Is 
– does that reflect your researches into the materials that 
10 
you referred to in paragraph 4 of your affidavit? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right before I get to the next topic I 
would like to just make one point or put one issue before 
you.  There does not appear to be a minute of National – the 
National Department at a technical MINMAC or even a 
MINMAC or any other meeting saying to the Provincial 
Department 
your expenditure recovery 
plan 
cannot be 
implemented it is unrealistic.  We do not have a minute of 
that.  And if in fact the National Department was saying, look 
20 
you cannot play – pay suppliers directly because it is too 
risky then of course it would not be commenting on the 
expenditure recovery plan it would be commenting on the 
other process.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Can you repeat that? 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 168 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry. 
MR MOKHESI:  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is a long question and it has been 
a long day.  We do not have a minute of any meeting where 
National says to Provincial do not implement the expenditure 
recovery plan.  We do not have a minute of a rejection of the 
expenditure recovery plan.  One can of course argue that 
had they looked at it they would have obviously come to the 
same conclusion or that they actually did reject it as you say. 
MR MOKHESI:  Well one can only infer because here is the 
10 
– that ERP was prepared.  It must have been prepared and 
the way we know the process is that the recovery plan you 
present it to the – to the technical meeting.  Either it will 
have been presented to this performance reviews which are 
not necessarily technical MINMAC per se.  Or they will also 
be presented in the technical MINMAC where it will be 
approved or rejected.  There should have been a process 
that decides that we are taking – we are taking money from 
you for that Province or Provinces. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that what – 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  And it happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  So you know there must have been some 
sort of an engagement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 169 of 178 
 
MR MOKHESI:  And some sort of correspondence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  One can infer too that had – if they 
had asked for it the Minister had said give me an 
expenditure recovery plan they would have looked at it and I 
would imagine and I think it is reasonable to put to you 
would not have been convinced by it as you say. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes they would have been. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  They would not have been convinced 
by it. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Because clearly on the face of 
it it was not an achievable project.  But you have given that 
evidence I do not want to repeat it.  We might get into 
another round of exchanges.  But the second point I wanted 
to make arising out of that is that a rejection of the idea that 
suppliers should be paid directly and not via contractors is 
another matter – it is a separate matter.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Alright.  Well we need not take 
that much further than that.  If I could take you to paragraph 
20 
72.  That refers to certain press statements and if you go 
back to paragraph 69 you record there: 
“That on the 18 January 2011 the National 
Department issued a media statement.” 
MR MOKHESI:  Hm.  Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 170 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Saying that it was shifting funding 
from 
underperforming 
Provinces, 
the 
Free 
State 
and 
KwaZulu Natal to other Provinces.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the response of the department 
to that was to say, no, no we are going to spend everything 
by the end of the financial year.  By the end of January in its 
response press statement the Free State says according to 
paragraph 70: 
“By the end of January 2011 expenditure 
10 
should be around 85%.” 
 
Now if one includes the R600 million plus spent on 
advance payments that might or might not be correct.  We do 
not know that? 
MR MOKHESI:  We do not know that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But you do say in paragraph 72: 
“By the time these statements – these press 
statements were issued the department had 
already transferred several hundred million 
rand 
from 
its 
conditional 
allocation 
to 
20 
suppliers.” 
 
And I stress suppliers and that would have been for 
materials. 
MR MOKHESI:  Materials yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 171 of 178 
 
“It continued to make unlawful transfers in 
January, February and March 2011.  The 
transfers were made without the suppliers 
having 
supplied 
material; 
without 
written 
agreements in respect of or regulating the 
transfers 
and 
without 
any 
procurement 
process having been followed.” 
 
Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You agree with that statement? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then paragraph 73: 
“The department made the transfers for the 
purpose of avoiding having its conditional 
allocation stopped and transferred to better 
performing provinces.” 
 
That was the object. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   
“It made the transfers so that it looked as if 
20 
the conditional allocation had been spent.  I 
submit that this was a fraud on the National 
Treasury and on the National Government 
more broadly as well as on the taxpayers and 
the public genre.” 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 172 of 178 
 
 
That is a repeat of your earlier statements. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Regarding the fraud correct? 
MR MOKHESI: Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I repeat that the unlawful transfers 
you say in paragraph 74 amounted to plus minus R631 
million in total.  That deals with that section.  You deal with 
the material supply agreements in paragraphs 87 and 88 of 
your statement.  That is on page 124.  You see that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That between October 2010 and 
August 2011 the department concluded approximately 112 
agreements termed material supply agreements.  These were 
the tripartite agreements of which we spoken earlier. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  They are well summarised in the 
judgment of Faul AJ which we may refer to because they are 
a convenient summary but we could do that at a later stage 
perhaps by way of revision tomorrow morning.  But what is 
instructive about that statement is that at the very time the 
20 
expenditure recovery plan was being devised and presented 
to National that is October 2010 this parallel scheme of 
material supplier agreements to spend R600 million was 
being devised.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 173 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You then deal with in the following 
paragraphs the material supply agreements and you highlight 
certain provisions of the tripartite agreement.  Firstly there is 
the conflict between the contractor’s obligation to source 
materials and pay for materials and the department doing so 
directly with the supplier.  You recall that conflict? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja the material supply and the contract. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The contractors were the contract? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Because the material supplier was put the 
responsibility of acquiring material was now put on the 
…[mumbling]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now it was clear.  Right.  The 
agreement you say in 90.2: 
“Obliges the contractor to order its building 
material from the material suppliers.” 
 
But now on the tripartite agreement there is a 
20 
possibility of a direct link between the department and the 
supplier. 
MR MOKHESI:  And the suppliers. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 174 of 178 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But what is interesting about this 
tripartite agreement in paragraph 90.3 which you point out 
there are no fixed prices.  So in other words the supply 
agreement is entered into with the hope as you put it that the 
material would be supplied at the best price.  So one enters 
into a contract with no price being fixed and the material 
supplier is told just give us your best price.  You make the 
remark later about whether this is a commercially viable way 
of going about business.  What is your remark about that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Well there is an element of risk particularly 
10 
for the contractor because all the milestones prices you 
know foundation, walls place those prices are fixed.  Now if 
you do not manage because the biggest input – the biggest 
input in building of houses it is material.  It constitutes 
perhaps 80 or 90% of the input costs.   
Now if you do not manage that particular issue and 
you will simply leave it to – to the material supplier you run 
the risk of materials suppliers either overcharging and 
unfortunately because the price is fixed the contractor or 
possibly because we pay – we pay a fixed price you know 
20 
100.  If we say foundation is R10 000.00 that is what it is.  
That is what we are going to pay.  So you can end up 
actually if you do not manage that material part of it you can 
– the contactor can up actually spending R12 000.00 for 
argument sake and we are certainly are not going to pay 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 175 of 178 
 
R12 000.00 we are going to pay R10 000.00.  And that is – it 
is again obviously what is going to happen is the contractor 
will abandon site because he is obviously losing money. So 
that is the risk basically. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In summary Mr Mokhesi at page 125 
and page 126 you deal with the terms of the tripartite 
agreement for the supply of materials.  The agreement which 
provided for direct payment at no fixed price as you point out 
by the department to the supplier as opposed to the 
contractor.   
10 
And you point out on page 127 how these tripartite 
agreements varied the contracts with the contractor.  To give 
the simplest example the contractor was originally obliged to 
source materials and pay for them and would only be paid by 
the department once they have – the building – milestone 
had been completed.  This provided for an upfront payment 
directly to the supplier without the controls that you have 
referred to and creating the risks that you referred to.   
All that is detailed here I do not think it is necessary to go to 
it in any detail.  It is clear what you say here and that is 
20 
backed up by an examination of the contracts and by the 
findings of Advocate Van Graan in the disciplinary inquiry.  
You make the point in paragraph 95 in addition on page 128 
that this material supply agreement is unusual in the 
construction industry and it is at odds with the requirements 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 176 of 178 
 
of the housing subsidy scheme, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You see that in paragraph 95.  
Again, we do not need to go into detail except that to say in 
paragraph 95.2, what you say is that there is a departure 
from the requirement that materials actually be incorporated 
into housing, houses been build and to the satisfaction of the 
employer before the employer is required to pay for the 
material.  That is the department. 
 
The department would ordinarily in proper expenditure 
10 
process and in accordance with all the regulations and the 
regulatory framework have to be satisfied that the materials 
are actually there in the completed house before it pays for 
them, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you also make the remark at the 
bottom of paragraph 96 on page 129. 
“The department paid substantial amounts of money 
often with no invoice at all.” 
MR MOKHESI:   Page? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 129 
MR MOKHESI:   129. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The last three lines of the first 
paragraph of the page, paragraph 96. 
“The department paid substantial amounts of money 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 177 of 178 
 
often with no invoice at all.  Where there was a 
document purporting to be an invoice, it was not 
certified and was often patently false.” 
 
You have given that evidence. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And those examples would appear in 
the reports.  But then at the bottom of page 129, you deal 
with the cession agreements.  And if we are going to 
complete the summary, we should deal with those.   
 
But before that.  Chair, I would want to deal and I see 
10 
we are beyond the time now.  I would like to deal with 
another topic which I would like to deal with tomorrow also.  
Would this be a convenient time? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wanted to find out whether in terms of 
how much time we will need during the week, whether we 
need to go beyond four o’clock or whether we should stop at 
four o’clock because we will be able to manage. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I was hoping to finish the 
evidence well in time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well in time? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  Then in that event, let us 
adjourn then and then we will continue tomorrow.  Okay.  We 
will adjourn and then tomorrow we will start at ten o’clock.  
We adjourn. 
21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 268 
 
Page 178 of 178 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 22 SEPTEMBER 2020  
