 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 311 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 139 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 3 of 139 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 24 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Kennedy, good 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Good afternoon Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We are thank you Chair and thank you 
for accommodating further evidence of the Denel witness 
from whom you have heard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Parts a week or so ago Mr Burger. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I thank Mr Burger and his 
attorney Mr Crouse for accommodating us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  At short notice this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no thank you Mr Burger and your 
attorney for making yourselves available at very short 
notice to assist the commission to make use of the time 
that it has.  Thank you. 
MR BURGER:  Huge pleasure Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes I think we will have to do 
the oath again. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record/ 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 4 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:  Abraham Stephanus Burger 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed affirmation? 
MR BURGER:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you true – do you solemnly affirm that 
the evidence you will give will be the truth; the whole truth 
and nothing else but the truth; if so please raise your right 
hand and say, I truly affirm? 
MR BURGER:  I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Burger; you may be 
10 
seated.  So you confirm Mr Kennedy we will be using Denel 
Bundle 10 is that right? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That is correct and it is Exhibit W25 
in Bundle 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Exhibit W25.1. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or – okay alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair we will in fact be referring to 
some 
other 
exhibits 
as 
well 
for 
purposes 
of 
cross-
reference. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Particularly … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Annexures to the affidavits of Ms 
Malahlela. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 5 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And Mr Mlambo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Burger you will recall on the last 
occasion that we dealt at length with the award of the Hulls 
contract – the Platform Hulls Contract by DLS to VR Laser, 
do you recall that? 
MR BURGER:  Yes Chair I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then we just started with certain 
aspects relating to the next award to VR Laser by DLS 
10 
while you were the DLS CEO and that was the Sole 
Supplier Contract or the Single Supplier Contract for 
various… 
MR BURGER:  I recall Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That was for various steel fabricated 
parts, correct? 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And we dealt mainly with these 
topics Mr Saloojee giving you the instruction and of course 
his version is that the initiative came from you but we have 
20 
covered your evidence on that.  Why you accepted the 
instruction and you made the acknowledgement to your 
credit that in retrospect you realised that the correct 
procedures were not necessarily followed in the award of 
that contract. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 6 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now I just want to go into 
some 
of 
the 
background 
that 
led 
up 
to 
the 
actual 
finalisation of the – of the contract.  May I ask you to look 
at Bundle 1 – Denel Bundle 1?  You have listened to the 
evidence have you not of Ms Malahlela and you have also 
been provided with a copy of her affidavit for your 
comment, correct? 
MR BURGER:  Yes I have Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you are aware that at an early 
10 
stage according to Ms Malahlela’s evidence she raised a 
serious concern about the award of the Single Supplier 
Contract to VR Laser particularly because there was no 
tender or RFQ -  Competitive Procurement Process? 
MR BURGER:  I learnt that from her evidence yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And were you not aware of that at the 
time? 
MR BURGER:  As I – as I stated in my affidavit the – the 
first time I heard about not being happy with the process 
followed was – was in – in the early parts of 2016 when 
20 
she first mentioned this to me in – in the passing and said 
we did not follow correct procedure.  I was surprised to 
hear that.  Shortly thereafter there was an EXCO meeting 
and where I recall it was raised again and then this was in 
2016 and then she followed it up with an email to me when 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 7 of 139 
 
I was overseas and I know I reacted quite sharply on her 
email because I thought the way she put it in the email was 
– was in a much more serious tone than what I heard it in 
the passing and at the EXCO meeting and I thought that 
was serious enough to be discussed on a one on one basis 
or in a committee and not writing an email while I was 
abroad.  So yes that is when I found out Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you found that out only 2016?  You 
sure you were not aware of that in 2015 at all? 
MR BURGER:  I – I cannot recall that.  I really cannot 
10 
recall that – it being discussed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Then how – then how do you come to 
say that you only found out about it in 2016 if you say you 
cannot recall if you found out about it during 2015? 
MR BURGER:  I cannot recall – I would not have reacted in 
the way I did and stated at that time – this is four years’ 
ago this is the first time apart from raising it in the passing 
is the first time that you now officially raise it with me.  So 
that is why I say at the time in 2016 I could not remember 
that she did.  I can less so now – so… 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you can? 
MR BURGER:  I can less so now recall that she – she 
mentioned anything of the likes to me.  I saw – I heard in 
the affidavit that it was discussed with Mr Teubes.  I was – 
I was – I cannot recall any of that currently. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 8 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Well can I take you in Bundle 1 to 
page 659?  Now this is an email from Ms Malahlela dated 
the 23 March 2015 so it is early in 2015 addressed 
exclusively to Mr Teubes.  It is not copied into you.  Can 
you recall if you saw this email? 
MR BURGER:  I cannot recall Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Is it possible you may have? 
MR BURGER:  I – I have not even read it Chair so I – I… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay. 
MR BURGER:  I cannot recall this. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess you would need to read it to see 
whether you remember having read it at some stage. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes perhaps I can just read the 
relevant parts to the witness Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  This is what Ms Malahlela said to Mr 
Teubes. 
“Hi Reenen, I have given – gone through 
the document and I realise that you have 
taken out my recommendation and now the 
20 
document has the name of the supplier 
specified.  I do not mean to belabour the 
point but I am still of the opinion that 
should management approve this request 
DLS must go out on tender or RFQ for the 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 9 of 139 
 
appointment of a single source for this 
scope of work. Once we have identified the 
supplier 
that 
meets 
DLS’s 
requirements 
through a competitive process then we can 
appoint such a supplier for a minimum of 
three years as a single source specification 
and evaluation criteria must be sent to all 
suppliers listed before time etcetera.” 
 
Now Ms Malahlela gave evidence … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy you did not say minimum hey 
10 
you said maximum? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not say minimum – it is written 
maximum but I heard you as if you were saying. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Oh I am sorry – did I say? 
CHAIRPERSON:  As if you were saying minimum. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry did I misread it?  I 
apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  From maximum of three years as 
20 
single source.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I recall this from the evidence that was 
given to me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And the context she gave to this in 
her affidavit and in her oral evidence was this.  She had 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 10 of 139 
 
initially 
prepared 
a 
motivation 
recommendation 
and 
unfortunately it is referred to in her affidavit but not 
attached – just the recovering email and it appears that the 
memorandum itself has gone astray.  But there is no 
dispute between here and Teubes that she initially when 
she put out the recommendation as the head of Supply 
Chain at DLS said this needs to go out to tender.  And here 
she is replying to Mr Teubes.  Because if we look on the 
next page – page 660 in the middle of the page – in fact 
the foot of the page the bottom email is from her dated the 
10 
12 March 2015. 
“Please find the attached document as 
requested.” 
 
And her evidence has been that was the – that was 
the recommendation in which she had recommended that it 
this is to go out on a Single Source Supplier Contract there 
would have to be a competitive process.  And he then 
replies the middle of page 660 on the 20 March and he 
says: 
“Hello Celia, I have changed the angle that 
20 
we ask for approval from Riaz.  Please see 
attached submission in the inputs.” 
 
And her response is the email that I have just 
quoted from where she specifically says: 
“I see you have changed the angles in a 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 11 of 139 
 
fundamental 
way. 
 
You 
no 
longer 
are 
incorporating my recommendation.  As head 
of Supply Chain Management whose job is 
to advise management on these things.  
That you should be going out to tender or at 
least RFQ to ensure that it is competitive.” 
 
Now Mr Teubes did he not discuss this with you or 
can you not remember? 
MR BURGER:  I – I did not see this email.  I cannot recall.  
I recall this email from the evidence that was given 
10 
recently – I cannot recall this email – having seen this 
email then. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes but my question earlier was 
whether you saw this email and you have already answered 
that before. 
MR BURGER:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  My question now is did he discuss it 
with you – Mr Teubes whether by email or person to person 
or however? 
MR BURGER:  Chair this – it is really difficult to recall.  He 
20 
might have asked my opinion on – do – what is my opinion?  
Should we go out on open tender or on closed tender for 
that matter?  My opinion at the time was I stated it quite a 
number of times that the way to go out on open tender with 
something like this or on – firstly to go out on open tender 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 12 of 139 
 
is – is more or less impossible.  The – to do it on a closed 
tender – multiple tender is to prepare drawings; is to 
supply 
potential 
single 
source 
suppliers 
with 
these 
drawings for them to – to tender a price, demonstrate their 
capability, demonstrate their quality and so on; on an 
actual example and then… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I think we understand what a RFQ 
process involved we have been through this a number of 
times before. 
MR BURGER:  Ja. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  My interest is really in the – in – on 
the question of accountability and who discussed what with 
whom and who gave approval, and who was taking the 
initiative?  For example you have said in your affidavit 
repeatedly and adamantly Mr Saloojee was pressuring you 
to award the contract – this contract to VR Laser.  He says 
no he was not pressuring you – you were pressuring him 
and your colleagues.  And that – I believe that it may be of 
interest to the learned Commissioner in the commission to 
know where the buck stopped?  Because you as CEO have 
20 
already said in great detail on the previous occasion that 
there was huge good reason why DLS should give a Single 
Supplier Contract to VR Laser and nobody else.  You recall 
that? 
MR BURGER:  I recall that vividly Chair. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 13 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Which seems to perhaps make sense 
if you were the one who was driving the process and – and 
I think it would be fair for the commission to understand 
whether you were aware of this at the time or not.  So with 
respect to you Mr Burger may I suggest you do not dwell 
on what is involved in a RFQ process?  We know that Ms 
Malahlela was saying you should go out on a tender or 
RFQ process.  We know what those processes involve and 
we know why they are there to try and ensure a measure of 
competitiveness and that is why she was promoting the 
10 
idea.  But it was not being picked up by management of 
which you formed part.  If you cannot remember whether 
this was discussed with you by Mr Teubes or Ms Malahlela 
at the time you must say that. 
MR BURGER:  Chair I cannot recall.  I was – I was 
however of the opinion that a process was followed a year 
earlier and based on that I did not feel it necessary to go 
out on a tender again.  That was my opinion at the time but 
I cannot recall this being discussed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then the last paragraph. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Kennedy.  I wonder if 
they can reduce the air conditioner noise but if – ja I 
hoping that that will not be problematic in terms of heat.  
But if it is too hot please somebody must tell me.  Mr 
Kennedy how is it like? 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 14 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is very hot. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is very hot. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am finding that – but quite honestly 
Chair… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  No, no, no. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is very important you hear the 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No maybe if – maybe what you can do 
because it is not like I cannot hear – maybe what you can 
do is put your microphone I do not know where it can be 
10 
closer because I was hearing you but I wanted to improve 
my hearing in terms of what you are saying. So I do not 
want everybody to complain about heat. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe – maybe where I am it is not as 
hot as where you are.  Okay alright but I think if you do not 
speak too far from the phone – from the microphone. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I have moved it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It will help me.  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja.  Okay alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I hope it is better. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Burger can I take you to the last 
paragraph of this email?   
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 15 of 139 
 
“I do not think we should piggy-back on the 
process that was followed for the Platform 
Hull.  We should go out on a separate RFQ 
tender process where we invite all suppliers 
that we think are capable and then do such 
appointment.  We will ask Michelle to 
schedule a meeting.” 
 
So she specifically saying it does not help that we 
went on a RFQ process for the Platform Hulls Contract and 
we have dealt with this in your evidence before. 
10 
MR BURGER:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That involved three bids that was the 
RFQ process which was to an extent a competitive 
process. 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So she is saying but we cannot just 
piggy-back on that because that process was for that 
contract – for those items – Platform Hulls.  And as you 
confirmed in your evidence last time this was for a different 
type of component.  You cannot say well because I have 
20 
awarded you Contract A therefore you entitled to Contract 
B. That was her rationale.  Now does that not make sense 
to you now? 
MR BURGER:  It makes sense to me now Chair.  At the 
time it did not but it does now. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 16 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And in fact in the previous 
paragraph I am not going to read it into the record she in 
fact says:  “We should invite LMT in this process – they 
should be one of the parties that we invite to bid.  And she 
says at the end of that second paragraph: 
“I am not saying that the work must be 
given to LMT all I am saying is that LMT 
and other capable suppliers must be given 
a chance to prove themselves through a 
transparent, competitive and fair RFQ or 
10 
tender process.” 
 
But it was not a concern for you at this stage early 
in 2015 that – that there was no RFQ procurement process 
being followed.  It is not something you raised or were 
concerned about yourself, correct? 
MR BURGER:  Chair I am running the risk of repeating 
myself but at the time I state again I got an instruction; I 
welcomed the instruction; I – it was minuted in the EXCO 
minutes of Denel Land Systems.  I wanted to make very 
sure that the – the engineers and the operation supported 
20 
that – that initiative.  I told Mr Teubes that we should do 
this and for that reason he ensured that the engineers did 
a study and to – that it was supported by the study.  The 
emails that followed it is very clear if it is analysed that I 
was not – I did not want to sign the MOU or the MOA.  I 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 17 of 139 
 
instructed in that it must be Mr Saloojee.  So it is all of 
these things that – that demonstrates that this does not – 
did not – the initiative did not come from me.  The very fact 
that in the past we used to on lower levels approve MOA’s 
probably made me not focus enough and understand 
enough that we should have gone out on tender.  In today’s 
current scenario we should have gone out on tender; we 
did not.  I – at the time I did not think it necessary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – this is something you may have dealt 
with previously but I may have forgotten what you said.  
10 
What did you think then was the process that should have 
been followed if the open tender system should not be 
followed if you thought that was not the right process?   
MR BURGER:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the process that you thought 
should be followed? 
MR BURGER:  Hundred percent Chair.  Prior – prior to 
2014 earlier 2010 thereabouts I cannot remember the exact 
date a person like the Supply Chain Executive without 
further authority approved Single Source Agreements.  
20 
Because we believed it had certain advantages for the 
company.  If the – if the Group CEO said we should do 
something like this I was hundred percent convinced at the 
time that this was within his delegation to do.  I knew and I 
said that my delegations were curtailed quite substantially 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 18 of 139 
 
but I was under the impression if that gets approved by the 
Group CEO then it is fine.  And that was my departure 
point and therefore I did not give it a lot of concern until 
now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  So we have just 
seen the email from Ms Malahlela to Mr Teubes and that 
was in March 2015.  Now we know and you have agreed in 
your affidavit as I understand it that the MOA was signed in 
May 2015.  
10 
MR BURGER:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You recall that/ 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I would like you now in the same 
bundle to please turn to page 672.  Do you have it? 
MR BURGER:  I have got it Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now this is an EXCO committee 
meeting minute of the 29 October 2015.  Unfortunately it 
does not as one normally would expect state who was 
present and who may have been absent or who chaired it.  
20 
May I just refresh your memory as to what it says.  
Paragraph 1.1. 
“A 
concern 
was 
noted 
with 
regard 
to 
placement of orders on VR Laser.  The 
predicament here is that the GSCE approval 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 19 of 139 
 
– sorry approved this deviation from the 
procurement 
process 
on 
the 
following 
condition.  “Under no circumstances shall 
products or services that can be procured 
from a group entity or division be procured 
from an external supplier to a non-Denel 
company unless there is approval by the 
Group Supply Chain Executive based on 
sound business reasons.”  This is also in 
line with the Group Supply Chain Policy and 
10 
the DLS Supply Chain Procedure.  The 
above provisions are in direct conflict with 
the MOU that DLS signed with VR Laser 
where VR Laser is the sole supplier for all 
complex welding and machining work to 
DLS for the next ten years.” 
 
And there was a resolution. 
“The committee took a decision that the 
MOU takes precedence over the GSCE’s 
condition 
and 
the 
Group 
Supply 
Chain 
20 
Policy 
and 
the 
DLS 
Supply 
Chain 
Procedure.  The committee stated also that 
given 
the 
– 
it 
says 
resend 
history 
– 
presumably it should be recent history with 
regard to prize – it should be presumably 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 20 of 139 
 
price and turnaround time VR was the 
preferred supplier with all opportunities.  It 
was further stated that in terms of the MOU 
VR Laser prices must be market related and 
in line with the Provisions of the MOA 
before an order can be placed on them. Due 
to this reason and previous experience with 
VR Laser committee felt confident that the 
VR Laser prices will be market related and 
reasonable.  Celia Malahlela was tasked to 
10 
draft a letter to the GSCE and explain the 
decision taken in this regard.” 
 
Now Mr Burger do you recall being at this meeting 
where this was discussed and this was decided? 
MR BURGER:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And the concern – the predicament 
that was raised in the first bullet point and the heading 1.1 
a concern was noted.  That was concern – that concern or 
concern about the predicament was raised by Ms Malahlela 
herself, not so? 
20 
MR BURGER:  Chair I cannot – cannot remember.  I know 
about this email I cannot remember who said what but I 
presume it was her that raised those points. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And this clearly is that we have 
not complied with the Group Supply Chain Management 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 21 of 139 
 
Policy because the GCSE or the GSCE rather Mr Mlambo 
had not approved the transaction relating to whether an 
outside supplier rather than an internal supplier could be 
used.  Correct?  That was the concern she raised. 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now this was raised in 
October 2015. 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Formerly in a meeting and it is 
minuted.  So your evidence cannot be correct earlier which 
10 
suggested although you seemed to go back on that later 
that you only heard about it in passing from Ms Malahlela 
only in 2016.  It cannot be correct can it? 
MR BURGER:  Ja.  Chair I cannot recall the exact date.  I 
know it was substantially later.  I know there was an EXCO 
meeting where it was discussed maybe it was this one and 
it was October 2015 I cannot recall. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  The – but as I said it was – it was 
discussed in an EXCO meeting. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes and presumably this is the EXCO 
meeting. 
MR BURGER:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now if I can take you back for 
a moment in the same bundle to page 669?  But let us start 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 22 of 139 
 
at 662.  This is the Denel SOC Limited Procurement Policy 
Group Supply Chain Policy.  Correct? 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that became effective as it is 
indicated near the top right on page 662 on the 19 
November 2014. 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now if we look at page 669 Clause 
6.10.1 
under 
the 
heading 
Intergroup 
and 
Group 
Procurement Contracts 6.10.1 says: 
10 
“Under no circumstances shall products or 
services that can be procured from a group 
entity or division or procured 
from an 
external supplier or non- Denel company 
unless there is approval by the Group 
Supply Chain Executive based on sound 
business reasons.” 
 
That is the very provision that is quoted in the 
minutes. 
MR BURGER:  Yes.  Correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Of that EXCO meeting that you 
attended. 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Ms Malahlela was specifically quoting 
and recording a provision of the Group Supply Chain 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 23 of 139 
 
Management 
Policy 
that 
she 
contended 
had 
been 
breached, correct? 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now is it correct that you had 
a discussion about this and you discussed it in these 
terms. Which one takes precedence?  Does the MOA/MOU 
take precedence over the Group Supply Chain Policy the 
policy take precedence over the MOU/MOA?  Is that the 
frame of reference of the discussion? 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But what did you understand Mr 
Burger to be the status of the Group Supply Chain 
Management Policy?  Can I just suggest something that I 
would with great respect suggest must be very obviously 
particularly to somebody so experienced in business and 
that is you have a policy which lays down rules for the 
Denel group which you must comply with when procuring 
goods or services, correct? 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you do so through contracts, 
20 
correct? 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So when you procure through a 
contract you must comply with the rules that are set out in 
the Supply Chain Management Policy, correct? 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 24 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So could you explain to us please 
how on earth you came to decide in this meeting that the 
agreement takes precedence over the policy?  Surely it is 
the other way around? 
MR BURGER:  In my mind at the time there was a policy 
and that policy was a Denel written policy and that policy 
the custodian of that policy my understanding was the 
Group CEO.  So what is – what is written here is not 
hundred percent my understanding.  The resolution was that 
10 
our recommendation is very strong that there is a legal 
contract between us and VR Laser and that legal contract 
must be respected.   
 
There is a conflict between the contract and group 
policies.  And my understanding at the time was, the group 
policies is an internal matter and therefore can be accepted 
by the necessary level of authority. 
 
So.  And for that reason I said not to get into a legal 
dispute with a valid contract.  The precedence should be on 
the contract but we should get approval from our bosses that 
20 
we can do this. 
 
So I cannot recall Chair that we took a decision and just 
implemented it based on that decision.  We took a decision 
as a recommendation to hire(?) and if I recall correctly, there 
was a motivation that was written that was sent to Denel’s 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 25 of 139 
 
corporate office in this regard. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, we will get to that memorandum in 
a moment.  What I want to put to you Mr Burger is that, the 
mere fact that a contract has been entered into in violation 
of a policy does not mean that there are no implications.   
 
It does not mean that you say:  Well, take(?) your 
folders.  It is tough.  We breached the policy.  Oh, well.  We 
have made a contract with an outside party and we breached 
our own internal policy.  That is only internal.  So let us just 
carry on implementing the contract.   
10 
 
Are you not aware or were you not aware then Mr Burger 
that government owned entities such as Denel are subject to 
the rule of law including the procurement regulations which 
include your own internal Supply Chain Management policy 
and if you breach a material provision of that it can nullify 
the contract?   
 
Were you aware of that at that time? 
MR BURGER:   At the time, I was most definitely aware that 
it was a breach of any laws.  I was aware that it was a 
breach of the Denel of the procurement policy. 
20 
 
And Chair, I have to say.  This Single Source Agreement 
was not a document that was kept in a dark corner and 
nobody knew about it. 
 
Every single body knew about this and including my boss 
at the time.  And for that reason, if we did something 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 26 of 139 
 
unlawful and incorrectly, there should have been action or 
there would have been action taken. 
 
So Chair, I – at the time I knew about Ms Malahlela’s 
concern.  There was a discussion.  She raised her 
objections.   
 
There were many people sitting around the table.  I was 
the chairperson of that meeting.  I tried to summarise the 
discussion and it is written in the resolution and therefore we 
went to corporate office with the resolution. 
 
So Chair, I have got really not anything to add to that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think from what you have said.  
One of the things you have said is that at the time you 
accepted that you were going to be acting in breach of this 
policy.   
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that correct? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you considered – maybe I should not 
say this.  You must say it if that is the case.  What – did you 
consider that the breach was justified in any way, and if so, 
20 
what is that you – that you thought justified the breach of the 
policy? 
MR BURGER:   Chair, I got an instruction to form a Single 
Source Agreement with VR Laser.  The content or the 
objective of that Single Source Agreement was minute in 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 27 of 139 
 
Exco meetings.  And I was under the impression that it was 
approved at the correct levels. 
 
So by the same token, the very same person that signed 
that agreement also signed the policy and also approved the 
policy for Denel. 
 
So I thought if there was a conflict between the two, it is 
easier to deal with an internal matter than an external 
matter.   
 
And for that reason I said, I support – and it was not my 
decision, this was a committee decision that was minute 
10 
here.   
 
For that reason I supported that this – that we should 
uphold the contract between us and VR Laser.  But at no 
time did somebody stand up and say:  You know what, you 
are doing it against the law here.  You are not allowed to do 
this.  At no time did anybody say that.   
 
I was under the impression it is a conflict with internal 
policies and for that reason I said...  And it was approved by 
the levels that – the same level that signed the policy and 
therefore I thought it was not a problem. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you think that the GCEO could give an 
instruction to anybody to actually act in breach of company 
policy? 
MR BURGER:   Chair.  [laughs]  It is a difficult question and 
I understand why you ask it.  I thought it – me, though that it 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 28 of 139 
 
made absolute business sense at the time why that Single 
Source Agreement existed and therefore there were good 
business reasons for it and given the good business 
reasons, I thought the Group CEO could override the policy.  
I really thought so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR BURGER:   I also agree that he cannot just do what he 
wants. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR BURGER:   I understand.  I understand your concern.  
10 
So, yes he cannot do what he wants but I was under the 
impression this was for good business reasons and given the 
good business reasons, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you would also accept, would you not, 
that it is people – it is particularly people as senior as you 
were who ought to have found it easy to say to the GCEO:  
Hang on GCEO.  It looks like your instruction is in breach of 
the policy.  Can you do that?   
 
Is it not?  It is the senior people who find it easy to say:  
I know you have given me an instruction but it looks like it is 
20 
in breach of the policy.  Can you give me an instruction that 
goes against the company policy? 
MR BURGER:   Ja, Chair.  Hindsight is perfect sign.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.   
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 29 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it was not done. 
MR BURGER:   It was not done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR BURGER:   Well, not that I can recall Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Certainly not by you. 
MR BURGER:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not by... 
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  If the policy was not 
a law that you did not have to comply with – and if you 
entered into a contract that was contrary to that policy, well 
then the contract must just fore stand.  What is the point of 
having a policy at all?   
 
Oh, because it would mean that people could, as 
actually happened here, go into a – signing an agreement 
with full knowledge thanks to Ms Malahlela that there was 
there a breach.  She first raised the issue of noting your RFP 
20 
process.  That was rejected by Mr Teubes.   
 
And secondly, she raised the point that you have not got 
GC / GSCE approval to go outside the divisions.  But if you 
could – if you felt that well that does not matter because it is 
not the law, it is only a policy.   
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 30 of 139 
 
 
What is the purpose of having a policy if you are not 
going to comply with it? 
MR BURGER:   Chair, no.  I think that is, with great respect, 
taking the point a little bit far.  The policy is there to govern 
the organisation and to make sure that good decisions as a 
norm but like everything in life there are always exceptions 
and that does not mean that one can ignore the policy.   
 
It means, in my mind, that if you are doing something 
that is not stipulated in the policy then you have to get 
approval at the correct level of the organisation.   
10 
 
And in my mind, this – having a policy like it is better to 
manufacture something internally than externally.  It is a 
good policy.   
 
I agree with the policy.  I am not questioning the policy.  
But in this specific case, with the problems we had, with the 
risk we were running – I have already indicated this would 
have been a good place where we have complex fabricated 
steelworks done.   
 
And Chair, my apology for saying it again.  It is also 
common knowledge that you have – when you deal with 
20 
highly complex things, having Single Source Agreement is 
not a bad thing.  It is a good thing in this complex 
environment.   
 
So I did support it.  I supported the idea then.  I support 
the idea now.  But it does not take away that the policy is a 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 31 of 139 
 
good policy and it makes sense in general terms. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And in fact, the policy – you talk about 
exceptions.  The policy specifically says that where you 
wanting to procure something that could be purchase to 
procure in-house, you want to go outside to an external 
supplier.  You have to get – there have to two things 
satisfied. 
 
The one is, you have to get the approval of the Group 
Supply Chain Executive, not from the Divisional CEO, 
namely Mr Burger, or his deputy or his assistant, Mr Teubes.   
10 
 
Only the GSCE could give that approval.  Do you agree 
with me? 
MR BURGER:   I do agree Chair but to qualify that.  I also 
thought and this how all decisions worked that if his boss 
and his boss’s boss listen to the arguments, they had the 
authority to decide what is the best for the company. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, in fact, that approval at a higher 
level than Mr Mlambo had, took place long after this.  It did 
not happen at this time. 
MR BURGER:   Ja. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I suggest we focus on the topic of 
my question? 
MR BURGER:   Ja. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Which 
is 
what 
happened 
in 
October 2015 when you were chairing a meeting of Exco at 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 32 of 139 
 
divisional level.  The fact that a year later or more, 
Mr Ntshepe may have signed to say:  Well, I am not going to 
override 
Mr 
Mlambo. 
 
You 
cannot, 
with 
respect, 
be 
particularly an impressive answer to explain what was going 
through your mind on the 25t h of October 2015. 
MR BURGER:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you accept that? 
MR BURGER:   I do accept. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that fair to say? 
MR BURGER:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Let us try to confine ourselves to that.  
You were the CEO.  You were there to ensure that there was 
proper compliance with whatever was required.  And here we 
have a situation with Ms Malahlela who is saying:  We have 
got a policy which precludes this.   
 
This is now the second time that Ms Malahlela was doing 
her job in drawing attention to her bosses.  IN the first place 
Mr Teubes earlier that year, saying:  We have to go out on 
tender or RFQ, otherwise, we are in big trouble.   
 
And he overrules her.  It then comes – it is then signed, 
20 
despite all of that.  Despite non-compliance with that 
requirement of the policy, not falling into any of the 
exceptions of the policy itself provides for, such as an 
emergency situation.  None of that.  It is then signed, not so, 
in May 2015? 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 33 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then a further problem is raised by 
Ms Malahlela a few months later.  There is another reason 
why we have a respect in which we have not complied with 
the policy and that is, we never go the GSCE approval.   
 
Now it just seems to me that the policy does not really 
have any sense or usefulness if twice in a row its provisions 
are breached but management say:  Well, do not worry.  We 
carry on.   
 
And secondly.  It does not make sense why you have no 
10 
doubt of the substantial salary.   Ms Malahlela employed as 
your Divisional Supply Chain Management Head if twice she 
raises serious concerns that this in breach of the policy and 
twice she is ignored or overruled by you. 
MR BURGER:   My I repeat Chair?  I reject the fact that it 
was overruled by me.  I state again.  There was a meeting 
held that consisted of executive members.  She raised her 
concerns.  It was discussed.  A resolution was taken by the 
committee, not by me, by the committee.  And a joint 
resolution was written down.   
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you not ...[intervenes]  
MR BURGER:   Sorry, sorry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   In this resolution, it is not minute that 
Ms Malahlela raised her objection about the decision.  It was 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 34 of 139 
 
taken as a group, a group discussion and a group resolution. 
 
And Chair, I hear what Mr Kennedy is saying but at the 
time it was an Executive Committee meeting and a joint 
resolution was taken.  It was not just – it was discussed and 
it was accepted. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, let us accept all that evidence 
Mr Burger.  But may I go back to the question?  You 
overruled it.  You say:  No, it was not you.  It was the 
committee.   
 
Now if it was a decision of the members of the 
10 
committee, 
it 
was 
not 
their 
decision 
supported 
by 
Ms Malahlela, not so?  She was against the decision. 
MR BURGER:   Chair, in all meetings there are difference of 
opinions.  In all meetings.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, the principle? 
MR BURGER:   In all meetings, there a differences of 
opinions and ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Will you not just answer the question?  
Was she for or against this resolution? 
MR BURGER:   She was – she put her point on the table and 
20 
she was against it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Against it? 
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So was a minority.  Was she joined by 
you Mr Burger?  Did you take her side or were you against 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 35 of 139 
 
her side? 
MR BURGER:   How these meetings usually happen.  I am 
the chairperson.  The chairperson does not say, I – what you 
say is nonsense.  I will – I think it should be different.  How 
it happens, everybody gets an opportunity to state their 
opinion and I ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am asking what you did Mr Burger.  
Let us not hear about how you allow other people to express 
...[intervenes]  
MR BURGER:   I repeat again.  The – I formulated the 
10 
consensus view of the meeting and that is written in the 
resolution. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you supported it? 
MR BURGER:   I supported it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So you were part of a collective 
that overruled Ms Malahlela.  Is that a formulation that you 
are more comfortable with? 
MR BURGER:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Or is it wrong? 
MR BURGER:   I ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  It has to be correct Mr Burger. 
MR BURGER:   Sorry, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The proposition has to be correct. 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
MR BURGER:   Remember I said ...[intervenes]  
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 36 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...or the questions is:  When you are part 
of the group that overruled Ms Malahlela – you have already 
said, she put her point of view and she was against it.  And 
you have already said you were one of those who supported 
it. 
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So Mr Kennedy is saying, you were part of 
the collective group that overruled her.  Do you agree? 
MR BURGER:   Correct Chair.  I – why I was hesitating is, is 
I wanted to qualify.  The word overruled is a very strong 
10 
word.  I do not recall – and maybe the other members that 
was in this meeting should divulge – but I cannot recall by 
saying:  We hear you.  We thought about what you said.  You 
are herewith overruled.   
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not have to be – the word does not 
have to be used, overruled.   
MR BURGER:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The fact of the matter is.  Two views were 
on the table. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you and in the view of the other view 
...[intervenes]  
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair, I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and you said:  In fact, we do not agree 
with your view.  This is the view that we support. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 37 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So, did you – to go back to your 
point earlier that you know had a contract, whether you liked 
it or not, you did have a contract with an outside supplier 
and you felt that the policy was really just an internal matter 
that should not affect your relationship with the outside 
supplier.   
10 
 
Did you even bother to approach VR Laser and say:  
Guys, we have a bit of a problem.  You know, we are a state 
institution and 
our internal Supply 
Chain 
Management 
expert, Ms Malahlela has drawn our attention to two defects, 
that we have not complied with our own policy. 
 
Now we know that you, VR Laser, are a private entity, 
not subject to our policy but we are.  And there is a problem.  
We need to terminate this agreement.  We need to agree that 
we will not proceed. 
 
In fact, the very point of the meeting was, can we 
20 
proceed?  Can we, Denel, proceed to place orders on VR 
Laser in terms of the agreement?  And the decision was yes, 
we must. 
 
So to get back to my question.  Did you make any 
attempt to contact VR Laser to say:  We are sorry.  There is 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 38 of 139 
 
a problem here.  Can we try and resolve it? 
MR BURGER:   No, Chair we did not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Why not Mr Burger? 
MR BURGER:   Because I held the view at the time that it – 
it was within the mandate of the Group CEO to sign 
something like this and that it was a document that was done 
according to the policy or to the Delegation of Authority.   
 
I have to add, however, that this – the time when the 
arguments became stronger, was the time when the press 
became more vocal about the Gupta involvement. 
10 
 
So – and the opinion of me was that that was not my 
place to give an opinion of that.  But from a – from 
Ms Malahlela’s side, she was vocal on that she did not 
support the idea of tarnishing Denel’s name of the link 
between the Gupta’s, and that was, in my mind, her real 
concern.   
 
And therefore, I took note of what was said.  Everybody 
around the table took note of what was said and the 
resolution was taken. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you were aware at that stage that 
20 
there was media controversy and public controversy about 
Denel’s involvement with Gupta associates and businesses, 
correct? 
MR BURGER:   Chair, if I recall correctly.  It started late 
2015.  It started with everything.  In the beginning of 2016, 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 39 of 139 
 
there was a quite a lot of media attention. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now you say that you thought 
that featured more in Ms Malahlela’s approach.  What are 
you suggesting?  That she was trying to use wrongly Supply 
Chain Management Rules to try and get the company to stop 
doing business with the Gupta’s or what?  What are you 
suggesting? 
MR BURGER:   I am not suggesting anything.  I am just 
saying that the - Ms Malahlela thought it will bring Denel in 
disrepute and, I mean, she was correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   She was correct, not so? 
MR BURGER:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And in fact, she was also correct that 
the Supply Chain Management Policy was breached.  You 
have already acknowledged that, to your credit. 
MR BURGER:   Ja, ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you see Ms Malahlela when she 
ended her evidence in tears here? 
MR BURGER:   I did Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   A long time after she left Denel, she is 
20 
still moved to tears and gave evidence that she tried her 
best as the citizen of this country and as an honest, loyal 
servant of...  Sorry, that is a bad terminology from the old 
days.   
 
A loyal employee of a state-owned corporation where 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 40 of 139 
 
she tried repeatedly to get her bosses, including you, to 
comply with the policy and you would not.   
 
And she did it in the context of where there was indeed 
growing controversy about Denel’s links with the very 
controversial Gupta family and their associates.   
 
And she was trying to warn you repeatedly:  We must 
keep Denel’s modus clean.  We must make sure that if we 
are going to award any contracts, particularly to people who 
are associated with or owned by controversial people, such 
as the Gupta’s, we must be absolutely sure in complying with 
10 
our policy.  That was her function, not so? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
It 
was 
a 
major 
part 
of 
her 
responsibility. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And despite knowing that she had 
views as a professional that was not acting in bad faith, not 
so?  You already conceded that. 
MR BURGER:   For sure. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  So she is saying to you:  We 
20 
need to make sure that we comply with the policy.  We are 
not complying.  And twice she gets rebuffed and effectively 
overruled by her bosses.   
 
And eventually leaves Denel in a state of absolute 
demoralisation, huge financial prejudice to herself and her 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 41 of 139 
 
family and still traumatised, as you saw when she was sitting 
in the very witness chair that you are sitting in now, on 
national TV.   
 
She had the dignity of showing her emotion but to her 
credit, she did it because she felt it.   
 
Now it just seems absolutely tragic Mr Burger and I am 
putting it to you, just as a human being, it seems tragic that 
an organisation which is owned by the public, members of 
the public, served by diligent good-faith members of the 
public, such as Ms Malahlela. 
10 
 
When she does her job to earn her salary, to try and 
keep Denel’s image good and to keep Denel’s image as a 
legally complied state entity good, she gets ignored, not 
least by you as her boss in Denel Land System. 
 
Do you have anything to say about that? 
MR BURGER:   Chair, I am not sure what I should say on 
what was ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Perhaps as a human being Mr Burger, 
what you feel.  May I remind you – I have taken you through 
this already.  Your 138-page affidavit, I think it is, spends 
20 
probably, at least half of that, saying how innocent you are 
and how this has been such a terrible thing for you 
personally to have to go through the glare of the nation and 
the glare of the media, associating you with the Gupta’s and 
associating you with allegations of corruption and so forth. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 42 of 139 
 
 
I have never received a penny from the Gupta’s or 
anybody else.  You protest your innocence repeatedly but 
what you do not have there is an acknowledgement, that you 
eventually gave in the witness box, which is that: I actually 
acknowledge with hindsight.   
 
Now if I only I had known before that all of this was 
actually in breach of the Supply Chain Management Policy 
and that the policy had legal effect. 
 
And I only realise now that Ms Malahlela was correct.  If 
I only I had listened to her.   
10 
 
Well, with respect, what I am suggesting to you is that 
particularly where you as the CEO of Denel Land Systems 
went into such a major contract with VR Laser, knowing that 
they were connected with the Gupta’s who were under the 
spotlight of media attention as potentially being corrupt. 
 
You should have been absolutely scrupulous in ensuring 
compliance with the policy.  And your suggestion on the 
previous occasion, a few weeks back in this Commission, 
that you just simply did not know about this.  If only you had 
known.  Now you know.  Now, of course, the benefit of 
20 
hindsight. 
 
You knew because you were told by Ms Malahlela.  You 
cannot hide behind ignorance.  Surely, Mr Burger. 
MR BURGER:   Okay Mr Kennedy.  Sorry, Chair.  Quite a lot 
of statements were made. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 43 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   And I cannot recall them.  Just a word of 
correction.  I did acknowledge that she was correct in her 
summation.  I do acknowledge that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR BURGER:   Secondly, I want to state again that she gave 
her inputs and her inputs were taken seriously at the time.  It 
was not just overruled, just ignored.  I think the word that 
was used.  Her inputs were acknowledged and taken.  The 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But not followed. 
MR BURGER:   Sorry, Chair? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But not followed. 
MR BURGER:   Not followed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No. 
MR BURGER:   No, not followed after a discussion within the 
Executive Committee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   It is – I never realised she was that 
traumatised by what happened.  I was also hoping that she 
20 
had due to the cultural that existed in Denel Land Systems, 
she really felt part of Denel and wanted to do the best for 
Denel.  I accept all of that.  And ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you feel any regret?  Just at a level 
of a human being as to effectively her career was wrecked at 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 44 of 139 
 
Denel.  It is effectively what she was saying to the Chairman 
last time.  Took some months to try and manoeuvre her 
financial situation so that she could be at a point that she 
could actually leave, totally demoralised and heartbroken, 
effectively.   
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And again you say:  Well, I did not 
realise it at the time.  There is a lot you are rather naïve in, 
to put it mildly.  Seem not have realised at the time. 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair.  Having looked at her and seeing 
10 
what she has gone through of course I feel deeply moved.  
If one takes cognisance of my own affidavit and the 
circumstances in which I left Denel I can truly sympathise 
with her.  My situation was very similar so I can really 
sympathise with her. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was it really similar, Mr Burger? 
MR BURGER:   Say again? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was it really similar?  You breached 
the procurement policy in important respects despite the 
fact 
that 
she 
was 
telling 
you 
do 
not 
breach 
the 
20 
procurement policy?  Is that truly similar?  Who was right 
and who was wrong? 
MR BURGER:   She was correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   But …[intervenes] 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 45 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So are you playing the victim then, 
you say well, poor her because poor me.  That is 
effectively what you seem to be saying. 
MR BURGER:   No.  No, Chair, Mr Kennedy is laying words 
in my mouth.  I am saying I can sympathise with her 
because I had a scenario that over years responsibilities, 
accountabilities …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Mr Burger.  If sympathising 
with her is important to mention you can deal with it later, I 
think 
Mr 
Kennedy’s 
question 
is 
not 
directed 
at 
10 
sympathising or anything, I think what his question is 
directed at saying, knowing what you know now, one, that 
you were part of those who approved acting in breach of 
the policy despite her making it very clear to all of you that 
this would be in breach of policy and even quoting what the 
policy says and bearing in mind how you know she must 
have felt at the time when all of you in that meeting did not 
– or rejected what she told you and knowing she felt 
because you have seen how she was moved to tears when 
she was giving evidence before me when that issue arose 
20 
again, are you able to say you feel that you should – or all 
of you should actually apologise to her for making her feel 
like this on something that at least now you see was quite 
clear or is that not the position?  I do not want you to say 
you apologise if that is not you feel. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 46 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay?  But what is quite clear and I 
think you acknowledge that at least as of now.  I will go 
back to the question of what your knowledge of the policy 
at the time because I wanted to go back to that but now 
you acknowledge the policy is quite clear. 
MR BURGER:   I do, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The policy is quite clear. 
MR BURGER:   I do, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were part of those who made a 
10 
decision that was in breach of the policy despite that the 
fact that she brought the policy to your attention and we 
know how she felt about this because we saw how even 
years later when she was testifying how she was moved to 
tears when she was talking about this.   
What do you say when you now look at the whole 
picture, about the fact that you were one of those who 
rejected what you now see was the right advice as to what 
should be done? 
MR BURGER:   Chair …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And bearing in mind that you were the 
CEO of the division. 
MR BURGER:   Chair, I cannot take away the frustration 
and the objective I wanted to reach to have various 
suppliers 
of 
good 
competency 
delivering 
with 
quick 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 47 of 139 
 
turnarounds to Denel Land Systems and I cannot – I cannot 
take away the feeling I had then and I still have today that 
all things being equal, VR Laser was a good company to 
form a single source agreement with.  So that is on the one 
side on my emotion or on my feelings. 
 
On the other side, she was correct.  She was 
correct that the mere fact that VR Laser is today bankrupt, 
does not exist anymore, it was a bad decision in taking 
what happened up to now.   
So if that decision was such a good decision at the 
10 
time then Denel should be delivering hulls now for a 
month.  That did not happen because they are bankrupt, so 
– for whatever reason.  So that emotion is also in me that 
if only I had a crystal ball and only I could see, look into 
the future.  The one thing I can say about Ms Malahlela, I 
had huge respect for her, she was – her work ethic was 
extremely high and she – her recommendations were 
always based on what she thought was the best for the 
company.  I, however, at the time expected that from 
everybody, not just her, everybody in the division. 
20 
So, Chair, I can only acknowledge the facts are the 
facts.  The whole single source agreement and the whole 
agreement today is a mess and it is to the detriment of 
Denel.  So therefore she was obviously correct in her 
assessment and I acknowledge that but there was no way 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 48 of 139 
 
at the time for us to have known that, so …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, there was a way, Mr Burger.  One 
is, you read the policy or she told you – quoted the policy 
and you did not see anything in the policy that said that 
the Group CEO could override the Group Supply Chain 
Executive, is it not? 
MR BURGER:   No, Chair, I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was nothing like that.  And you 
were aware, were you not, that in terms of the policy, 
generally speaking will make rules and will also state 
10 
where there are to be exceptions to the rules, were you 
not? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, in other words, the policy tells you 
this is the general rule but in certain circumstances you 
can depart and it tells you if you have got to get approval 
from somebody else in order to depart from the general 
rule, is it not?  You knew that. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of the policy. 
20 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And in taking the view that the Group 
CEO could instruct you to do something in breach of the 
policy, you did not check the policy whether it allows that, 
did you? 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 49 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:   No, Chair, I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that was no right, you should have 
checked, particularly because of you position as the CEO 
of the division. 
MR BURGER:   No argument, I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   :You are right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  May I take 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one last point in regard to that.  I 
said I was going to go back to the question of your 
knowledge of the policy because I had a little bit of some 
concern because last time you testified I think the idea that 
you did not have much knowledge of the policy seemed to 
loom large in your evidence.  Is my recollection correct?  
To a very large extent you seem to be saying, you know, I 
am not a supply chain management policy person. 
MR BURGER:   Ja.  Chair, I understand that when you are 
CEO of a division of a company, want to know what is in 
20 
the policies …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is what I wanted to come to, 
that one of your duties must be to uphold the policy of the 
company. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 50 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if you are serious about your duties 
as CEO you are going to make sure that each time you are 
going to make sure that you know the policy as much as 
possible and where you are not sure you will consult it and 
where you are not sure you could even ask for legal 
advice, is it not? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And none of this was done. 
MR BURGER:   No, Chair, it was not but I know that should 
be case, one should study the policies and one should 
10 
know the policies.  These policies, this specific policy also 
changed every so often and I was really focused on 
growing the burns unit and not try – and not being  
bureaucrat and making sure that all policies being adhered 
to, I was – at the time I was focusing on growing the 
business, having meetings with the clients and I was away 
a lot of times from the company travelling abroad.  So it is 
a mistake, it is a fault on my side but that was what the 
situation was at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, may I now 
ask the witness to turn to page 824? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    824. 
CHAIRPERSON:   X24? 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 51 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   824. 
CHAIRPERSON:   824, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   824, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Is that the – which 
bundle, the one we are using at the moment? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, the same bundle 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, 824. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now this is a memorandum that was 
sent by Ms Malahlela to Mr Dennis Mlambo, the supply 
chain executive at Denel head office level, dated the 29 
10 
October 2015, correct? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that was sent on the instructions 
of Exco. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Following on the meeting held just 
before this memo was sent. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The one we just looked at the 
minutes, correct? 
20 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And you will have heard from 
Ms Malahlela’s evidence that she complied with the 
instruction although with some misgivings and she said at 
the top of page 825: 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 52 of 139 
 
“I 
request 
permission 
to 
implement 
the 
Exco 
decision in this regard.” 
Now that was the majority decision taken by you and your 
colleagues on the Exco despite the disagreement of Ms 
Malahlela . 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now of course we have seen in this 
memorandum that has been dealt with at some length by 
10 
Ms Malahlela  and Mr Mlambo that she has referred to the 
previous indication by the Group Supply Chain Executive 
that products such as these should be sourced in-house 
unless there was a good reason to depart from this.  And 
then in the second paragraph she actually quotes the 
Group Supply Chain policy, the very same quotation that 
she had given in the earlier document that we have looked 
at that it has to be approved by the GCSE if you are going 
outside the group and he or she as the GCSE can only give 
such a decision based on sound business reasons. 
20 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So she was alerting him to that and 
then she says in the third paragraph on page 824 that DLS 
in fact had already signed.  This is in May, so that was five 
months earlier, DLS had signed an MOA with VR Laser for 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 53 of 139 
 
the scope of work.  It then refers to the BBBEE credentials 
and it refers also to provisions of the MOA relating to 
prices being market-related, etcetera.  And then she says, 
the last paragraph on page 824: 
“Due to these contradicting positions…” 
If I might stop for a moment, that is a contradiction 
between the agreement and the supply chain policy, 
correct?  Is that what you understand? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   “…supply chain approached DLS 
10 
Exco  
to make a decision as to whether to honour the 
MOA and placed the order on VR Laser or to follow 
the supply chain policy and procure from inter-
group namely DVS or LMT for this project.  Given 
the timeframe, urgency and 
history, Exco has 
recommended that the work be done by VR Laser.” 
And then she concludes with the passage I have already 
read.  And of course we know that Mr Mlambo refused to 
give the approval that she was requesting here on behalf 
20 
of Exco and we see his handwritten note under the blank 
area where it says approval, he refused to sign it and then 
says in his handwritten words: 
“NB DVS and LMT must submit proof that they 
cannot meet the requirements prior to the contract 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 54 of 139 
 
being awarded to VR Laser.” 
He then signs it.  Now that was then overruled later by Mr 
Ntshepe as Group CEO or perhaps Acting Group CEO as 
he then was, correct? 
MR BURGER:   Correct.  Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now that was sometime later.  What 
happened before Mr Ntshepe signed, as we see here, to 
say he has approved, in other words he has approved the 
stance of your Exco that you must honour the MOA with VR 
Laser.  Something else happened and that was you 
10 
attempted to persuade Mr Mlambo to give his approval, is 
that right? 
MR BURGER:   If you say so, Chair.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, I do not want to invent 
anything.  To be fair to you, let me take you to page 837.  
If you cannot recall, this may jog your memory.  837, it is 
just a few pages further on.  Now that is a letter from you 
on the Denel Land Systems letterhead and we see in very 
small print the date is the 29 April 2016  Do you see that? 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that is in fact a letter that came 
from you.  Is that you name and signature on page 838?  
Correct. 
MR BURGER:   Yes, that is my name. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now this is what you say in your 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 55 of 139 
 
letter: 
“Firstly, thank you for the constructive meeting held 
at DCO with Mr Odwa Mhlwana and yourself on the 
28 April 2016.” 
So that was a meeting you attended, is it? 
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   “I confirm my discussion that a single  
source supplier agreement hereinafter referred to 
as the MOA was entered into with VR Laser on 19 
May 2015 pursuant to a motivation being submitted 
10 
to DCO.  The motivation was recommended for 
approval by both the Group Executive Business 
Development Mr Zwelakhe Ntshepe and the Group 
Chief 
Operations 
Officer, 
Mr 
Johan 
Wessels, 
whereupon it was approved by the Group CEO at 
the time, namely Mr Riaz Saloojee.  The approval 
by the Group CEO of VR Laser as a single source 
supplier is in accordance with regulation 16A 6.4 of 
the National Treasury Regulations 2005.  Copy of 
the approval dated 22 April 2015, the signed MOA 
20 
and the applicable National Treasury Regulation is 
attached marked A, B and C respectively.” 
Now you have indicated that around this time you were not 
fully knowledgeable about the law relating to public 
procurement and what exactly applied, whether this was 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 56 of 139 
 
lawful and so forth.  May I suggest to you that you seem 
now to have acquired some knowledge because you are 
here referring to – whether your reference is correct or not 
is something Mr Mlambo deals with later but you certainly 
here seem to know quite a bit about the National Treasury 
Regulations, you are in fact quoting the specific clause of 
the Regulation 16A 6.4 of the 2005 regulation and you then 
attach it.  May I ask you where you got that knowledge 
from, have you had that all along or – I see you are 
smiling?  Had somebody enlightened you, is that you asked 
10 
for somebody to assist you on this? 
MR BURGER:   Ja.  In matters like this I would not have 
the knowledge, Chair, and I still do not have the knowledge 
but I am – if I remember correctly, this letter in all 
probability would have - I would have requested the head 
of legal at Denel Land Systems, Ms Denise Govender to 
…[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ms Govender? 
MR BURGER:   Ja, to support …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   To assist you on that. 
20 
MR BURGER:   To support my – in all likelihood, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And let us just get the context 
of this.  We know that Mr Mlambo had been sent for his 
approval the recommendation we looked at a moment ago 
saying that will you what has been done.  Can you recall if 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 57 of 139 
 
he had rejected his approval at the stage you had the 
meeting with him and then your letter?  Was he still 
deciding it or was it after he had put in this handwritten 
portion on page 825? 
MR BURGER:   Chair, I really cannot remember.  What 
surprises me here, this letter was written in October 2015, 
the first letter.  I cannot remember when he wrote his note. 
I do not know when Mr Ntshepe approved it.  This letter is 
six months later, you know, in 29 April 2016. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR BURGER:   So I can remember frustration. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   Lots of frustration, that I can remember, 
but …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On your part or on his part or both? 
MR BURGER:   Both probably. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Both, yes. 
MR BURGER:   Both probably. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You knew there was a problem, not 
so? 
20 
MR BURGER:   Oh yes, for sure. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Okay, let us see what else you 
say in your motivation for him to give approval. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am sorry, Mr Kennedy, before you 
proceed.  Mr Burger, you say that this reference to 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 58 of 139 
 
Regulation 16A 6.4 was not based on your knowledge, you 
spoke to somebody. 
MR BURGER:   Yes, my …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Head of the legal department. 
MR BURGER:   Head of legal supported me in writing this 
letter, yes.  I am pretty convinced, I am not saying hundred 
percent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but I would have thought that if you – 
it was not based on your knowledge but based on what you 
had been advised by the head of legal your letter would be 
10 
couched in those terms to say I have been informed or 
advised by the head of legal that actually it is Regulation 
blah, blah, blah, that does – you would not present it as 
your own knowledge because here it is presented as your 
own knowledge, would you not agree? 
MR BURGER:   I agree, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   You are right, I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And you did not 
20 
refer in your letter to the fact that Ms Malahlela had 
already raised concerns about noncompliance with the 
policy, not so? 
MR BURGER:   Ja …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On the contrary you were saying this 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 59 of 139 
 
can be done in terms of the National Treasury Regulations. 
MR BURGER:   That was my impression at the time, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.   Well, let us carry on at the 
foot of page 837 with what you said to Mr Mlambo.   
“As indicated during the meeting and in terms of the 
abovementioned approval…” 
Presumably the GCEO’s approval that had already taken 
place, is that right? 
MR BURGER:   On the previous – on the October one?  Are 
you referring to the October one? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am looking at the letter at page 
837. 
MR BURGER:   Yes? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And I am looking at your last 
paragraph at the foot of this page: 
“As indicated during the meeting and in terms of the 
abovementioned approval…” 
What approval were you referring to there?  It seems to me 
that you were probably referring to the approval given by 
Mr Saloojee. 
20 
MR BURGER:   For the single source agreement, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And then you carry on: 
“The rationale for appointing VR Laser as a sole 
supplier was based on inter alia the following: 
1. Its 
unparalleled 
expertise 
on 
fabrication 
of 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 60 of 139 
 
complex engineering systems which includes but 
is not limited to turrets, outer shields, add on 
armour and vehicle hull structures. 
2. It is a key supplier and strategic partner to DLS. 
3. It 
offers 
the 
best 
value 
having 
inter 
alia 
committed to invest capital and resources in the 
facilities in order to ensure that the capability 
remains intact and available to DLS for minimum 
period of 10 years. 
4. It is prepared to assist and has assisted DLS 
10 
with its obligations to foreign jurisdictions such 
as Malaysia in transferring skills relating to its 
manufacturing process hereinafter referred to as 
intellectual property, IP. 
5. It promotes a black industrialist entrepreneurial 
company within the defence industry.” 
Now these are all reasons why you felt strongly that VR 
Laser was somebody good worth appointing not so? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But Mr Mlambo’s concern was 
20 
not so much as to whether VR Laser was good at its job, 
Mr Mlambo’s concern was the supply chain management 
policy says that before we go outside the group there has 
to be a good business reason why we go outside the group, 
not is the outside supplier a good supplier, but why can we 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 61 of 139 
 
not use our in-house suppliers?  Now presumably, if he had 
been presented with reasons that the in-house entity such 
as LMT and DVS did not have the capacity, that would have 
constituted a sound business reason but none of the 
reason you are putting forward here had anything to do 
with that, not so?  You just simply say VR Laser are great, 
correct? 
MR BURGER:   I said VR Laser is great and we have got 
an agreement with them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And then you conclude your 
10 
letter after paragraph 5 on 838: 
“It 
is 
hereby 
recommended 
that 
the 
attached 
submissions 
relating 
to 
the 
fire 
compartment 
module FCM and the outer shield marked D and C 
respectively 
be 
sourced 
with 
VR 
Laser 
in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of the 
MOA.” 
So you understood, as I read this letter, you understood 
that although there was an MOA you were going to have to 
go through the process of trying to persuade Mr Mlambo to 
20 
place orders under the MOA for these two categories of 
items you would have to give his approval, not so? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can you explain why you made no 
attempt to actually address the real problem which is why 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 62 of 139 
 
you could not source them from LMT or DVS, I am not 
asking why you could not source from those, I am asking 
you why you did not even raise that point in your letter 
because that was the point of concern to him, not so? 
MR BURGER:   Ja.  Once should – the letter is probably 
not complete, you are correct.  The point we wanted to 
raise was we have got an agreement and they are a good 
company to have an agreement with …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, that you did say in the letter. 
MR BURGER:   Ja.  And that was my main thrust of the 
10 
letter. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is his only thrust of his concern, 
was 
you 
have 
not 
complied 
with 
the 
supply 
chain 
management policy.  If you want to comply you must ask 
me, the Group Supply Chain Executive, for approval as to 
why we should not give the contract to an in-house entity 
which at that stage was LMT and DVS, correct? 
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And to do that you have to satisfy 
me, as GSCE, that there are good business reasons for 
20 
sending it outside the company.  So all you have given him 
is well, we have done an agreement with them, seemingly 
suggesting well, if we have done an agreement and it is in 
breach of the policy well, tough.  And secondly, well, VR 
Laser are great guys. With respect, it does not actually 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 63 of 139 
 
address at all Mr Mlambo’s concern which seems to be to 
be a valid concern. 
MR BURGER:   You are right and I also did not go through 
the whole argument of why …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You did not go through any of the 
argument that Mr Mlambo had invited you to give, why 
should you go outside the group entities?  Why should go 
outside?  You did not address that at all. 
MR BURGER:   Yes, I was trying t say, Chair, the reason I 
did not do that was because I did not also write a long 
10 
story about the DVS was not a fabrication house.  Yes, 
they did make hulls in the past and also the frustrations 
and the technical failures we had with other products we 
placed on the LMT, so I did not go through those 
arguments.  At the time when we wrote the letter we 
thought we will get approval based on those arguments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, Mr Burger, there may be 
a concern here that maybe we are seeing what may have 
been a pattern.  Ms Malahlela raises concerns, valid 
concerns, and she have used her concerns that rejected on 
20 
what we all now, including you, accept were not valid 
grounds. 
 
Mr 
Mlambo 
also 
raises 
concerns 
about 
procurement policy and there is a long letter from you 
written to you but in this long letter there isn’t a response 
on it, so one begins to say – excuse me – one begins to 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 64 of 139 
 
say how could it be that such legitimate concerns, when 
such legitimate concerns were raised by certain individuals 
who were very concerned about ensuring that the policy of 
the company was followed, how is it possible that each 
time you did not see their point of view.  How is it possible 
that you did not respond to the actual concern in the case 
of Mr Mlambo, one begins to ask that question.   
 
Do you want to say something? 
MR BURGER:   Chair I cannot argue with you, the long and 
the short was there were different camps. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   And Ms Malahlela and Mr Mlambo both felt 
that V R Laser was not the right company to place an order 
on.  I have to qualify what I am saying now, Ms Malahlela 
still supported V R Laser in the early days, in 2014 to the 
middle of 2015, it then changed and it was clear that Mr 
Mlambo was not in support of VR Laser doing business for 
all the reasons given.  The opinion I had at the time it had 
more to do with what’s going on in the public domain than 
what their capability was and never could anybody say they 
20 
are not good at what they are doing.  Everybody agreed 
they were good at what they were doing. 
 
So there were different schools of thought and from 
my perspective I thought it was a good idea and therefore I 
supported it.  In hindsight you are absolutely right, I should 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 65 of 139 
 
have written a letter that is more wise, the risk of doing 
that and was – if I write a motivation letter because of all 
these policy reasons and all these governance reasons it is 
better to go to LNT than or to DBS than to VR Laser, I am 
sure that he will not support the idea.  I knew what his 
position was, it was not a surprise to me, I knew what his 
position was and therefore I tried to put the relevant issues 
on 
the 
email, 
but 
in 
hindsight 
Chair 
yes, 
I 
mean 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So you – from what you are saying it 
10 
seems you are saying to me maybe the reason why your 
letter didn’t address his stated concern was because you 
may have been trying to address not his stated concerns 
but what you believed was him being against VR Laser? 
MR BURGER:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but not the point that he had raised 
because he didn’t raise the merits as it were, it was the 
process. 
MR BURGER;   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And one would have expected that at a 
20 
level at which all of you cooperated all of you would have 
known 
including 
yourself 
the 
difference 
between 
the 
process and the merits of a particular supplier, to say when 
the objection is to the process let’s address the process.   
You can’t say let’s breach the process because the 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 66 of 139 
 
supplier is such a good supplier.  It doesn’t work like that, 
the process is there and you only depart from it if the 
policy allows you to depart from it? 
MR BURGER:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair.  I want to pick up 
with something you said a little earlier and that is that you 
were aware of the sensitivity arising from the media 
controversy concerning Denel’s doing business with VR 
Laser and their links with the Guptas.  Now if it is true 
10 
what you have said in your affidavit repeatedly that you 
were aware that the Guptas were linked with this, you were 
aware that there was this controversy but to link you with 
any wrongdoing is just completely inappropriate, because 
you were simply trying to do your job, objectively and 
honestly in the interest of Denel. 
 
Surely it would have made sense for you, especially 
when Ms Malahlela and then at Group Level Mr Mlambo 
had both raised repeatedly real concerns about non-
compliance with procurement procedures, it would have 
20 
been at least expedient and sensible for you to say I think 
I need to protect myself to make absolutely sure because 
this is something that could well backfire.  The spotlight of 
the media and the public and possibly courts, and possibly 
commissions in the future may be looking at all of this 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 67 of 139 
 
because there is so much controversy, I better make sure 
that I am squeaky clean on this, and yet you go against the 
guidance, the very strong advice of the two experts, the 
one in your division who was part of your own personnel as 
well as above you at Head Office, and you seem to have 
just thought well I can ignore what they say, isn’t that 
really what you were doing? 
MR BURGER:    No Chair I have to repeat the time when 
this became public knowledge and became a real problem 
was more or less around when this letter was written. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Exactly. 
MR BURGER:   It wasn’t prior to that so much in our faces.  
So it was only later on ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry I am not sure if I 
understand your earlier evidence.  You raised the concern 
about the media controversy in the context of the earlier 
memorandum from Ms Malahlela that we looked at some 
time back, not this correspondence between you and Mr 
Mlambo’s latest April 2016, you in fact gave evidence that 
you believe it was in the latter part of 2015 that media 
20 
controversy was becoming so intense and that was in the 
context of her motivation dated the 29 t h of October 2015.   
Do 
you 
remember 
your 
evidence 
that 
was 
that 
...[intervenes]  
MR BURGER:  No correction, correction Chair.   It is true 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 68 of 139 
 
that we became knowledgeable about the press situation I 
cannot recall saying it became intense at the end of 2015, 
but I do recall around middle of 2016 it started getting 
intense but I knew about it at the end of 2015, yes I did, 
but it wasn’t intense at that stage.     
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The point remains though whether it 
was intense or pale, whether it was light or heavy intensity 
you 
were 
aware 
at 
this 
time 
that 
the 
media 
were 
scrutinising in the public domain with some measure of real 
interest, in fact you suggested that they went really 
10 
overboard with exaggerating and distorting the facts and 
so forth.  Surely your – alarm bells should have been 
ringing, I being the CEO of a State Owned Corporation 
must make sure that my operations are squeaky clean in 
complying with legal requirements, and here you are twice 
told by supply chain officials, Ms Malehlela and Mr Mlambo 
you 
cannot 
do 
this 
and 
you 
have 
been 
telling 
the 
Chairperson as I understand it well you thought you could 
do it, they were telling you, you can’t do that and still you 
went 
on 
ahead 
and 
now 
you 
acknowledge 
to 
the 
20 
Chairperson with the benefit of hindsight you know what 
they were right all along.  It is just a mystifying, can you 
perhaps explain?   
MR BURGER:   Chair, and I am running a big risk of 
repeating myself, which I don’t want to do, but we went 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 69 of 139 
 
through a process wherein the highest authority in the 
company supported this, gave instructions to do this and 
for all the reasons I had given we thought it was a good 
idea and we also had the scenario which I explained about 
the press articles in India where single articles can really 
influence the future of a company and I did state earlier 
that that made me realise that I should not pay too much 
attention to what is going on in the press, and that we 
should do what is the best for the company and I have tried 
to do that. 
10 
 
Yes, both Mr Mlambo and Ms Malahlela did raise 
their concerns but this was at a later stage after the 
agreement was signed, so I had an option, I had an option 
to cancel the agreement based on the media and Ms 
Malahlela and Mr Mlambo or make sure that it is supported 
by Denel and as I said on numerous occasions the whole 
media coverage was not done on a divisional level or the 
image of the company, that was done by corporate and I 
said we have here a valid agreement, I am not sure on 
what basis I would have cancelled it, and for that reason I 
20 
supported the agreement, that it was a valid agreement.   
In my life in Denel I always thought Denel employees were 
very good at the initial stages of partnering with people, it 
– and my opinion was always that early stages of 
partnership was a good time, but when the going got tough 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 70 of 139 
 
Denel didn’t always honour their commitments to their 
partners and I wanted to make sure that if we have a 
partnership agreement with somebody that we do our bit to 
uphold the agreement, so that was in my mind always, I 
never ever, and I say this again, thought that there was a 
conflict with the law, that never passed by – I was under 
the impression this was supported by the group, there were 
people both Ms Malahlela and Mr Mlambo that did not 
support it and therefore I wrote these letters to say please 
approve it and if it is not approved then higher authority 
10 
must take the decision. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I would like to pick up on one point 
that made you, that higher authority approved it, and it is 
so that Mr Saloojee signed it but the Chairperson has all 
the evidence before him as to which version applies to 
which witness, but of course Mr Saloojee’s attitude has 
been well I wasn’t alerted by Mr Burger about issues 
relating 
to 
non-compliance 
with 
these 
supply 
chain 
management policy, so I assumed that he was doing the 
right thing.  He was the one who was pushing me resolutely 
20 
to expedite the approval and signature of this process. 
 
You on the other hand say well I thought that 
although I knew Malahlela and Mlambo were against this 
on the basis that there breaches of the supply chain 
management policy I in my wisdom thought no they are 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 71 of 139 
 
actually wrong and well it should be fine because the 
Group CEO has been persuaded to sign so obviously he 
must be happy.   It just seems it is sort of passing the buck 
back and forth isn’t it Mr Burger? 
MR BURGER:   Correction Chair, the Group CEO was not 
persuaded to sign the agreement, he gave me instruction 
to 
sign 
it 
and 
all 
the 
evidence 
with 
supporting 
documentation 
is 
there 
to 
prove 
that 
he 
gave 
me 
instruction to do that, so it was from that perspective. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you at least accept this Mr 
10 
Burger, again with the benefit of hindsight, which as they 
say always gives you 20/20 vision, that it is not particularly 
surprising that where you went into a contract, one of three 
contracts within the Denel Group, two of which you were 
actively involved in, you went in knowing that you were 
doing business with VR Laser, that has had good track 
record and its previous owners had recently been acquired 
by Gupta Associates, it was part of the Gupta Group, 
where you knew that there was press, media controversy 
and so forth, and where there had been questions raised 
20 
subsequently as to compliance with the correct processes.   
 
Now isn’t it something to be expected by you as a 
CEO looking not only to making the best business decision 
but one which as part of being the best business decision 
should take into account in its protection reputation, avoid 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 72 of 139 
 
reputational 
damage 
and 
the 
Commission 
has 
heard 
considerable evidence from various witnesses as to the 
terrible damage that has been done on – to Denel and its 
ability to trade, trade successfully, exploited opportunities 
that are otherwise available to it.  There has been 
devastating impact on Denel’s image and that largely 
arises – so the evidence has been, and your own evidence 
seems to be to this extent as well that there has been huge 
controversy in the media and in the public domain about 
the links between Denel and VR Laser and its links with 
10 
the Guptas.  It just seems in retrospect perhaps you can 
accept that it makes sense the people are wondering how 
did you give a contract like this to VR Laser in the first 
place, and how did – why did it happen that this was done 
by our own admission now in breach of procurement 
policies by your own admission now in the face of specific 
advice to the contrary given by your colleagues Malahlela 
and Mlambo and do you accept that it – there is some 
sense to the fact that people are raising the sort of 
questions that I am asking you here, because if it was just 
20 
so genuine and bona fide as your affidavit has repeatedly 
tried to make out how could it come about that at least two 
contracts involving you were given to VR Laser Services 
where by your own admission there had been breaches of 
policies, and you expect the Chairperson and the nation to 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 73 of 139 
 
believe well that has nothing to do with the fact, it is a 
pure coincidence that this happens to have involved Gupta 
associates who have been involved according to other 
evidence in numerous other acts of corrupt and illegal 
activities. 
MR BURGER:   I cannot speculate on behalf of corrupt and 
illegal activities Chair, what I can say is that the passion 
and the beliefs I had then are the passion and beliefs I still 
have today.  I cannot speak on behalf of other people and 
on behalf of the Guptas, I don’t know them.  The problem 
10 
here is that it is so much easier to distance yourself from 
this mess and I would not be able to live with myself to say 
it wasn’t me, it was my boss that instructed me to do it, I 
didn’t want to do it but it was him that instructed me and by 
doing that clear my name.  I am trying to bring across what 
actually happened and if we can take one little step back 
and I will cover both of them now for you. 
 
The hulls contract was not supported by me, it was 
supported by everybody in Denel Land Systems, all the 
senior personnel and there’s emails to prove that.   The 
20 
single 
source 
agreement 
was 
supported 
by 
all 
the 
executives because they thought it was the right thing to 
do at the time.   Yes, Mr Mlambo and Ms Malehlela did 
raise the concerns and they did say these things but at the 
time when we were in the trenches fighting the fight we 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 74 of 139 
 
really, we really thought that was the best thing and it was 
not my opinion, it was the opinion of all the executives in 
Denel Land Systems. 
 
So that is the first point, the second point is looking 
back Chair it is a mess, the place is bankrupt and they are 
not producing any health so obviously I wish I could turn 
back the clock and say let’s try and do it in a different way, 
for sure I would have done that.  The one thing I would 
want to say however is the reason why this is in a mess is 
for whatever the reasons and whatever their association by 
10 
the owners they could not have a bank account and they 
are bankrupt as a result of that  
 
So too is LNT bankrupt today, not because – or in 
business rescue, not because it did not place a hull 
contract on it but because they could not execute their 
orders, so whatever decision I would have taken at the 
time be it VR Laser or LNT I would sit today and say I am 
sorry that I took that decision it would have been the wrong 
decision because both instances would not have been able 
to produce the hulls.  
20 
 
So with the benefit of hindsight Chair I wish I could 
have it differently, I wish I could have done it differently, 
for sure I would have, but at the time I had a certain 
opinion and I am reflecting that opinion I had the and I did 
not change my opinion from then to now for whatever 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 75 of 139 
 
reasons there are, I am saying this is what actually 
happened. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If your opinion was that neither LNT 
nor DVS had the capacity and reliability to be able to 
produce these items why didn’t you bother to say that to Mr 
Mlambo because that is exactly what he was asking for, he 
was saying give me a good business reason why we can’t 
keep this work in-house. 
MR BURGER:   Yes Chair you will recall that just a little 
earlier I sent him a very long email of ten points or 
10 
something that I said LNT cannot be trusted to do this so 
that’s – I didn’t repeat it again.  DVS was in my mind not a 
fabrication house, it was a vehicle assembly plant so it was 
for me almost irrelevant, so yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Let’s look at Mr Mlambo’s response 
on page 838. 
MR BURGER:   83?   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   838.  He says this is again his 
handwritten response instead of signing where it says 
approval he instead leaves that blank and simply writes in 
20 
handwritten form: 
“NB 1. The evidence on how VR Laser was selected 
is not available to support its appointment as a 
single source supplier. 
2. 
The approval process of the MOA excluded 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 76 of 139 
 
supply chain and the reasons thereof have not been 
furnished.” 
Now let us stop there.  That is true, supply chain at head 
office level was never consulted before the MOA was 
signed at your request by Mr Saloojee, not so?     
MR BURGER:   Correct, correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and he is saying still this is 
now almost a year later, almost to the day a year later, 29 t h 
of April 2016, the MOA was signed I believe it was on the 
15 t h of May 2015, he says: 
10 
“I still don’t have any reasons why we were left 
out.” 
You have never given those reasons to him have you Mr 
Burger? 
MR BURGER:   No I haven’t Chair, apart from saying 
please discuss this with your line manager. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then paragraph 3 says: 
“The recommendation is given the fact that Denel 
Executives committed the company to place orders 
on VR Laser for specified products for ten years to 
20 
have the same executives approve future orders.” 
Paragraph 4 
“The paragraph in Treasury Regulations that has 
been cited in the motivation memo is irrelevant 
because it was not impractical to test the supply 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 77 of 139 
 
market.” 
As I understand it that is a reference to Treasury 
Regulation that you have referred to on the previous page, 
is that right? 
MR BURGER:   I understand so yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Regulation 16 [a] 6.4.  Now as it 
happens, can I ask you to turn to page 719, as it happens 
Mr Mlambo, same bundle, has for the convenience of all of 
us in his affidavit quoted the treasury regulation.  719, 
paragraph 6.16, this is what Mr Mlambo says: 
10 
“Dealing with your submission to him he says the 
submission further states that VR Laser Services 
was appointed as a single source supplier in 
accordance 
with 
Regulation 
16[a] 
6.4 
of 
the 
National Treasury Regulations 2005.” 
Which reads as follows: 
“If in a specific case it is impractical to invite 
competitive 
bids 
the 
Accounting 
Officer 
or 
Accounting Authority may procure the required 
goods or services by other means provided that the 
20 
reasons for deviating from competitive bids must be 
recorded and approved by the accounting officer or 
accounting authority.” 
Now his response to your point going back to page 838 
says that this paragraph has no bearing on the matter 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 78 of 139 
 
because it wasn’t impractical to invite other competitive 
bids.   In fact he says in his paragraph 6.17: 
“I believe the National Treasury regulations were 
applied incorrectly.  In the case of DLS there was 
no need for a deviation request because there was 
no emergency involved.  In instances where there 
was no emergency DLS was supposed to go out to 
the market to establish if there was no other 
company apart from VR Laser that had the requisite 
capability 
and 
capacity, 
that 
process 
was 
not 
10 
carried out.  If at the time of approval the MOA it 
was brought to my office I would disagreed with the 
rationale behind the MOA and rejected it.” 
Now Mr Burger again you accept that Mr Mlambo was 
acting in good faith? 
MR BURGER:   Yes I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you accept that that was part of 
his duties to highlight if there were any breaches of the 
procurement policy? 
MR BURGER:   I absolutely do yes Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, now what did you do in 
response to his response that we have just seen? 
MR BURGER:   Sorry Chair I say again that there were 
differences 
of 
opinion. 
 
It 
would 
have 
been 
my 
understanding because what he is saying is cancel the 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 79 of 139 
 
agreement with VR Laser.  It would have ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He does not actually say that 
expressly in his words.  Did he say that in the meeting? 
MR BURGER:   No he is saying that it is not in – what you 
read now the agreement is not really valid, should not be 
valid.   So – and there was a difference of opinion as I said 
before, so from my perspective if he was – if he felt so 
strongly then as he is feeling today I would have expected, 
because he was on all the emails that came from VR Laser 
for late payment or non-payment he was also copied, I 
10 
would have also expected him to raise this issue with my – 
with his bosses to say we have got a dilemma here, this is 
a 
problem, 
I 
suggest 
we 
do 
the 
following, 
go 
into 
negotiations with VR Laser, tell them that that agreement 
is not valid, let us try and get it behind us and let’s do it, 
proper governance.  I would have expected that to happen.  
That never happened. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is not a bit unfair on Mr Mlambo and 
a copout on your part Mr Burger?  Why point a finger of 
blame at Mr Mlambo?  Mr Mlambo was also emotional; he 
20 
was not brought to tears but you could see he was very 
emotional in his evidence too.   
And he gave evidence that he acted in a particular 
way as he did and ultimately he too was demoralised to the 
extent that he then gave up an otherwise very impressive 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 80 of 139 
 
career at Denel.  Why criticise him?  My questions are 
directed at you.  You are sitting in this witness box.  Now 
you say there was a difference of opinion. 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now let us assume for a moment 
that both of you were acting completely in good faith.  You 
were both acting honourably and you both had a genuine 
belief in your respective opinions.  My question was that 
elicited your last answer where you pointed finger of blame 
at him was why did you not respond Mr Mlambo’s response 
10 
to you?  So let us look at this difference of opinion.  For 
example the Regulations – Regulation 16.A6.4 of the 
National Treasury Regulations that you had now become 
aware of. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Mr Kennedy I am sorry to 
interrupt you.  There is a question you formulated in a 
certain way earlier.  I am very interested in Mr Burger’s 
answer to that question. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did you do in response to this – to – 
20 
after you received Mr Mlambo’s response; what did you do? 
MR BURGER:  Chair I cannot recall.  I think we had a 
discussion and agreed to probably and I am guessing now 
probably agreed to disagree. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You… 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 81 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:  But I cannot remember what we actually did 
about this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Obviously having read he – what he said at 
page 838 – 838 you realised that he was saying that the 
Treasury Regulation on which you relied was irrelevant.  You 
realise that that is what you are saying. 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And one would have expected that if 
you were genuinely engaging in a discussion to try and see 
exactly what the correct position is you would have wanted 
10 
to look into that issue.  Why is he saying it is irrelevant when 
I believe it is relevant?  Is it not?   
That would be the natural thing if you were really 
interested in establishing is his point of view the correct one 
or is it my point of view that is correct?  He has now said 
something that I was relying on is irrelevant.  You would 
want to look into that, is it not? 
MR BURGER:  Chair I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not ja. 
MR BURGER:  I did not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you accept that that is one – that is 
what one would have expected 
MR BURGER:  Would have expected. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From you if – and it did not happen? 
MR BURGER:  No it did not. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 82 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why did it not happen because this was – 
if his – if his point that that regulation was irrelevant was 
valid it could have made a big difference in the view you took 
could it not? 
MR BURGER:  It could yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  It probably would have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But why did you not pursue that and 
even go and look at the regulation yourself or go back to the 
head of the legal department and say, Mr Mlambo and expert 
10 
in Supply Chain Management says this regulation you told 
me about is irrelevant what do you say?  Because if he is 
right this might change my whole view.  Why did you not go 
to the head of the legal department and say that? 
MR BURGER:  Ja.  I did not analyse it as you are analysing 
now Chair.  It was for me at that time and this is – this is a 
year of negotiating on the – starting with the hull contracts 
going through the Single Source Agreement, going through 
these other agreements I knew very well what is – what his 
position 
was. 
He 
did 
not 
support 
the 
Single 
Source 
20 
Agreement and whilst there were many others that did 
support the Single Source Agreement.   
I was not in my mind equipped enough to have a 
legal argument with him with regards to what is correct and 
what is not correct in PFMA.  The feedback I got numerous 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 83 of 139 
 
occasions was that the PFMA is sometimes we strangle 
ourselves too much with the PFMA and there is room for 
more flexible decision making within the PFMA.  And for that 
reason I did not even try to venture there because I knew I 
would tie myself up in knots if I had that.   
And I also stated earlier that – that he was very 
knowledgeable of these facts and I accept that and I – but at 
the time I can only say what happened was I – I got his 
feedback; I – it was not such a big surprise to me and it 
confirmed that he was on the one side and we are on the 
10 
other side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you see precisely because you 
acknowledge that he was very knowledgeable on these 
matters.  It is precisely because of that that one is surprised. 
MR BURGER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why you did not say look this person who 
is very knowledgeable in these matters is saying this 
regulation is irrelevant I must therefore take his view very 
seriously because he may be right or he is probably right.  
And – so I am concerned as to why despite you knowing that 
20 
this is somebody who is knowledgeable in these matters and 
he could go back to your evidence that you did not know 
much maybe about these matters all the more reason why 
you would be expected to take his view very seriously before 
there is – was any finality and if necessary get some advice 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 84 of 139 
 
from other knowledgeable people.  But at least go back to 
the head of the legal department and say, hang on here is 
Supply Chain Management Guru here says this is irrelevant 
we cannot take us views lightly.  Tell me why he is wrong?  
You understand that? 
MR BURGER:  I understand and I take your point Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Because now I would expect that you 
would agree now that when you look at that regulation as he 
has quoted it he was right, was he not? 
MR BURGER:  Yes Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know I interrupted you but I thought you 
had 
asked 
an 
important 
question 
that 
needed 
to 
be 
answered. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Indeed thank you Chair.  Mr Burger the 
learned Chairperson asks you why you did not go to get 
advice and it would have made sense.  If you had gone and 
got advice from for example as the Chair has suggested from 
the head office legal person and the head office legal person 
20 
might have felt well let us bring in an attorney or an 
advocate as often happens with entities such as this.   
We have internally two different views which one 
legally is correct?  We get objective independent advice.  If 
that had been on your side – if the advice from Senior 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 85 of 139 
 
Counsel or whoever or from the head of legal at head office 
had said, in fact Mr Burger is right the regulation 16.A6.4 or 
whatever it is actually did apply here, Mr Mlambo is right – is 
wrong Burger is right.  That would have vindicated you not 
so? 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  It would have protected you.  It 
would have made you look good.  If on the other hand the 
advice was no Mlambo is correct and Burger is wrong then 
the advice would have been this is what we need to do about 
10 
it?  At least you would have looked good in this sense that 
you would have been accountable and showing initiative and 
saying well we have got this difference of opinion as you 
have put it to the Chair a moment ago let us have somebody 
determine which of us is right and whoever is found to be 
wrong is then told that they are wrong and we can then move 
on and take corrective action.  But here you seem to have 
done nothing.   
May I ask you Mr Burger what was the point of you 
asking Mr Mlambo for approval if when he refuses to give 
20 
approval and gives his reasons for rejecting approval you 
then do nothing?  Surely there was a problem here.  That is 
why you were asking for approval.  If you felt relaxed about 
this you would not have asked him in the first place, not so? 
MR BURGER:  It is not about feeling relaxed it is about the 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 86 of 139 
 
process dictated that we should… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  We should get his approval for. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes you need – you needed his 
approval. 
MR BURGER:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You knew that you needed his approval. 
MR BURGER:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Correct? 
MR BURGER:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You knew why – why did you know that 
you needed his approval? 
MR BURGER:  Because I know the Delegations of Authority. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  So now he does not give your – 
give you his approval so do you have a problem?  You now 
know at least by now you may not have known it previously if 
in your lack of knowledge previously you were not aware that 
it was necessary but at least by now you knew that it was 
necessary that is why you asked for it.  And you put up some 
reasons and he comes back to you and says, your reasons 
20 
are not good enough, they are not relevant reasons, they are 
not persuasive reasons I am not going to approve it.  But you 
do not do anything to deal with it.   
Is the answer perhaps not simply this that at a 
pragmatic level the reality was the CEO had already signed 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 87 of 139 
 
it?  So if Mr Mlambo was saying well this was done 
improperly, irregularly and he is not going to approve it 
where you knew he had to approve it well tough we will just 
carry on.  Was that – was that what went on in your mind? 
MR BURGER:  I stated in my affidavit a couple of times 
Chair that I – I was frustrated with the decision making at 
group level.  It is a frustration I cannot hide it – it was there.  
I was also frustrated with – with in my mind the – the lack of 
guidance and the – and the number of stumbling blocks we 
experienced when we brought things like this to head office. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So a lack of guidance by whom? 
MR BURGER:  By people like Mr Dennis Mlambo.  So… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But he was giving you guidance. 
MR BURGER:  No I am saying in general. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He was not not giving you guidance he 
was giving you guidance. 
MR BURGER:  I understand. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Which you just refused to understand. 
MR BURGER:  But – but the – and this was a build-up over a 
long period of time.  So to answer your question I was 
20 
frustrated.  I do not take that feeling away and it was there.  
And maybe there is some truth in what you saying in the 
back of my mind I said I here you, I take note of what you 
saying but you know what the document is approved by the 
Group CEO I will not – I will not place orders without 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 88 of 139 
 
approval but I will probably take things like this to higher 
levels of authority. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you will not take approvals with – 
sorry orders without approval, is that what you saying? 
MR BURGER:  No I am saying we will – if he rejects 
something like this we will not just place an order. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  We… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But is that not what you did? 
MR BURGER:  I cannot remember the… 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you not place orders after this note 
was issued?  Or did you write or speak to VR Laser and say, 
I am sorry we cannot implement this contract.  I want to; I 
think that Mr Mlambo is being difficult but I am sorry we 
cannot place orders? 
MR BURGER:  Chair you talking about the Single Source 
Agreement 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  Okay.  Now I am talk – I am referring to 
separate orders on the back of the Single Source Agreement.  
20 
So we went through the process if it was within a certain 
level of delegation we would take it to the Group CEO.  So – 
but you asked me a question earlier, was it not – was it not a 
feeling of it was approved by the Group CEO and I am trying 
to give context to the fact that maybe there was an element 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 89 of 139 
 
of truth in that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  I – I was frustrated and I felt look going – talk 
your troubles out with your boss – your Group CEO and give 
me guidance.  I was frustrated. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am interested in the – in the issue 
about 
frustration 
and 
of 
course 
the 
law 
does 
cause 
complications and frustrations for business and government 
officials but the law is the law.  Now you used a phrase 
earlier and I may have misheard it but I think you said you 
10 
felt that we were often strangling ourselves too much with 
the PFMA.  I am not sure if the notes that I made of your 
comment is quite correct but is that what you were saying? 
MR BURGER:  I am… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Or meaning? 
MR BURGER:  That was the opinion held by certain legal 
people that said any organisations sometimes act too 
conservatively and because of acting too conservatively as a 
result of the PFMA misses opportunities that there might be 
and that the PFMA is more lenient than what we think.  That 
20 
was – that was opinions people gave in the passing like for 
instance the legal people within Denel Land Systems.  So I 
am not saying that is what I thought I am just saying.. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Well can I ask you what you did think?  
You were frustrated, you knew that Mr Mlambo and Ms 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 90 of 139 
 
Malahlela were giving you advice based on their expert 
knowledge of the PFMA, the National Treasury Regulations 
that you were now so happily quoting from and being told by 
Mr Mlambo you have got it wrong. 
MR BURGER:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So were you saying well I am – I did 
not respond to Mr Mlambo and I did not take it higher – I did 
not take it for example to the Group Legal Advisor to get a 
properly considered view because I was frustrated? 
MR BURGER:  No I would not – I would not have received 
10 
this and done nothing.  I just cannot remember.  In all 
probability had a discussion with the Group CEO and say 
what must I do? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Burger may I suggest to you that if 
you did in fact do something you would have remembered it. 
MR BURGER:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  This was surely a major issue.  You had 
now been advised and decided that it was necessary to get 
the approval of the Group Supply Chain Executive because 
that approval was necessary in terms of the Supply Chain 
20 
Management Policies and that you had to get it in order to 
process further orders.  Correct? 
MR BURGER:  Correct Chair and if – if the impression I held 
was the Group Supply Chain Executive needed in all 
accounts needed to be consulted I was under the impression 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 91 of 139 
 
that if higher authority listened to both sides of the story 
they could make a call – a judgment call what is the right 
thing to do or not to do.  That was my – that was my thinking 
at the time and my impression at the time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I may – I might not have heard you 
correctly Mr Burger but I thought when you made the 
comment about being strangled I think that is the term you 
10 
used by the PFMA.  I thought you said we sometimes felt 
that – I do not know whether you said we strangle ourselves 
or we were strangled by adhering to the PFMA.  Did I … 
MR BURGER:  Sorry Chair that was a different point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  That was – I was responding to getting his – 
his signoff on orders or not his signoff on orders. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  But to your point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
20 
MR BURGER:  The – I am reflecting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR 
BURGER: 
 
On 
discussions 
we 
had 
in 
executive 
committee meetings where it was stated that people may 
sometimes make too bit an issue of the PFMA and that it is 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 92 of 139 
 
not so rigid as what certain companies or divisions might 
think it should be and that there is a – there is room for 
decision making within the PFMA.  I – it is just a comment I 
made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BURGER:  To say that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I am – the reason why I am raising is 
that Mr Kennedy subsequently asked you whether that is 
what you had said and he seems to have heard it in the 
same way as I think I did namely that when you made that 
10 
remark you were saying you thought by which I understood 
you in the company thought sometimes I do not know 
whether you said strangled yourselves or the... 
MR BURGER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or the PFMA has strangled you. 
MR BURGER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But later on you said it was an opinion 
held by some people I do not know whether you said in the 
legal department. 
MR BURGER:  It was – yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – and you said it was not an opinion of 
– held by you. 
MR BURGER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is why I am going back. 
MR BURGER:  Okay. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 93 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say I thought I heard you to be 
including yourself as one of the people who felt that 
sometimes the PFMA strangled you or you were strangled by 
the PFMA.  So I am checking whether I did not hear you 
correctly to be saying we. 
MR BURGER:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As opposed to other people. 
MR BURGER:  I think Chair you heard correctly.  Let me try 
and rephrase it to be absolutely clear.  There – there were 
discussions within the Denel Land Systems EXCO.  If you – 
10 
and there were views held that some – by different people 
also by legal people that – that sometimes we apply the 
PFMA too strictly and strangle ourselves in doing that.  The 
arguments put on the table when – during those discussions 
without knowing the PFMA – without sitting down and 
studying the full implication of the PFMA I supported that 
view because it made logical sense to me that the – the 
PFMA should not be that rigid.   
So you can also include me in that discussion 
because I supported that view.  What was clear to me at the 
20 
time was there were different – differences of opinion on how 
to interpret the PFMA and that – that is why I refer my legal 
person – supported me in that letter that I wrote to Mr 
Mlambo I referred to the – to those paragraphs.   
But Chair I just – I just want to say something and 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 94 of 139 
 
speeding as an example and sorry to do that is very clear – 
it is very unambiguous.  You drive at 60 kilometres you 
supposed to not drive that faster than 60 kilometres.  If you 
drive faster than 60 kilometres and somebody catches you 
you will be caught and there will be a fine.  Very 
unambiguous and very clear.   
What I have come to learn in the last weeks and 
months is that I – I was wrong.  I was wrong in the sense 
that the PFMA is not so flexible.  The PFMA is actually fairly 
clear and if I reflect back I would say it is – it is like a 
10 
Formula 1 driver trying to win a race within the Road 
Ordinance Act trying to win a trace.  And the law is very 
clear you are not supposed to drive faster than 120 or 
whatever the case may be.  If he complies to the – to the 
rules of 120 kilometres an hour there is no way he can win a 
race.   
So – so – and – but there is very good reasons for 
120 kilometres an hour because if you let everybody drive 
fast at 120 there will be chaos.  So – so I understand that 
law but – but in my mind we were – we were operating in an 
20 
environment where quick decision making was necessary; 
where 
sometimes 
you 
have 
to 
drive 
faster 
than 
120 
kilometres an hour.   
And 
for 
Denel 
to 
succeed 
successfully 
in 
the 
international market I am – I am tempted to say that it is 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 95 of 139 
 
going to be very difficult under the PFMA laws that I 
understand today which I did not understand so well then but 
which I understand today.  And my advice would very 
strongly be it is for the future of Denel probably better to – 
to operate under a more privately owned scenario and that is 
just my opinion Chair.  But – but that is the only way I can 
explain it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  But I must put this to you that it 
seems as I understand your evidence that with regard to 
whether you were one of those who held that opinion about 
10 
being strangled or strangling yourself it seems that when you 
made the remark you may have included yourself.   
But later on when you were answering a question that 
Mr Kennedy put to you, you seem to have said that was not 
your opinion it was the opinion of others. 
MR BURGER:  Okay.  No, no, no.  Sorry I – I did not state it 
clearly enough.  It was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on – hang on let me finish – let me 
finish.  But when you are answering me now I understand 
you to be – to include yourself? 
20 
MR BURGER:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now I am not sure I just want to make sure 
that I have understood you correct but this is how I have 
understood you. 
MR BURGER:  The second one Chair.  The last – the last 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 96 of 139 
 
one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – your answer to Mr Kennedy? 
MR BURGER:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were not including yourself?  You did 
not hold that opinion that sometimes you strangle yourself – 
you strangled yourselves. 
MR BURGER:  No.  It is a big… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Trying to comply with the PFMA that is not 
an opinion that you held at the time, is that what you are 
saying? 
10 
MR BURGER:  Sorry Chair I am battling to express myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR BURGER:  I am saying the – it was an opinion held by 
people that – that we are too critical on ourselves when 
applying the PFMA and it – it was discussed in the meetings 
and it was – it was an opinion I also held at the time that we 
were strangling ourselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR BURGER:  With the – in the way we were applying the 
PFMA. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But – but did I understand your 
evidence 
correctly 
that 
when 
you 
were 
answering 
Mr 
Kennedy you had said it was not your opinion that is what I 
want to check?  What – had you – did you say that to Mr 
Kennedy? 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 97 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:  What – what I tried to say to Mr Kennedy was 
I was not knowledgeable enough on the PFMA so I could not 
form an independent opinion by – I did not study the PFMA 
however and that is why I said it was not my opinion that I 
put on the table to say – to be part of the argument.   
It was a – it was an opinion that I shared when there 
were arguments on the table that – that said we are 
strangling ourselves with the PFMA I supported the fact that 
we were strangling ourselves with the PFMA.  But I did not – 
I did not actively put arguments on the table from a point of 
10 
knowledge and from a point of expertise. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Hm. 
 
Well 
there 
may 
be 
some 
inconsistency but Mr Kennedy you – you … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Burger I would 
like you to leave aside Bundle 1 now.  I would like to go back 
to Bundle 10 which contains your affidavits.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Kennedy we are at half past four 
and I have certainly from my side we can continue but we – 
20 
maybe we need to agree. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At what stage we might take a short break 
and maybe we could take it now or maybe we can still go on 
until five and take it from there also depending on the 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 98 of 139 
 
witness he might need a break. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair subject to your guidance I would 
be happy with a break but may I suggest respectfully that we 
finish this particular topic with the last few questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then take a break because I was 
going to ask in any event for an opportunity to chat with my 
team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Members to see what other issues we 
10 
want to raise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We getting very near the end. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I had hoped that we be finished by five 
o’clock in any event. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so maybe if we are – if you think we 
might be finished by five o’clock then maybe unless the 
witness or his attorney needs a break maybe we can just go 
on.  Mr Burger you do not particularly need a break now? 
20 
MR BURGER:  I am happy Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you are fine. 
MR BURGER:  I am fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you fine?   
ADV CROUSE:  Chairman I am also happy to proceed. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 99 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright then let us proceed then. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  What I am 
suggesting is just to complete this line. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Which should take about five minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No more then take the break then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Burger please 
turn now in Bundle 10 to page 720.  Have you got that? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are now back in Bundle 10? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And it is page 7? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  20. 
CHAIRPERSON:  720.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  This is part of your affidavit and it is a 
section where you were dealing with a response to various 
questions that were being put to you by members of the 
investigation team, is that right? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And in that paragraph 162, the 
question that you have quoted in italics, that comes from the 
investigators, reads: 
‘Why you proceeded with giving VR Laser work as a 
Single 
Source 
Supplier 
even 
after 
the 
Group 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 100 of 139 
 
Executive Supply Chain refused to grant approval on 
the grounds that the process was flawed?” 
 
So this is the very question that I was putting to you 
earlier.  And I just want to pick up on something, a couple of 
things that you written here. 
 
I would like to start, if I may, at the foot of the page, 
162.3.  We are going to come back to the earlier ones in a 
moment.   
 
162.3, you say: 
“Since Mlambo reported to the Executives of DCO, 
10 
who again reported to the Group CEO, I expected 
that in the case of dissatisfaction, he would have 
taken 
the 
matter 
up 
through 
the 
appropriate 
channel.” 
 
In other words, that Mr Mlambo should have raised it if 
he was dissatisfied.   
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You did not feel it appropriate that you 
should raise it.  You simply left it to him because he was at 
head office, is that right? 
20 
MR BURGER:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you continue: 
“From a DLS perspective, however, there was a 
Memorandum of Agreement in place. 
However, regardless of the MOA, the delegations 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 101 of 139 
 
required 
the 
DCO 
approves 
contract 
beyond 
R 20 million. 
This was one of the contracts presented to the 
Executive 
Supply 
Chain 
Committee 
and 
were 
discussed and approved at various levels.   
If the Group CEO took note of Mlambo’s input and 
for good business reason decided to disregard his 
input and approve the submission, then I would 
imagine it was his right and authority to do so.” 
 
Now at this stage, the Group CEO was Mr Ntshepe, 
10 
correct? 
MR BURGER:   I presume you are referring to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Motsepe.  Mr Motsepe.  Is it not 
Motsepe?   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Motsepe, yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Zulake Ntshepe. 
MR BURGER:   Correct.  I ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He was Group CEO, correct? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And he, in fact, did overrule 
Mr Mlambo in the note that we have seen. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That followed Mr Mlambo’s concerns.  
So am I right in understanding, you felt that at divisional 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 102 of 139 
 
level, if Mlambo does not like what I am doing – and he has 
already given his reasons for that – he can raise it higher up 
than himself and that is what he did.   
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But would you agree that it is not 
right to imagine, as you suggested here, it was his right to 
authority to uphold your approach and reject Mr Mlambo’s 
approach if that in breach of that law?  You would accept 
that the Group CEO cannot do something unlawfully? 
MR BURGER:   Fully.  I agree Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ja.  Now just while we are here.  On 
the previous page 162.1, you say: 
“The first insinuations that the process was flawed 
only came to my knowledge in 2016 when Malahlela 
mentioned something to that effect to me. 
This coincided with a large amount of negative press 
for the Gupta family and Mlambo and Malahlela, by 
the same token, made no secret that his or their 
dislike for VR Laser was based on his or their 
perceptions formed by the media and not because of 
20 
the performance of VR Laser.” 
 
Now you have climbed down a fair bit on what you have 
said in this affidavit in your oral evidence, both last time and 
this time.   
 
Mr Burger, may I ask you?  Do you stand by this 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 103 of 139 
 
statement or do you want to correct it?  Because these are 
very serious allegations making – that you are making 
against Mr Mlambo and Ms Malahlela that they had some 
antiphony and some antagonism for, as you put it, a dislike 
for VR Laser based on their perceptions formed by the 
media. 
MR BURGER:   Chair, I actually said it 15-minutes ago that 
my opinion was that Mr Mlambo did not particularly support 
the contract because of the shareholding and the ownership 
of VR Laser. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did he say that?  Or is that something 
that you just inferred from what he was saying? 
MR BURGER:   I cannot remember his words but maybe it 
was something that he – that is how it was projected to me.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It is not in any of the words that we do 
have in front of us, in the documents for example that we 
have looked at a moment ago.  He raised a number of 
concerns that you have now acknowledged at legitimate.   
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Based on the provisions of the Supply 
20 
Chain Management policy.  Nowhere do you see anything 
like:  I do not think we should be doing business with shady 
characters at VR Laser who are connected with shady 
characters called the Gupta’s.  Nothing remotely about that. 
MR BURGER:   H’m. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 104 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So where did you pick that up from? 
MR BURGER:   The – as an example, when I received the 
letter from Ms Malahlela when I was overseas – this letter I 
am referring to her in the first paragraph – I – that was for 
the me the first time I saw in those bold words:  We have got 
a really big problem here.   
 
The discussion I had with the – in my letter or reply, I 
felt very strongly that she knew that the mistake was being 
made. 
 
I also felt that and probably if I did exactly the same 
10 
thing as what she did, I would not be sitting here today.  But 
she – I felt that she wrote the letter in such a way that she 
does distance herself from that deal. 
 
And then when I had the discussion on my return, and I 
listened to her giving evidence and she said:  Well, nothing 
really happened in that meeting.  I can actually remember 
that meeting very well, very vividly. 
 
And the discussion was not so much on the process.  
The discussion was on the image and the position of the 
Gupta’s and the effect that could have on the company. 
20 
 
That was what the – and my view to her was and I did 
action that, was the image of the company is really – there is 
a department within Denel that looks after that and should be 
handled by them. 
 
So I am saying – I am making these comments because 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 105 of 139 
 
of meetings like that Chair.  Mr Mlambo also make no secret 
about the fact that it is – it is going to be bad for the 
reputation of Denel if we continue with these agreements. 
 
So that is why I made these comments.  Having said that 
Chair.  The arguments put on the table by both Mr Mlambo 
and Ms Malahlela on their opinion about the application of 
the PMFA, the policies of Denel and so forth, are all very 
unemotional valid reasons and I cannot fault that and I take 
that point very strongly.   
 
I am reflecting on how I felt at the time and the...  So to 
10 
put it in perspective.  Looking at the affidavits.  Yes, I think 
they are logical and emotional points being made. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Did ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Why did you say that at Denel there was a 
separate department or you unit that looks after the image of 
the company? 
MR BURGER:   The ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What was that to say, it was something 
that none of you should concern yourselves within the 
context of the contracts? 
20 
MR BURGER:   Chair, there was a Public Relations 
Department.  I cannot remember exactly what it was.  Or a 
Media Committee or something.  I cannot remember the 
name of the department.  That dealt with the image of Denel 
and they dealt with interaction with the press. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 106 of 139 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but what I mean is.  Am I correct in 
understanding 
you 
to 
have 
taken 
the 
view 
that 
the 
discussions or engagements that you were having with them, 
should not bring in issues of the image of the company 
because there were other people whose job was to concern 
themselves about that.  Is that what you meant? 
MR BURGER:   Ja, Chair very much so.  I mean, I was told 
in no uncertain terms by the then Group CEO that this was 
not a domain I must concern myself about. 
 
And so the legitimacy of contracts, because of media or 
10 
threat of a media scandal was not something I really 
concerned myself about at that time.  And I tried to explain 
how the delegations and the accountabilities moved to head 
office during that time. 
 
So, yes, I truly left that to the Group CEO as well as the 
Media Department to deal with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So was your attitude that it did not matter 
how much, having the contract with a particular entity who 
could potentially tarnish the image of the Denel, it was fine 
for all of you to approve that contract being entered into with 
20 
such an entity because the Group CEO said do not concern 
yourselves about the issues of the image of the company? 
MR BURGER:   H’m.  Chair, yes, of course, I was concerned 
about the image of Denel.  I mean, I am still am. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would have expected to you have been. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 107 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:   It – at the time, there was much speculation 
of what is right and what is wrong.  And in 2020, it is much 
easier to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am not sure if it is in 2020 
Mr Burger because this was 2016. 
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Three years after the landing of the Gupta 
aeroplane at Waterkloof.   
MR BURGER:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Gupta jet landing at Waterkloof 
10 
happened in 2013 around April.  So this was April 2016.  
This was three years later. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And my recollection and the evidence that 
has been led before the Commission in regard to that 
landing, has been that the whole country was shocked that a 
private jet or an aeroplane hired by or owned by just some 
private people, foreigners or citizens or whatever they were, 
could be allowed to land at Waterkloof.  And there was a big 
issue in the whole country. 
20 
 
And for some people who might not have taken notice of 
the Gupta’s or the influence that they appear to have within 
government, that was the moment that made them sit back 
and say:  So what is happening? 
 
Now, I am a little surprised if in 2016, you would not 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 108 of 139 
 
have been quite aware that there was some negativity just in 
terms of – in the public domain about the Gupta’s. 
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you accept that there was some 
negativity.  It is a question of how much there was, how 
much negativity there was. 
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By 2016.  Actually, I see that you say in 
paragraph 162.1, that is page 720 of your affidavit: 
“This coincided with a large amount of negative 
10 
press for the Gupta’s.” 
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So by then you must – there must have 
been in your own view quite some negative media attention 
surrounding the Gupta’s. 
MR BURGER:   Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, I would then have thought that it 
would have been a matter of concern to you and either 
20 
senior people at Denel or DLS to conclude a contract with an 
entity that was connected with people who enjoy that 
negativity about them. 
 
Because if Denel concludes a contract with them, 
Denel’s 
own 
image 
and 
reputation 
may 
be 
severely 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 109 of 139 
 
damaged.  They may be seen as friends to these people. 
 
And why would that not be something that you would 
think seriously about to say:  What are we going to do to the 
image and reputation of Denel if we conclude a contract with 
people who are so closely associated with the Gupta’s. 
MR BURGER:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So what I am putting to you is that.  I 
would have expected this to have been a matter of serious 
concern to any senior person within a company, particularly 
at your level. 
10 
 
And especially when it was being pointed out by other 
people within the company.  Because you do say that some 
of the people were concerned.  One of them Mr Mlambo, I 
think you said. 
 
Even though, in regard to this point, he might not have 
raised that but you say there were other discussions from 
which you knew, as far as you are concerned, that he was 
concerned about that. 
MR BURGER:   Yes.  Chair, I state again.  I was – obviously, 
the image of Denel is and will always be of importance to 
20 
me.  Number two.  Denel is operating locally and with foreign 
governments in a very much politically environment. 
 
I have soon in my career, took a position that I do not 
want to be – I do not want to pick sides and I do not want to 
have an opinion on what is politically correct or incorrect. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 110 of 139 
 
 
And that attitude, I must be honest with you, served me 
well for a fair amount of time but it caught up with me.   
 
The dilemma of picking of political sides is that 
sometimes you are in and sometimes you are not in and you, 
as a result, lose your job as a consequence. 
 
So I, early on in my life, I said I just want to be a 
businessman.  I do not want to pick political sides.  And 
therefore, apart from – while I acknowledge that the image 
was important to me.  I also did put my head in the ground a 
little bit when it came to these things. 
10 
 
And you are right.  In hindsight, I should have stood up 
and said:  No, we cannot, you know, you cannot do that or 
whatever. 
 
But I felt at the time this was the best company to do the 
job irrespective – and I did not concern myself with the 
political scenario. 
 
Now, I – and I call it political scenario because it really 
relates to who they were supporting politically and not.  So I, 
honestly, did not – I looked away from those things and in 
hindsight, maybe I should have concerned myself more with 
20 
that but that really was the scenario. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you may have looked away and you 
may have decided at some stage that you did not want to 
take political sides, but there is always what is right and 
there is always what is wrong. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 111 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:   No, you are right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And leaving aside political sides within the 
context of the Gupta’s, the negative press that you talk about 
here, was the press that was saying they were involved in 
acts of corruption.   
 
It was the press that was making all kinds of allegations.  
And I accept that it was allegations at that stage.  We will 
see by the end of the work of the Commission where we are 
with that particular allegations that they were involved in 
corruption. 
10 
 
And I would have thought that when it came to 
allegations such as that, you would be concerned to say, it is 
not a question of taking political sides.   
 
It is a question that I do not want Denel to be associated 
with an entity against whom there are all kinds of allegations 
of corruption.  You understand? 
MR BURGER:   I understand fully Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR BURGER:   I did not take that view.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Mr Kennedy. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I would just like to ask one follow-up 
questions before we ask for the stand-down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that is.  Even if you had answered 
that question – asked that question and even if you had 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 112 of 139 
 
decided that it was in the interest of Denel, despite the fact 
that there were so much controversy with the Gupta’s, that 
the deal should have been done.   
 
Does the fact not that there was controversy about them, 
did not that provide all the more reason for you, if you were 
really genuinely concerned about doing the right thing for 
Denel and its image, that you should have made absolutely 
sure that everything was squeaky clean as far as compliance 
with the law and with procurement policies was concerned? 
MR BURGER:   I take it – I take your point Chair.  I can only 
10 
say that during the Single Source Agreement, I was really 
under the impression this was something that the Group CEO 
had the authority to do.  That it was in the best interest of 
Denel.   
 
And by 2016, the agreement was in existence and my 
view I had then was the horse has been bolted.  If there is 
evidence of corruption, then we have something to act on.  
 
But in the absence of them being blacklisted or evidence 
of corruption.  How do you act on that?  And that was my 
opinion at the time.   
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, may we then ask for a brief 
stand-down, 
perhaps 
around 
ten, 
maybe 
15-minutes 
maximum and then my team will be able to give their input 
and we will be able to complete. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 113 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I do not believe we should need more 
than about ten minutes thereafter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I understand from Mr Crouse that there 
is at least one aspect on which he, as he has indicated to 
me, he may want to re-examine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But it should not be very long. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine.  Let us take a ten minutes’ 
break. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So coming back at about...  Well, let us 
just make it – we will resume at ten past five.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That will give you enough time with your 
team. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Just a few follow-
up questions and then we will be done.  The evidence 
earlier relating to officials becoming too entangled in the 
PFMA, that was a view that was expressed by some legal 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 114 of 139 
 
people.  Was that people within your legal department who 
were suggesting that some officials were imagining that the 
PFMA was more complicated than it really was?  Sorry, just 
switch on your mic, please? 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair, but this was a general 
discussion, this was not a VR Laser big discussion. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   It is a general view that was …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And can you recall who said that? 
MR BURGER:   It was a general view and if I remember 
10 
correctly, the head of my legal department Ms Denise 
Govender also held that view.  So but I stand corrected but 
I am pretty sure that was the scenario. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Then you were asked 
questions about that letter that you sent to Mr Mlambo 
where you referred to Treasury Regulation 16A, etcetera.  
How did it come about that you got that advice?  What 
prompted you to get that advice? 
MR BURGER:   The normal practice was that any letter 
that was written for head office – not any letter, in 90% of 
20 
the time of normal run of the mill letters like approval for 
certain things would be written by the person that wants to 
get it approved and I would read it, I would make sure I 
understand it and I support it and I would sign it.   
This letter was one of them and words in that letter, 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 115 of 139 
 
although it was a long time ago, words that were used in 
the letter were words like inter alia which is a typical legal 
term and something I would not write now.  I am fairly sure 
that that letter was not written or I would surprised if that 
letter was written by Ms Malahlela and for that reason I 
think it was between the Chief Operating Officer, Mr 
Reenen Teubes, who wanted to get this contracts placed 
and our legal department, Ms Denis Govender, that that 
letter was constructed and there might have been back and 
forth with the letter and I might have given inputs to it but 
10 
the bulk that letter was written by – and my guesstimate 
would be – and/or I am pretty sure by Ms Denis Govender, 
most of it, with inputs from Mr Reenen Teubes.  What 
typically…[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Teubes? 
MR BURGER:   Ja.  And what typically then would happen 
is I would scrutinise it, make sure it make sense and so – 
and then take it to head office. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the reason why you went to them 
for their advice and input was because you and they 
20 
realised that Mr Mlambo had to approve this in terms of the 
policy. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, on the last bit of the statement 
and the earlier part of the statement, I did not go to them 
to say go and write a letter, they wanted – from operations’ 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 116 of 139 
 
side they wanted to place a contract on VR Laser.  We 
might have had a discussion or they just brought the letter 
to me to say we need to get approval and therefore they 
did know that Mr Dennis Mlambo must sign it and 
presented a letter that, like in most cases, I would go 
through and sign it off and give inputs, if necessary but I 
did not initiate that letter, if that was the comment made. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Can I ask you in bundle 10, 
still looking at your statement. 
MR BURGER:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   To turn please to page 646, 
paragraph 86 and 87 at the top.  646.    
MR BURGER:   I have got it, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In fact let us start, if we may, on the 
previous page, 645, to give it context.  Paragraph 84: 
“The reality is that Saloojee is himself a political 
animal, he never cautioned me or Ntshepe about 
our interactions with Essa and VR Laser and in fact 
encouraged it.  He visited the Gupta residence on 
more than one occasion.  That is more than I can 
20 
say.  It is therefore surprising that Saloojee will 
categorically deny that he instructed Ntshepe to 
manage the relationship with Essa.  Not only does it 
fly in the face of his own testimony but it is simply 
disingenuous to suggest that my version in this 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 117 of 139 
 
regard if not correct.  I am certain that Ntshepe will 
corroborate me in this regard. Saloojee, and I again 
remind the reader, that Saloojee did not have a lot 
of patience with me as an individual.  On more than 
occasion told me that my duty, as the CEO of a 
division, was simply to ensure that I focus on the 
implementation of programmes and that I should 
leave 
the 
political 
element 
and 
business 
development to him.” 
Now is that correct? 
10 
MR BURGER:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright.  And then the top of the next 
page: 
“I was therefore not surprised that at the beginning 
of 2014 he called me into his office and proposed 
that I give work to VR Laser as this was a supplier 
with political clout.  He was surprised to learn at 
the time that Denel had been doing business with 
VR Laser since at least 2003 and that VR Laser was 
a very successful supplier in a niche environment.  
20 
It was Saloojee, who in 2015, suggested that VR 
Laser be appointed a single source supplier of 
complex fabricated structures.” 
Now of course you are aware that Mr Saloojee has denied 
a number of these allegations against him.  He denies that 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 118 of 139 
 
he proposed whether in 2014 or at any time that you 
should give work to VR Laser at all let alone that this was 
a 
supplier 
with 
political 
clout 
but 
you 
were 
aware, 
according to your version, as far back as the beginning of 
2014 that Mr Saloojee was aware that VR Laser had 
political clout and was pressurising or encouraging you to 
give them business as a result. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And presumably on the strength of 
that it came as no surprise to you that the following year in 
10 
2015 he was encouraging you to appoint to appoint VR 
Laser as a single source supplier of DLS. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you gave evidence on the 
previous occasion that you did not feel that this was 
necessarily appropriate but you left the politics to him and 
as it happened for technical business reasons, not political 
favouritism or anything like that, but for good business 
reasons for Denel you felt it would be a good idea to give 
VR Laser a single source supply contract, is that right? 
20 
MR BURGER:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But I want to go back to a line 
of questioning I put to you earlier and ask you with the 
benefit of some time since I asked you the first question in 
that regard, whether you have reflected on it, whether or 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 119 of 139 
 
not it was a good business idea for Denel to go into a 
single source supply agreement with VR Laser - I am 
talking here about DLS specifically – whether or not you 
felt that was good and whether or not you felt well, this is 
a good opportunity, I can now exploit this opportunity to 
get a supplier that I have always liked and want now,.  
Should you not have actually reported that to somebody, 
that Saloojee had effectively been pressurising you to give 
business to VR Laser because of what you say he said, 
political clout, in other words, their connections, not their 
10 
business credentials.  He obviously is accountable for 
whatever he said.  He, of course, denies that and he will 
be asked questions in that regard but what about your own 
accountability?  If your superior, albeit your superior, albeit 
that he was – he had more senior position in the group 
than you and you were accountable to him, surely you are 
accountable also as an official to the nation at large and if 
somebody is making such a proposition to you which 
clearly is inappropriate, was it not incumbent on you to 
report that? 
20 
MR BURGER:   Chair, I think knowing what I know now, 
having listen to evidence given supporting that Mr Saloojee 
was deeply involved than even what I thought at the time, 
it would have been the correct thing to do.  I have got no 
doubt in my mind.  At the time, however, the –what I call 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 120 of 139 
 
political pressures, those things, Mr Saloojee made no 
bones about the fact that he is under political pressure for 
many things and that is his domain and I think over a long 
period of time I got used to the idea or accepted the idea 
an wrongly so that when a comment is made like that, that 
it needs to be supported.  If I could have my life over I 
would have done that, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you saying that Mr Saloojee 
indicated to you a number of time that he was under 
political 
pressure 
in 
the 
sense 
that 
he 
was 
being 
10 
pressurised by politicians to ensure that work from Denel 
was given to political favourites such as the Guptas? 
MR BURGER:   No, Chair.  No, I would not go that far.  He 
did not elaborate in that …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So what did you understand by his 
reference to his being under political pressure? 
MR BURGER:   That, well, it is political clout, he is moving 
in political circles, that he said a number of times to me 
and he has to conform to those pressures.  I did not see it 
as anything but – you called it favouritism and maybe that 
20 
is – it is a good description.  I did not see it as any funny 
business in that regard. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But should you not have seen that at 
least when he was saying to you in 2014 you should be 
giving favourable treatment to VR Laser because they have 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 121 of 139 
 
political clout?  What else could that mean? 
MR BURGER:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But that he was saying to you people 
want you to favour them in business not because they are 
good but because they are politically connected.  Is that 
not 
exactly 
what 
he 
was 
saying, 
according 
to 
your 
evidence. 
MR BURGER:   Ja.  No, you are right, Chair, and I – if it 
was the only case then one can make a big argument about 
it but it also happened in terms of the [indistinct] 13.58 
10 
business that I had to place on them, so – as I indicated in 
the previous interview.  So it was common knowledge that 
Mr Saloojee was in general under political pressure and so 
I -  it is – not just relating to this, in general.  So, you 
know, with the clarity and the advantage of time passing, 
you are right, I am not disputing that.  At the time when we 
were fighting the war, the – I just accepted that that is the 
way it is and it in principle always been the case.  It is not 
new to – there has always been some form of political 
imperatives that needed to be supported. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us understand that clearly, Mr 
Burger.  You would be able to make a distinction between 
what he said and what you understood him to be saying, 
hopefully the two will be in harmony, but they might not be 
in harmony.  The political pressure that you say he 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 122 of 139 
 
generally spoke about that he was under… 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was your understanding of what he 
was being politically pressurised to do? 
MR BURGER:   Chair, it is a wide range of things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what I want to hear, what are 
those things? 
MR BURGER:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As you understood them. 
MR BURGER:   Yes.  Things like the transformation of the 
10 
organisation, the necessity to have deputies and fast-track 
the deputies to senior positions, the decisions to only 
appoint black female engineers in a very difficult time to 
get experienced people and if one argued a different angle 
to say we have got a programme running, it is good to do 
80% of that but let us try and also get experience in, then 
the argument was understand the enormity of the political 
pressure.   
So 
those 
were 
the 
more 
general 
type 
– 
understandable and I am not saying it was incorrect, 
20 
understandable pressures he was under.  He was – he also 
comment fairly regularly that the interactions that he had 
with certain people of importance, if certain people visited 
the organisation, should be treated in a very special way 
because of their political position or whatever the case 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 123 of 139 
 
may be.   
So it was a wide range of things and in particular he 
also said there are companies of importance and with 
political clout that needs to be supported, for whatever 
reason that may be. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you recall any people that he thought 
should be treated in a special way when they visited the 
company?  By any chance to you remember any names or 
you never got the names? 
MR BURGER:   Individuals? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, individuals. 
MR BURGER:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No.  But did he mention or you have 
forgotten or he never mentioned? 
MR BURGER:   I cannot remember, it is six years ago, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR BURGER:   He might have mentioned, he might have 
mentioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Okay and in terms of 
20 
companies that he thought should be …[intervenes] 
MR BURGER:   Sorry, Chair, maybe – there was – I can 
remember there was a called Tub and I am not hundred 
percent – I am fairly sure it was Mr Saloojee that said 
there was a company called Tub and there was a lady 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 124 of 139 
 
owner of that company and he also referred – and I cannot 
remember her name now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that is fine. 
MR BURGER:   But he did mention her name specifically 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine. 
MR BURGER:   As a very important person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, if you do remember later on 
you can give us a supplementary affidavit. 
MR BURGER:   Will do, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I just have one 
topic still to raise and that is after Mr Mlambo again 
refused to approve the single source supply contract 
retrospectively.  Did you then take the matter up with Mr 
Ntshepe, the CEO?  How did …[intervenes] 
MR BURGER:   I did not have a discussion with – I cannot 
recall, Chair, whether I did.  My argument would not have 
been I think we should cancel the single source agreement, 
I would not have said that. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, I am not asking …[intervenes] 
MR BURGER:   Based on the inputs given by Mr Mlambo.  
Whether – I might have had a discussion with him about his 
– I am pretty sure I had a discussion with him about his 
discontent with the whole process, so yes. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 125 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But I am asking who raised it with Mr 
Ntshepe at the level of Group CEO the fact that there was 
now a need for a decision?  Earlier you said you believed 
that once Mlambo was refusing to approve it would be dealt 
with higher up but in fact we know that Mr Ntshepe then 
signed.  He said approved and then he signed. 
MR BURGER:   Oh sorry, are you talking about the specific 
T5 contract that was placed?   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am talking about the single source 
supply agreement. 
10 
MR BURGER:   The single source supply agreement? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   No, I took that to Mr Saloojee, Chair, I did 
not take that to Mr Ntshepe. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But – if I can just have a moment, 
Chair?  If you look please in bundle 1.  Have got bundle 1, 
page 824?  This is a document we looked at earlier. 
MR BURGER:   824.  Ja, this agreement was not the single 
source agreement.  This …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 824? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   824, yes, Chair. 
MR BURGER:   This was for a complex fabricated steel 
plate that was needed for the T5 demo on the back of the 
single source agreement.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes but if you look at the second last 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 126 of 139 
 
paragraph.  We went through this in some detail: 
“Having identified a need for a single source 
supplier 
for 
the 
supply 
of 
steel 
component 
fabrications in May 2015 DLS signed an MOA with 
VR Laser for the scope of work.  VR Laser is a 
hundred percent black-owned entity.” 
Etcetera.  Next paragraph: 
“Due to these contradicting positions supply chain 
approached DLS Exco to make a decision as 
whether to honour the MOA and place the order of 
10 
VR Laser or to follow up the supply chain policy and 
procure from intergroup.  Exco has recommended 
that the work be done by VR Laser.” 
So that was giving work pursuant to the MOA. 
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the MOA was the single source – 
single supplier agreement. 
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   But this request was for the T5 steel plate. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, but it did reflect the fact that the 
MOA had been found by Ms Malahlela and later by Mr 
Mlambo not to be in compliance with the procurement 
policy. 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair.  Correct, Chair. 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 127 of 139 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  So how did – who took the 
matter to Mr Ntshepe and obtained his signature as 
approved on the foot of page 825? 
MR BURGER:   In all probability, Chair, and I cannot state 
this a hundred percent but in all probability this was 
brought back to me by Ms Malahlela and this was a very 
urgent requirement because we had to go and do a demo 
and I in all probability took this to Mr Ntshepe. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now Mr Mlambo has testified that 
after he wrote what appears in handwritten form in the 
10 
middle of page 825 he was effectively ignored.  You did not 
come back to him, other executives did not come back to 
him, Mr Ntshepe never came back to him, he found out 
later through the backdoor, as it were, that Mr Ntshepe had 
just sommer approved this, overruled him and did not 
engage in any discussion with him let alone with you and 
with him. 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You confirm that as far as your 
understanding goes. 
20 
MR BURGER:   I cannot recall having a discussion with Mr 
Mlambo. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  May I just have a moment, 
Chair?  In fact I am reminded that Mr Ntshepe himself gave 
evidence here.  When he was asked how long it would have 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 128 of 139 
 
taken if Mr Mlambo’s questions and concerns had been 
addressed and taken seriously, how long would it have 
taken, for example, to put up a proper business reason.  
He said about a day.  Can your evidence seriously be 
correct that there was such urgency to this matter that 
needed an immediate decision by the CEO thereby ignoring 
the Group Supply Chain Executive’s concerns? 
MR BURGER:   Chair, it is impossible to get a quote on 
something like this in a day.  It is not possible.  So I do not 
know where he got the day from, it is just not possible to 
10 
set up and do an analysis of the drawings, it is a complex 
drawing.  Other people take weeks.  I cannot comment on 
that but one can argue the fact that Mr Mlambo should 
have been taken more seriously and I have already 
acknowledged that, Chair, I do not want to go back on that 
argument.  But I can only say and I say it with a fair 
amount of shame, but I was convinced that it was the right 
thing to do at the time, I was convinced that we had an 
agreement, I wanted to honour that agreement and I was 
pushing for the work to be done there because I knew it 
20 
would come out to be the correct configuration.  So, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair, we have no further 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Burger, the answer that 
you have given with regard – when you said you do not 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 129 of 139 
 
know where …[intervenes] 
MR BURGER:   My apology, Chair, I did not hear.  My 
answer…? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The answer that you gave to Mr Kennedy 
just now which involved you saying you could not get a 
quote within a day.  Remember that answer? 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that in relation to page 825 where 
Mr Mlambo made the handwritten note saying DVS and MLT 
(sic) 
must 
submit 
proof 
that 
they 
cannot 
meet 
the 
10 
requirements prior to the contract being awarded to VR 
Laser or that is in response to something else? 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you are not sure? 
MR 
BURGER: 
 
 
No, 
Chair, 
I 
am 
very 
sure, 
the 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  In terms of what were you – was 
that in the context of that because that question arose 
because, as I understood the position, it was said that 
there was urgency. 
20 
MR BURGER:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is why he – what he required could 
not be given.  Is that what you were talking about because 
I am not sure that that required quotes if it was in the 
context of this handwritten note.  All he wanted was proof 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 130 of 139 
 
that they cannot meet the requirements, they cannot do the 
job, I guess is what he meant, as I understand it. 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair, when I read his comment, my 
deduction was both the – well, not DVS but LMT for sure, 
would in all probability want to do the work.  So they would 
say – they were not supply proof, I cannot meet the 
requirements, they would say let me work out a quotation, 
let me speak to my engineers how quickly we can do that, 
let us see what the processes are, we will come back to 
you with an answer.  That is what I read when I read this, I 
10 
did not expect LMT to write back, sorry, we cannot make it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BURGER:   Not – in my mind, this would have 
protracted the whole thing.  I took this to Mr Ntshepe and 
said what must we do, with his background in marketing he 
knew about the urgency and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   How long do you think it would have 
taken from your understanding of ...[intervenes]  
MR BURGER:   I would guess ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   A week, two days? 
20 
MR BURGER:   A week I would guess. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But a week wouldn’t have made any – a 
week’s delay wouldn’t have made a big difference as I 
understand the position.  As I understand the position in 
the scheme of that contract it would – a day or a week 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 131 of 139 
 
wouldn’t have made a big difference as I understand the 
position there. 
MR BURGER:  Sorry Chair, no this has got nothing to do 
with Badger or the Hoefyster Programme.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MR BURGER:   This was – there was a deadline for a 
demonstration in a client’s country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR BURGER:   And we had to prepare a gun to – and 
usually in a client’s country there is a specific, a very, very 
10 
specific time slot when demonstrations or evaluations, not 
demonstrations, evaluations are held and it is usually to 
summer temperature and ranges are available and the time 
scale on this invoice it is clean to we had to still build the 
gun, test the gun and ship the gun, so there was really 
huge diversion on this specific programme.  If it was 
Hoefyster I accept your argument but this was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, Mr Kennedy you must help me, 
I may have been misunderstanding at least you and I have 
been there with all the witnesses. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was your question in the context of this 
note? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because now I don’t know whether it 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 132 of 139 
 
was Mr Burger or another previous witness, my impression 
was that really it wouldn’t have made much difference if 
there was a delay of a few days. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is my understanding Chair and 
that would have been Mr Ntshepe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but now Mr Burger is talking about 
guns and so on, does that relate to guns? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The demo elements in the first 
paragraph do relate to guns as we understand it, or 
something related to guns. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I mean I would have thought that Mr 
Ntshepe would have known if there were good reasons for 
urgency? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and he discounted that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he discounted that.  Did you know, 
Mr Burger even with the -  within the context of guns that 
you are talking about, the testing of guns or whatever, do 
you know what the deadline was as at the time of this 
memo, namely 29 October 2015?  Because if you don’t 
know the deadline you – if you don’t know the deadline you 
20 
might not be able to say that the deadline would not have 
been matched if there was a delay of a week, but if you 
know that the deadline was within the three days after this 
then you would know that you couldn’t afford that deadline 
but do you know what the deadline was? 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 133 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:   Chair I cannot – the deadline for one thing 
wasn’t the urgency, there was say a month later or I cannot 
recall, but there was a month or two months later the gun 
had to be, we actually didn’t ship it because of the 
...[indistinct], we flew it to the country because of the 
urgency so there was an overall time pressure to make this 
happen.  On top of that I can recall that after we received 
the components and we tested the gun there was a problem 
in the ammunition feeder for this gun, so then we had to 
rectify that and there were extreme pressures. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the long and short of your evidence 
in this regard is – I must just check with you – that you 
know that there were some time pressures. 
MR BURGER:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you don’t know whether those time 
pressures were such that a delay of a week would have 
made a difference or not, that you don’t know, or do you? 
MR BURGER:   Chair we almost didn’t make it and the 
reason was not because of the late placement of this 
particular item, what happened was we received all the 
20 
items, we assembled the gun, we took it down to the gate 
to get it tested and it didn’t function properly, and we had 
to redo certain things.  So there was and it almost didn’t 
work, and we almost didn’t make the ship or the flight for 
this, but at the time you could have argued but in your 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 134 of 139 
 
schedule maybe there is a week to sort this in and I would 
have conceded to you yes you are correct Chair there is 
that week, we could have done that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR BURGER:   But in hindsight in this case it didn’t affect 
that there was a functioning problem, it was a good thing 
that we didn’t waste time, so – but I cannot say a week 
would have worked or wouldn’t have worked, I just 
remember very strongly the time pressure 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that’s fine. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I just ask your indulgence just to 
ask a follow up question just to try and get some clarity on 
the issue.   Ms Malahlela gave evidence as I recall in 
explaining the memorandum that she wrote at page A24, do 
you have that? 
MR BURGER: Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   A24, that this was specifically asking 
for approval retrospectively for the MOA for the single 
supplier contract, and what she was doing in paragraph – 
in the first paragraph that refers to the T5 demo was simply 
20 
reminding 
Mr 
Mlambo 
that 
previously 
he 
had 
given 
approval for the T5 demo as she says in giving the 
approval for the deviation from the normal procurement 
process and list of supplies to be used for the T5 demo the 
Group Supply Chain Executive, that is Mr Mlambo, gave an 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 135 of 139 
 
instruction that DLS must first explore how Denel Vehicle 
Systems ...[indistinct] ratio and LNT inter-group companies 
will be used in the project on condition that they meet the 
quality, then she reminds him of what appears in the supply 
chain policy and then says having identified a need for a 
single source supplier for the supply of steel components 
in May 2015 DLS signed an MOA. 
 
So the first paragraph was simply referring to a 
historic fact that  had already occurred, namely he had 
approved previously the special procurements by way of a 
10 
deviation 
for 
the 
T5 
demo 
but 
subject 
to 
specific 
conditions, try and deal with him them in-house, so she 
was just reminding him of his approach previously which 
said don’t go outside the group if you can go inside the 
group, and now she is saying after reminding him of what 
the supply chain policy says in that regard requiring a 
sound business case to be made out, she now says there 
has already been an MOA recently, in May 2015, five 
months earlier, with VR Laser for the single supplier and 
on the basis of what you have already Mr Mlambo raised in 
20 
relation to the earlier approve for T5 and in relation to 
bearing in mind what the procurement policy requires may 
we now ask you for approval, well she is saying not herself 
but Exco has said may we now ask for your approval, not 
of the T5 demo contract, but of placing orders under the 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 136 of 139 
 
MOA for single supplier, that is my understanding.  Am I 
correct?  
MR BURGER:   Chair I never saw it like that, I cannot 
recall any retrospective request for approval of a single 
source agreement, that I facilitated. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But Mr Burger may I take you back to 
the minutes if my colleagues can just help me with the 
reference. 
MR BURGER:   Sorry Chair, I remember about the conflict 
between the single source agreement and ...[intervenes] 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER;   That I remember. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR BURGER;   And that because of that conflict but my 
understanding was to – there is a conflict so placing an 
order now there is a conflict, can we please get approval to 
place the order. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, but that is a conflicted – that 
relates to the MOA or the single source ...[intervenes]  
MR BURGER:   Correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And because how people formulated 
it was the framework for the debate was which takes 
precedence, which trumps the other, does the MOA trump 
the procurement policy or does the procurement policy 
trump the MOA, not so? 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 137 of 139 
 
MR BURGER:   Yes, Chair but in the placement of a 
specific order, that was my understanding. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But in the placement of any order 
going forward, not so? 
MR BURGER:   Ja, I do not recall this as being a general 
paper and I haven’t studied it enough, I see it now again, 
but yes because it was a conflict, I remember that there 
was conflict between the MOA and the procurement policy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, if I can take you back to the 
minutes, page 672 in the same  bundle. 
10 
MR BURGER:   672? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Under the heading resolution, 
committee took a decision that the MOU takes precedence 
over the GSCE’s condition and the Group Supply Chain 
policy.   Now the condition related to the T5 demo 
previously not so?  That was his condition correct? 
MR BURGER:    Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes and the Group Supply Chain 
Policy and the DLS Supply Chain Procedure and that is 
why – that is why Mr Mlambo was then approached after 
20 
this resolution was taken in Ms Malahlele’s memo so it 
specifically related to requesting approval by the Group 
Supply Chain Executive Mr Mlambo of orders being placed 
under the MOA single supply contract, is that right? 
MR BURGER:   It is correct Chair but I thought this was 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 138 of 139 
 
driven by a specific requirement and not a generalistic 
discussion.   I confirm to all of this but I just – I was under 
the impression it was driven a specific requirement which 
is not defined. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, thank you very much, thank 
you Chair, no further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Crous do you still want to – would 
you like to re-examine? 
MR CROUS:  Chairman I have no re-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have no re-examination. 
10 
MR CROUS:   No I don’t. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you very much.  Thank you 
very much Mr Burger for coming to give evidence, if we 
need you to come back we will ask you and I am sure you 
will come back, but thank you very much for availing 
yourself and you are now excused. 
MR BURGER:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair that is all we have for you in 
formal open session today, may we then ask for the matter 
20 
to stand down and may I approach you chambers just to 
confirm arrangements in relation to the two remaining 
witnesses in the Denel stream. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay no that is fine.  We are going 
to adjourn for the day and tomorrow I will be hearing – this 
24 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 311 
 
Page 139 of 139 
 
is for the benefit of the public, I will be hearing evidence 
relating to OEH, the OEH Company, that evidence started 
yesterday, it will continue tomorrow and for the rest of the 
week. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 25 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
