 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 345 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 202 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 3 of 202 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 18 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Freund, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV FREUND SC:  We are indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let us start. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair as I – as I 
believe you know we propose to lead today four witnesses.  
We are going to be departing a little from the – the nature 
10 
of the evidence heard thus far by this stream. 
 
Thus far we have really been hearing from people in 
and around Parliament about what did and did not happen 
at certain time. 
 
The – the focus today will be slightly different.  The 
focus will be from what one might call observers who as it 
were wish to contribute to the work of the commission by 
giving their analysis as to what they believe went wrong if 
anything went wrong and what they believe perhaps could 
be suggested as potential measures to help to address the 
20 
problem from occurring in future. 
 
We will be starting with the evidence of Mr Lawson 
Naidoo from CASAC.  We will then hear the evidence of 
Professor of Corder.  We will then hear the evidence of a 
representative of the Parliamentary Monitoring Group Ms 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 4 of 202 
 
Jennifer Rault-Smith and then finally this afternoon the 
evidence of Mr Lewis from Corruption Watch. 
 
Chair with your leave I wish to call the first witness 
Mr Lawson Naidoo? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:  His – his documents are to be found in 
Volume 3 from page 204 and following it is Exhibit ZZ10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you I have got it.  Thank you.  Mr 
Naidoo are you there? 
MR NAIDOO:  Good morning Chair yes I am thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning how are you this morning? 
MR NAIDOO:  Very well Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much and thank you for 
availing yourself to try and help the commission.  I know 
that you and your organisation are big supporters of the 
commission and its work and we appreciate that very much 
so I am very grateful that you have availed yourself to try 
and assist the commission. 
MR NAIDOO:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Sorry Chair I was just going to say I 
suggest that maybe we should ask for Mr Naidoo to be 
sworn in. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 5 of 202 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  The Registrar will now either 
administer the oath or the affirmation.  Mr Naidoo if you 
speak then you will come back onto the screen. 
MR NAIDOO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR NAIDOO:  I am here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja the – the Registrar will administer 
either the oath or affirmation depending which one you 
prefer. 
MR NAIDOO:  The affirmation Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR NAIDOO:  Parmananda Lawson Naidoo. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to making the 
prescribed affirmation? 
MR NAIDOO:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you affirm that the evidence you will give 
will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing but 
the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, I truly 
affirm. 
20 
MR NAIDOO:  I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much – thank you very 
much.  Mr Freund you may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Naidoo is it 
correct that under your direction; your organisation the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 6 of 202 
 
Council 
for 
the 
Advancement 
of 
the 
South 
African 
Constitution commonly known as CASAC prepared and 
submitted a report to the commission? 
MR NAIDOO:  That is – that is correct Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And is that the report we find in Bundle 
3 at page 206 and following? 
MR NAIDOO:  That is – that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  It is a report entitled Why the National 
Assembly failed to exercise effective oversight in respect 
of state capture, is that correct? 
10 
MR NAIDOO:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And is it correct if you go to Bundle 3 
page 
205.1 
and 
following 
that 
you 
signed 
a 
brief 
confirmatory affidavit in relation to that report? 
MR NAIDOO:  I did indeed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair on that basis may I move that 
Exhibit ZZ10 be admitted as – formally as an exhibit before 
this commission? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Parmananda Lawson 
Naidoo together with its annexures and the affidavit 
20 
appears at page 205.1 is admitted and will be marked as 
Exhibit ZZ10. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair may I proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Mr Naidoo I just want to take you 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 7 of 202 
 
briefly through one – aspects in the confirmatory affidavit 
itself.  It is correct is it not that you are the Executive 
Secretary of CASAC? 
MR NAIDOO:  That is correct Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Perhaps if you describe very briefly 
what that job entails and the nature and duration of your 
experience in CASAC and I emphasise very briefly? 
MR 
NAIDOO: 
 
Indeed. 
 
CASAC 
was 
established 
in 
September 2010 I have been the Executive Secretary of 
the organisation since its inception for over ten years now.  
10 
And CASAC’s main focus is to promote the basis of our 
constitutional democracy in South Africa focusing primarily 
on issues of public accountability, constitutional awareness 
and – and broadly holding public officials to account and 
seeking 
to 
strengthen 
the 
work 
of 
institutions 
of 
governments. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And in that – for that purpose and in 
that 
capacity 
you 
together 
with 
colleagues 
were 
instrumental in preparing the report that we are going to be 
discussing this morning? 
20 
MR NAIDOO:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And the ultimate objective as I 
understand it at the report you tried to analyse as it were – 
try to understand if something went wrong why that 
happened from the perspective of effective Parliamentary 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 8 of 202 
 
oversight and then drawing on that you make suggestions 
as to what issues should be considered to try to address 
the problem.  Would that be a fair summary? 
MR NAIDOO:  That would be a fair summary yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Just for the purposes of the record if I 
could take you to page 205.2 and to paragraph 5 of your 
confirmatory affidavit?  The report we are going to come to 
shortly we have already referred to I just draw attention to 
the fact that you indicate in your confirmatory affidavit that 
there are annexures to your report.   
10 
 
The first of which is the report by Professor Huge 
Corder and others and that is not annexed to your affidavit 
because it is appears elsewhere in the bundle.  Chair that 
is in the Reference Bundle from pages 49 and following. 
 
And then secondly you annex as annexure 2 a 
document that discusses the dedicate – a dedicated anti-
corruption agency that is annexed to your report and that 
Chair is at pages 257 to 267.  Is that correct Mr Naidoo? 
MR NAIDOO:  That is indeed correct Chair – Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Now I would like to turn 
20 
now to the substance of your report and if I may say so it 
starts with the very helpful set of references both to the 
statutory underpinning and constitutional underpinning of 
oversight and some of the principles that emerged from the 
leading case law particularly case law of the constitutional 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 9 of 202 
 
court on Parliamentary oversight.   
 
And you have endeavoured to sketch the legal 
background.  Is that correct? 
MR NAIDOO:  That is correct yes we have put into context 
the issues of Parliamentary responsibilities with regards to 
executive oversight. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now in the interest of time and bearing 
in mind that the Chair as the Deputy Chief Justice is 
reasonably familiar with the provisions of the constitution 
and of the case law to which you refer I am not going to be 
10 
taking you in detail through that material although we are 
grateful because it does assist to kind of focus the mind. 
 
But if I can just ask you generally if one – if one 
looks at the question of the adequacy of the powers and 
the adequacy of the legal instruments – well let us stop – 
let me rephrase this.   
 
Whether the existing legislation in your opinion 
confers 
sufficiently 
clearly 
adequate 
powers 
on 
the 
legislature to exercise oversight, what in broad view is 
your view? 
20 
MR NAIDOO:  I would agree with that the – about the 
constitution 
and 
legislation 
as 
well 
as 
the 
rules 
of 
Parliament – the rules of the National Assembly with the 
00:10:38 that provide a clear guidance on what is required 
of Parliament; what its responsibilities are in respect of 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 10 of 202 
 
oversight of the executive and organs of state and I think 
the law and the rules are clear in that regard and so we – 
our view that the constitution, the law and the rules are not 
an impediment in themselves to effective oversight. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  And in addition to focussing on 
the constitution its statutory provisions and rules of the 
National Assembly.  You have also drawn attention to 
Parliament’s own governing policy document the oversight 
and accountability model and you deal with that from 
paragraph 47 and following of your report, is that correct? 
10 
MR NAIDOO:  That is correct. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 And 
again 
Chair 
just 
for 
your 
convenience the – that is to be found in the Reference 
Bundle pages 1 to 48.  And what you do in the next few 
pages of your – of your report is to highlight some of the 
core views and commitments that one finds in what has 
become known as the OVAC Report adopted by Parliament 
in 2004, is that correct? 
MR NAIDOO:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So I want to pick up the threads from 
20 
that point onwards in your affidavit.  In other words I am 
going from page 223 and following in Bundle 3 and what 
you do over the few pages that follow is to draw attention 
to certain of the key decisions of the Constitutional Court 
on the question of – of Parliamentary Oversight.   
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 11 of 202 
 
 
Perhaps you might like to just summarise what you 
see to be the very gist of the – the right or the duty of 
Parliament to exercise oversight over the executive as it 
emerges from that case law in your understanding. 
MR NAIDOO:  Well I think what the jurisprudence tells us 
and I think it is quite instructive for Parliament is that there 
are matters that have come before the courts particularly 
matters that have come before the courts in recent years 
have clarified what the constitutional provisions regarding 
Parliament’s 
responsibilities 
are. 
 
How 
members 
of 
10 
Parliaments are expected to exercise those powers of 
oversight and scrutinising executive action and giving 
meaning and content to those rights and responsibilities 
and those matters have on occasion come before the 
courts because there were disputes in Parliament as 
between political parties as to what the nature of those 
responsibilities were and how Parliament should in a 
constitutionally compliant manner execute its mandates.  
So I think the jurisprudence from the courts is very 
instructive in elaborating on what the responsibilities of 
20 
members of Parliament are. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And it seems from a reading of your 
report that you seem to be of the view that the very fact 
that a number of these cases were considered to be 
necessary 
demonstrates 
that 
there 
had 
been 
some 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 12 of 202 
 
measure of failure of – of oversight which is what prompted 
the very decisions that you sight. 
MR NAIDOO:  Indeed that is true and we make the point I 
think that it is the very failure of Parliament to resolve 
many of these issues which concerns the workings and the 
function being of Parliament which Parliament is given the 
discretion in terms of the constitution to develop its own 
rules and orders to ensure smooth functioning.  But where 
there are disputes and they have not been capable of 
being resolved within the political structures of Parliament 
10 
they have landed up before the courts. 
 
 
Some of those issues are perhaps issues that are 
not appropriate for judicial judgment insofar as issues such 
as the use of un-parliamentary language and the like which 
are matters we do not necessarily sight in this report but 
which are matters that have come before the courts. 
 
Others have been more fundamental issues about – 
about oversight about what the powers of the Speaker are 
in relation to certain matters that come before Parliament 
when motions of no confidence and 00:15:20 motions need 
20 
to be discussed and what the powers of Parliament are in 
relation to reports from Chapter Nine Institutions and 
specifically reports from the Office of Public Protector. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes and I think one of the most famous 
cases to which you refer is the case that arose out of the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 13 of 202 
 
Public Protector ’s Report on Nkandla and the manner in 
which Parliament through various structures dealt with that 
resulting in a finding by the Constitutional Court that 
Parliament had failed in its constitutional obligations of 
oversight.  Do you want to just touch on that very, very 
briefly? 
MR NAIDOO:  Again yes I mean this was a seminal case in 
any respects and it was the failure of Parliament to 
properly deal with the report of the Public Protector type of 
securing comforts relating to former President Zuma’s 
10 
residence and Parliament’s failure to properly process that 
report and instead seeking to substitute its own findings of 
that of the Public Protector as found by the Constitutional 
Court to be unconstitutional and a dereliction of the 
constitution 
responsibility 
of 
Parliament 
to 
hold 
the 
President to account. 
 
So I think again coming back to what I said earlier it 
is a judgment that was instructive to Parliament in how it 
needs to go about in exercising its oversight mandates.  
And I think the issue that arises is – is what has 
20 
Parliament done in relation to many of these judgments to 
absorb 
them 
– 
the 
advice 
and 
judgments 
of 
the 
Constitutional Court in many respects and adapt its 
workings to conform with – with those complications of the 
law. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 14 of 202 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  Now I would like to take you to 
page 228 of your – of your report where you commenced 
dealing with something that becomes a theme that runs 
through this report which is to focus on the role of the 
Speaker of the National Assembly. 
 
Now I do not wish and I do not believe the 
commission wishes to get amerced into controversy about 
a whole number of issues of detail here of the Speaker ’s 
role in any particular incident. 
 
But you have some views on the general principle of 
10 
Speaker impartiality and I would be interested if you could 
just elaborate on that please.  
MR NAIDOO:  Yes I mean this is drawn in part from a 
previous report that was commission by CASAC in 2015 
which looked at the state of Parliament at that time and I 
think in – in contextualising how Parliament has responded 
to many of these issues in the period that we are referring 
to which is largely the tenure of the Fifth Parliament from 
2014 to 2019. 
 
I think it is important to place it in the context of the 
20 
disruptions that occurred in Parliament following the 2014 
national elections and Parliament’s difficulty in dealing 
with those issues as they arose.  
 
And 
many 
of 
those 
brought 
into 
sharp 
focus 
questions around the impartiality of the Speaker in dealing 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 15 of 202 
 
with those protests within Parliament; within dealing with 
requests for Parliament to properly exercise its oversight in 
particular over the President. 
 
And so I think those respects and you know this is – 
it 
is 
common 
knowledge 
being 
reported 
you 
know 
extensively by the media the role of the Speaker was 
called into question.  The impartiality of the Speaker was 
called into question.  Suggestions that the Speaker was 
using or – her power to protect the President and you know 
it – it resulted in – I think in the first time in certainly the 
10 
history of the democratic Parliaments in South Africa of a 
motion 
of 
no 
confidence 
being 
brought 
against 
the 
Speaker. 
 
So I think that – that sets the context and the 
concerns that were being raised by members of Parliament; 
opposition party 00:19:41 borders of the South African 
public because the role of the Speaker as an impartial 
Chair of the most important plenary forum of our elected 
representatives needs to be a position that is beyond 
approach that needs to exercise functions independently 
20 
and impartially. 
 
And in the South African context one accepts the 
fact that the Speaker is drawn from a political party and is 
a politician and a member of Parliament in his or her own 
right.  
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 16 of 202 
 
 
But how the exercise the power as the Speaker 
should be in a manner that commands the respect from 
across all of the parties that are represented in that 
assembly. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And is it your assessment that – that 
this issue is – is relevant when one considers the extent to 
which 
Parliament 
succeeded 
or 
failed 
in 
the 
Fifth 
Parliament in holding the executive to account in relation 
to allegations of alleged state capture; alleged corruption. 
MR NAIDOO:  It did and I think you know we made the 
10 
point in the report that it was the conduct of the state that 
contributed towards the dis-functioning of Parliament that 
created the grounds for this – the breakdown of trust 
between political parties in the National Assembly. 
 
You know Parliament is – is a political forum there 
is 
always 
going 
to 
be 
contestation, 
robust 
debate, 
disagreements and it is the role of the Speaker to mediate 
those 
in 
the 
interests 
of 
finding 
a 
resolution 
and 
Parliament coming to a decision on matters. 
 
But when the Speaker acts in a manner that is 
20 
partisan and it seen to be favouring one political party or 
members of the executive then it undermines not just the 
confidence of other political parties but of the public at 
large in the constitutional ability of that institution to do 
what it is constitutionally mandated to do. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 17 of 202 
 
 
And I think that has brought Parliament into a – 
Parliament’s reputation into question and it is something 
that cannot be healthy for a democracy in which Parliament 
is 
the 
primary 
mechanism 
or 
institution 
that 
holds 
executive power to account. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I want to change focus.  This 
commission has already heard evidence and you also deal 
in your report with the – with the central feature of our 
constitutional order which is our closed list proportional 
representation system and the impact that that has on – on 
10 
the exercise as it were of conscience by members of 
Parliament when voting on issues of high national concern. 
 
And you focus if I can refer you to paragraph 69 or 
your report?  You draw attention to two similar and related 
provisions in the constitution.  They are Section 47(3)C 
and I believe you deal elsewhere with it is 100 and – 106 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page did you say Mr Freund I am 
sorry.  What page of the report? 
ADV FREUND SC:  200 – 232 in Volume 3. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Which is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Which is page 27 of the report itself 
and I am at paragraph 69.  And that is one of the places in 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 18 of 202 
 
which you – you deal with this issue.  There you refer to 
Section 47(3)C of the Constitution and that is the provision 
that provides that a person loses membership of the 
National Assembly if that person (and then I leave out 
some words and come to sub-paragraph C) ceases to be a 
member of the party that nominated that person as a 
member of the assembly and it continues.   
 
And there is a – there is a similar provisions in 
Section 106(3)C of the Constitution.  Let me just read that.  
It provides likewise a person loses membership of a 
10 
Provincial Legislature on terms really substantially the 
same as what I have just read to you. 
 
Now would you like to comment on this issue 
generally the problem of – of party discipline in a PR 
system and then move on and – and the submissions you 
wish to make on the advisability and relevance of those 
particular provisions of the constitution? 
MR NAIDOO:  Well these two sections you know Section 
47(3)C 
deals 
with 
the 
membership 
of 
the 
National 
Assembly and 106(3)C deals with it in a context of 
20 
Provincial Legislatures the same provision. 
 
But what it really recognises is that in the place 
closed list – closed party list system that we currently have 
the seat in Parliament or in the Provincial Legislature 
belongs to the political or party and not to the NP that is 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 19 of 202 
 
allocated that seats and therefore should a representative 
cease to be a member of the political party 00:25:13 list 
they 
were 
nominated 
to 
the 
Legislature 
in 
question 
probably lose that seat for whatever reason whether they 
resign from the party or are expelled from the party and 
this seems to place significant power in the hands of party 
bosses in that they can use that as a mechanism to get 
members of Parliament to tow the line as it were and to 
follow the party line on various issues. 
 
Now in many respects that is not an issue because 
10 
in any electoral system political parties put forward a 
manifesto and the electorate votes on the basis of that 
manifesto and if it is an issue of policy and a party uses its 
power to do that it is commonly called using the whip to 
get party numbers to support a party position on a policy 
matter. 
 
Now in that context it is not a – it is certainly not 
problematic that is the very essence of a democracy that 
the party winning an election has the right to implement its 
policy proposals in its manifesto.  But where that power is 
20 
used in Parliament not on issues of substantive questions 
but to abuse procedural rules and to use the majority of a 
political party to stifle or shut down debate and not allow a 
debate to even happen that certainly undermines the role 
of Parliament and Parliament’s ability to execute its 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 20 of 202 
 
constitutional mandates. 
 
If a debate were on a particular issue were to 
happen – if the – an enquiry into corruption or alleged 
corruption in state owned companies it is conducted by 
Parliament and this disputes about whether there was 
corruption or not and so on the substantive decision taken 
after an investigation can certainly be along party lines but 
that – the issue would have been heard in public and the 
public would be able to make a – to make a finding on – of 
their own on the outcome of that process.   
10 
 
So a distinction between the procedural rules and 
the substantive issue is one I wish to highlight. 
 
But I think the electoral system as we currently 
have 
it 
chose 
– 
had 
that 
as 
being 
manipulated 
to 
undermine the role of Parliament and inhibit Parliament 
from truly exercising its oversight mandate. 
 
Now you know almost simultaneously with making 
the submission to the commission which I think we did in 
July last year just a few weeks before that we have – had 
an important judgment from the Constitutional Court in the 
20 
New Nation Movement 
Matter which declared certain 
sections of electoral acts inconsistent with the constitution  
and it has given Parliament 24 months in which to amend 
those sections of the electoral act which is likely to see us 
move away from a closed party list system because the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 21 of 202 
 
amendments of the electoral act will have to make 
provision for independent candidates to contest national 
and provincial elections in the – in a manner that perhaps 
will be the same as in which they contest elections at local 
government level at the moment. 
 
But it does mean that Parliament is now ceased 
with the issue of considering how to amend the electoral 
act 
and 
whether 
a 
new 
electoral 
model 
needs 
to 
implemented in South Africa. 
 
The New Nation Movement Judgment comes on the 
10 
back of significant pressure in recent years for at least a 
discussion of – around electoral reform and the need to 
change its current system because it places too much 
power in the hands of party officials over the conduct of 
NP’s. 
 
It was an issue that was raised in the task team that 
was chaired by Dr Van Zyl Slabbert in the early 2000’s.  it 
was an issue that was reflected upon in the independent 
panel report in Parliament in 2008 or 2009 and again in the 
high 
level 
panel 
report 
that 
was 
chaired 
by 
former 
20 
President Kgalema Motlanthe in 2018.  So the time is 
certainly ripe for electoral reform. 
ADV FREUND SC:  If I could just stop you there because I 
think the report of the high level panel of 2018/19 probably 
has not received a great deal of attention at least in these 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 22 of 202 
 
hearings but there once again a – a structure – a 
committee appointed by Parliament to review Parliament’s 
own success in the democratic era once again proposed 
that 
serious 
consideration 
should 
be 
given 
to 
elect 
...[indistinct – cut off] along the lines first proposed in the 
Van Zyl Slabbert Report.  Would that be correct? 
MR NAIDOO:   That is indeed correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the nub of the argument, as I 
understand it, is that some type – there is no attack on the 
principle of proportional representation but what some 
10 
proponents are arguing is that it needs to be married 
somehow with some form of constituency system so that 
the MP has a relationship with the constituency and 
therefore has sort of powerbase independent from that 
purely of party bosses.   
 
Would that be a fair summary of the gist of your 
argument? 
MR NAIDOO:   It would be.  I think the issue – you know, 
the issue that have arisen here is firstly is that the 
Constitution requires that the results of the election must 
20 
in general resulting in proportionality to give effect to the 
wishes of the electorate. 
 
So a simple constituency model where they first 
ask post-system.  The rest meets the model, if you like, 
would 
fall 
foul 
of 
that 
constitutional 
requirement 
of 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 23 of 202 
 
proportionality. 
 
But within that, there are various other options 
available including the one that was recommended by the 
Van Zyl Slabbert Task Team in 2002 which was multi-
member constituencies using a closed party yes-system but 
a 
multi-member 
constituency 
in 
which 
proportional 
representation is applied rather than closed past-post.   
 
And the view of the Van Zyl Slabbert’s majority 
report was that in time one should look towards to an open 
yes-system where voters get to ranked the kind of – that is 
10 
individually and therefore are able to make a closer 
preference for the people that you would like to see in 
Parliament. 
 
Having 
said 
that, 
I 
think 
experience 
from 
elsewhere in the world tell us that simply changing the 
electoral system does not deliver accountability and it does 
not in any sense necessarily reduce the power of political 
parties over their MP’s whether they are in a defined 
single-member 
constituency 
or 
a 
multi-member 
constituency. 
20 
 
Because the reality that political parties are a 
central 
feature 
of 
our 
democracy 
and 
many 
other 
democracies around the world and the... 
 
You know, so it is a mechanism to enhance 
accountability but it needs – it is – what I would say is a 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 24 of 202 
 
necessary step to take but in itself it is not sufficient to 
necessarily enhance accountability. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, that is just the point I wanted to 
come to because what I think your reports says and to 
mean in the past is, that it is necessary albeit not sufficient 
but you think it is something whose time has come albeit it 
is not a panacea.   
 
And I do not think anybody is arguing with the 
proposition that it is not a panacea.  It is not going to sort 
out all the problems but what I would like to focus on is 
10 
why you think it is a necessary reform if we are going to 
enhance accountability? 
MR NAIDOO:   Well, you know, and this is an area where 
CASAC has done some work and we published a paper also 
in 2015 I think.  It was prepared and written by Professor 
Steven Friedman that looked at the issue of alternative 
electorate models and lead back to accountability.   
 
And the view is that whatever the electorate 
system we choose that there needs to be a change in 
political culture of holding political parties and individual 
20 
representatives to account. 
 
And experience in South African tells us, and I 
have made reference to the electorate model that operates 
at a local government level, where we have constituencies, 
where we have single-member or with a single council 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 25 of 202 
 
allocated to that. 
 
And it is clear that at the local government level 
that has not have an impact in terms of enhancing 
accountability which is why that we say that it is a not a 
sufficient mechanism on its own. 
 
But I think the broader issue but why it is 
necessary to revisit the electoral system and CASAC does 
not have a particular preference for a particular model that 
we need to adopt, we believe that a national debate on the 
issue is necessary to identify the model most appropriate 
10 
for a democracy as it now exists in the 27-years after 
freedom. 
 
We understand the necessity at the time of having 
a simple close-party PR system in 1994 but we think that – 
the experience has told us that this electorate model, and I 
think it is demonstrated by the issue we discussed with the 
vote of Parliament. 
 
And it is said as an inhibitor towards the execution 
of responsibilities by members of Parliament or to behold 
them to the party that they – that has nominated them to 
20 
Parliament.  In many cases it did not gel. 
 
What means from a member of Parliament who 
chooses to step out line, be disciplined by that political 
party, firstly expulsion from the party and therefore a loss 
of income and livelihood. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 26 of 202 
 
 
So these are serious issues that inhibits members 
of Parliament using their own discretion to decide what is 
in the best interest of the country, how to executive their 
constitutional and legal mandates to the electorate and to 
serve the interest of the electorate rather than of the party 
officials that have placed them in those positions. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in the course of your diversions 
over the last few minutes, you have said that electorate 
reform would be advisable but I think you have said that 
political culture is at the heart of the problem. 
10 
 
And perhaps if you could just elaborate on what 
concerns about political culture insofar as it is relevant to 
this issue that the Commission is seized with which is 
oversight in relation to allegations of State Capture and 
corruption. 
MR NAIDOO:   Well, the – you know, in our Constitution, 
you know, we speak of an inclusive anticipatory democracy.  
The 
Constitution 
makes 
adequate 
provision 
for 
that 
anticipatory democracy in terms of Parliament that its 
processes that must be open to the public and to the 
20 
media. 
 
There must be public consultation on legislation 
and 
other 
policy 
development 
issues. 
 
And 
so 
the 
democracy we have is not simply one where a voter goes 
to a polling booth once every year five years and make a 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 27 of 202 
 
cross on a ballot paper. 
 
But is being more engaged in the politics and what 
is happening and ensuring, ultimately, that those members 
who are elected to legislatures do what they promised in 
their manifestos which is to increase the level of service 
delivery to people, to ensure that more services are 
available, to ensure that we have a thriving and prosperous 
economy in which people have jobs, do not suffer any 
poverty and so on. 
 
And people have a right to that expectation but 
10 
people have a responsibility that when political parties and 
individual representatives are seemed to be acting against 
that interest, they raise their voices and do so. 
 
So it then becomes a two-way street but political 
parties will only become responsive when we demand that 
of them.   
 
And therefore I place the responsibility on the 
electorate as well as on political parties which need to 
change the culture in which they operate in institutions of 
Parliament to see it as a deliberative forum where, you 
20 
know, you just do not just trap down debate but you 
engage in debate and reach a decision after debate and be 
open to persuasion to compromise and the like, which is a 
feature of a robust democracy. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I take your point about the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 28 of 202 
 
important role of the electorate and the electorate being, 
as it were, demanding and vigilant, but if we focus for the 
moment on political parties themselves and in the nature of 
democracy in whichever party wins a majority it has great 
power over the actual decisions of the Parliament. 
 
Do you wish to comment at all on the question of 
political culture wherein political parties, in particular the 
majority political parties, as a fact of relevance to the 
issues that we are debating? 
MR NAIDOO:   Well, you know, I think we have seen an 
10 
entrenchment of a culture of following the party line and I 
do not think this is an issue that is unique to the majority 
of the ruling party.   
 
I think we see it a number of the larger parties that 
there is a consensus of opinion and an opinion that 
deviates from that, it is marginalised and it is not given 
proper consideration. 
 
So you know this speaks to an issue of internal 
party democracy and internal party tolerance of differences 
of opinion and when those differences are being raised in 
20 
order to enhance the ability of the party to discharge its 
manifestos, 
mandates 
as 
well 
as 
it 
is 
constitutional 
mandate in terms of, for example, issues in the bill of 
rights have been enhancing and the delivery of rights and 
the bill of rights to the people of South Africa. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 29 of 202 
 
 
 
Then 
that 
is 
something 
that 
ought 
to 
be 
welcomed but we see, as I say, across political parties 
where a party line is taken and no deviation from that and 
no debate on that is permitted. 
 
And I think that is the culture that is stifling to the 
developments of our democracy and to the development of 
policies that can really begin to address the fundamental 
challenges that we face. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now can I refer you to paragraph 62 of 
your report, please?  That is at page 227.   
10 
MR NAIDOO:   Did you say 62? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Paragraph 62 at page 227.  Now this is 
an extract from a judgment by Justice Jaftha in the 
Constitutional Court and one of them, various decisions 
that you referred to but it is an extract that you used 
through your report to highlight a theme. 
 
And you quote Justice Jaftha’s as having held the 
following: 
“The 
fact 
that 
members 
of 
the Assembly 
assume through nomination by political parties 
20 
ought to have a limited influence on how they 
exercise 
the 
institutional 
power 
of 
the 
Assembly. 
Where the interest of the political party was 
inconsistent with the Assembly’s objectives, 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 30 of 202 
 
members must exercise the Assembly’s power 
for 
the 
achievements 
of 
the 
Assembly’s 
objectives. 
For example, members may not frustrate the 
realisation of ensuring a government by the 
people if its attainment would harm their 
political party. 
If they were to do so, they would be using the 
institutional power of the Assembly for a 
purpose other than the one for which the 
10 
power was conferred. 
This 
would 
be 
inconsistent 
with 
the 
Constitution.” 
 
Now it seems to me that that bears directly to what 
you have been just talking about a moment ago.  The 
problem of the situation which there can emerge a conflict 
or at least a perceived conflict being in the interest in 
relation to a particular issue of a political party and the 
constitutional duties of members of Parliament. 
 
Do you agree and would you elaborate? 
20 
MR NAIDOO:   Indeed.  I think this excerpt from Justice 
Jaftha has said more eloquently of what I was trying to 
explain a moment ago. 
 
And I think it deals with that very issue of what is 
the ultimate responsibility of the member of Parliament.  
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 31 of 202 
 
Yes, they are – they hung their seats by virtue of political 
party putting them on the list and having them nominated 
and then homely elected but once they are nominated to 
Parliament, they take an oath of office which is again 
prescribed in the Constitution and it is an oath of office to 
uphold the law to do what is in the interest of the country 
and not the political party. 
 
They do not have a take an oath of office, a 
political party.  They may do that within their own political 
party but once you become a member of Parliament that 
10 
constitutional oath of office is what ought to guide and 
direct a member ’s behaviour within that institution. 
 
And I think this excerpt from the judgment from 
Justice Jaftha encapsulates what that actually means, that 
where there is a conflict between what a political party 
asks you to do and what the Constitution asks you to do, 
then the Constitution – your constitutional responsibility 
overwrites that of the political party. 
 
And that is why I say earlier that the current 
electorate system is a great inhibitor on members of 
20 
Parliament 
demonstrating 
that 
we 
have 
a 
law 
of 
independence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well...  I am sorry Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund.  Well, Mr Naidoo, 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 32 of 202 
 
the point of the conflict between what the party may view 
as in its interest which its members of – which it may 
expect its members of Parliament to protect and advance 
and what may be in the interest of the republic is quite an 
important issue. 
 
And there may be cases where – maybe it is quite 
clear where the interest of the republic lays and if the 
party has a different view, it is a situation that could be 
seen 
as 
protecting 
people 
that 
may 
be 
involved 
in 
wrongdoing and so on. 
10 
 
But I would imagine – I imagine that within the 
context of South Africa because while at a certain level we 
can talk in general principles, we have also to talk in terms 
of the specific context of South Africa where there has 
been one majority party in Parliament, in the National 
Parliament from 1994. 
 
It may be quite difficult for a member of the ruling 
party who wants to do the right thing if he or she is told if 
you do this - what he or she regards as the right thing - 
you are going to cause disunity in the party. 
20 
 
Or, he or she is being accused of being factional 
or he or she is being accused or will be accused of not 
showing loyalty to the party or he or she will be accused of 
forgetting that it is the party that brought her or him to 
Parliament. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 33 of 202 
 
 
Or, he or she will be accused of wanting to do 
things that will decrease the number of voters for the party 
in the next election.  You want this party not to be the 
majority party after the next elections.  That kind of talk. 
 
You must tell me if my understanding of your 
evidence is correct.  It seems that where you referred to 
the need for the change of culture, that maybe what you 
are talking about to say we may change a lot of things but 
if we do not... 
 
If there is no change of the culture, and in this 
10 
context one can talk about the culture in a political party, 
there would still be serious difficulties in having proper 
oversight and accountability, the Executive being held 
accountable by Parliament including the majority party. 
 
Is my understanding of your evidence correct? 
MR NAIDOO:   Perhaps let me clarity Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and put it in your own words. 
MR 
NAIDOO: 
 
 
I 
think 
when 
it 
comes 
to 
issues 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And put it in your own words. 
20 
MR NAIDOO:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you want to. 
MR NAIDOO:   I think when it comes to issues of policies.  
So your political parties get elected on the basis of a 
manifesto that they offer to the electorate.   
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 34 of 202 
 
 
And so I am not suggesting that we should do 
away with internal party discipline, far from it.  And it 
would be legitimate for a political party to say:  Well, this 
is the manifesto we put to the electorate and this is the 
manifesto we are going to implement as the majority party. 
 
And 
if 
a 
member 
then 
disagrees 
with 
that 
manifesto position, then the party has every right to 
discipline that member to say:  Well, this is the basis on 
which we were elected. 
 
But when it comes to issues of unconstitutional 
10 
conduct of allegations of illegality, of corruption, of misuse 
of public funds, of maladministration then surely the 
member of Parliament has the right to speak out and not be 
constrained. 
 
In those circumstances, by party disciplined and 
being told that you have to do this regardless of the 
consequences of what that might be that we are ignoring 
issues of corruption, we ignoring issues of the misuse of 
public funds. 
 
After all, Parliament is the primary organ that is 
20 
entrusted with oversights over the expenditure of public 
funds.  Parliament, after all, is an institution that allocates 
to those funds to the Executive and has a responsibility of 
oversight over this stuff. 
 
So I think I would draw that kind of distinction 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 35 of 202 
 
Chair in looking at that issue.  And one does not want to 
undermine or you know the role of political parties and 
their abilities to be able to discipline their members and to 
call them into line and to impose a particular consistent 
with democracy, with the manifesto and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what you say is important and I 
think it is in line with what some of the witnesses have said 
for example Professor Calland, I think. 
 
So it seems to me that what you say and part of 
what Professor Calland said includes this that it may be 
10 
necessary that we try and find a way that accommodates 
legitimate party discipline within the context of members of 
Parliament of a particular political party. 
 
And the need for members of Parliament to be able 
to deal effectively with certain specific and identifiable 
issues such as corruption. 
 
Now obviously, no party is going to come before 
the Commission and say:  We want to be able to tell our 
members in Parliament not to raise issues of corruption.  
Nobody is going to do that. 
20 
 
But what people may do in public and what they 
may do in private sometimes are different things.  So the 
question that arise for me is whether we might – it is 
possible to identify a list of matters where maybe there 
could be consensus among all right thinking people in 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 36 of 202 
 
South Africa, all political parties to say. 
 
If members of Parliament, if it comes to these 
matters, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.  Members of Parliament must be able 
to really do their job the way they believe the interest of 
South Africa dictates.   
 
Or, whether that is going to be too difficult to draw 
the line because a member of Parliament might be saying:  
I am raising issues of corruption against, for example or 
argument sake, the President.   
 
And then maybe the party says:  No, you are 
10 
joining the opposition to try and unseat the ruling the party, 
the ANC for example, for argument sake.  They are starting 
with the President.  It is just a start. 
 
So in brief my question is whether it is possible to 
identify issues where we could all try and get consensus to 
say members of Parliament, if it is these types of matters 
they should be able to deal with them and no party should 
be trying to force them to draw a particular line. 
 
Or, is it just wishful thinking to think that is 
possible? 
20 
MR NAIDOO:   Chair, I think it is a difficult question but my 
response to that would be.  I think we would be able to 
identify certain issues that fall into that category. 
 
I think trying to produce an exhausted list might be 
near impossible and perhaps not necessary but you know I 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 37 of 202 
 
tried in my earlier response to say:  Well, where it involves 
allegations of service misconduct, of criminal conduct and 
corruption, abuse of public resources.  Those are the kinds 
of issues. 
 
And I think, you know, to take your example.  If 
there is an allegation of corruption against the President, 
then surely it is in the interest of the party for that matter 
to be aired and resolved. 
 
And if the President is innocent, it will be find to 
be so and then you move on and you know rather than 
10 
having you know those allegations hanging over the – 
against the person to whom they are made. 
 
So that is the response – that I would argue is the 
responsibility of Parliament.  Once it becomes aware, 
either from members of Parliament, from members of the 
public, 
civil 
society 
or 
the 
media, 
that 
there 
is 
a 
responsibility to take those allegations seriously. 
 
And you know, on some occasions it may be quite 
clear that the allegation is simply being made for political 
motive and there is really no substance behind it and then 
20 
you dispose of it quickly but you have got to deal with the 
issue so that you restore public confidence that the matter 
has been attended to. 
 
And if there is no evidence, it gets dismissed and 
if there is evidence then there must be consequences.  But 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 38 of 202 
 
that I think is the responsibility of Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, in the current electorate 
systems that we have and that – maybe that is partly why 
the suggestion about some combination of the current 
system and electorate and the constituency system is 
being suggested. 
 
In the current system.  If I am a member of the 
ANC and there is this issue about corruption, about the 
President of the country who is the president of the party. 
 
If I speak too much and too harshly in Parliament 
10 
about this, I may be thinking:  You know, the leadership of 
the party is – they are the ones who have a say on who 
gets promoted in terms of career, who finally gets into you 
know the list of Parliament next time after elections. 
 
And I am not going to be enduring myself to them 
very much if I speak to much.  So that too is an inhibiting 
factor.  But I think the point you are making is and I think 
Professor Calland may have made the same point too, is 
you know the constituency system is not a panacea. 
 
It might make a contribution to the problems that 
20 
we have but there may be a way of trying to marry the two 
systems and see how that can work but nobody should 
expect that anything that we come up with will solve all 
challenges that we have. 
 
And maybe that is where the issue of the change 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 39 of 202 
 
of culture becomes important and maybe on the part of a 
particular political party to say we do not want to be 
associated with corruption, for example. 
 
We do not want to be associated with covering up 
corruption and any member of Parliament who is part of our 
party should not do anything that the public will perceive 
as covering corruption.  In our deeds and what we say, we 
must be seen to be anticorruption.   
 
So maybe until you have that kind of situation of 
culture there will be challenges but if we were to have that 
10 
culture, things would be much more easier.  But that might 
take quite some time. 
MR NAIDOO:   Indeed Chair it would take some time.  You 
know, and that is why I said earlier that the you know any 
change of the electorate system would be necessary but 
not a sufficient change to try and develop that kind of 
culture. 
 
In the context, you know, a member of Parliament 
who goes against the party leadership will find that to be a 
very career limiting move and will soon find themselves 
20 
removed. 
 
So you know, to come back to the proposal that we 
consider Section 47(3)(c) that you know within a new 
electoral system, you know, one consideration could be 
that once a member is elected to a legislature, the state 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 40 of 202 
 
belongs to that member to the next election rather 
[indistinct – word cut off] that would give that member the 
freedom to do what they believe is right without the threat 
of expulsion and losing their livelihoods. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Freund. 
MR FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I am 
conscious of time, so I am just going to try and take Mr 
Naidoo very briefly through a few discreet separate points. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine. 
MR FREUND SC:   Firstly, Mr Naidoo, you deal from page 
10 
240 through to 245 with the Corder report and as you are 
aware Professor Corder will be the next witness and no 
doubt he can talk to his own report in some detail but if 
you could just summarise your stance and the stance of 
your organisation to the core arguments made in that 
report and in particular the desirability of legislative reform 
on the question of parliamentary oversight. 
MR NAIDOO:   Thank you, Mr Freund, indeed I would refer  
to the expertise of Professor Corder to come but perhaps 
the reason we have raised this in our report is to go back 
20 
to what we said at the bottom of our report which that there 
was no hindrance in the current roles of the National 
Assembly and the current constitutional and legislative 
environments for parliament to do what is necessary but 
there is a failure to do so, whether it is a failure of political 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 41 of 202 
 
will, commitments a product of the electoral system that we 
have as we have just discussed but it seems to us that 
something more is needed in order to ensure in the short 
term at least until this new culture is hopefully developed 
that there is a compulsion on members of parliament to 
exercise this oversight, responsibility and for that to have 
consequences and it therefore is our view that some of the 
recommendations 
in 
the 
Corder 
report 
include 
an 
Accountability Standards Act may be necessary in order to 
ensure 
that 
parliament 
does 
what 
the 
constitution 
10 
mandates would do and which the rules of the National 
Assembly allow it to do but is not always done.  So we 
would 
certainly 
support 
the 
recommendations 
of 
the 
accountability Standards Act and, in particular, I think 
recommendations that Professor Corder and his team 
would 
take 
with 
regards 
to 
the 
role 
of 
Chapter 
9 
institutions.  This again is a subject of some discussion 
over a long period of time and in a similar manner the Van 
Zyl Slabbert report that we have just discussed there was a 
report commissioned by parliament itself, an ad hoc 
20 
committee and the Chairmanship of the late Professor 
Kader Asmal produced a report in 2007 on Chapter 9 
institutions and how they can – their efficiency and 
effectiveness can be enhanced and I think that is an issue 
that is again a debate, it has a matter that has been sitting 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 42 of 202 
 
with parliament for some years now but now progress has 
been made and I am thinking of a piece of legislation and 
the establishment of dedicated committee to receive and 
deal with reports of Chapter 9 institutions is necessary.   
 
We use the example of SCOPA, the Standing 
Committee of Public Accounts from whom you have heard 
already that we have a dedicated committee to deal with 
reports from the Auditor-General but we do not have 
dedicated committees, you know, they go to the justice 
committee or whatever, but the proposal that there would 
10 
be a Chapter 9 committee, as it were, in parliament to 
process these reports from the Human Rights Commission, 
the Gender Commission, Public Protector, etcetera, would 
be of great assistance to parliament because what they 
provide is a level of oversight and scrutiny of executive 
action at a level of detail and specificity, that is not always 
available to parliament, parliament does not have the 
resources to go into the kind of detail that these Chapter 9 
institutions do and often times complaint from these 
Chapter 9 institutions, they produce reports, they submit 
20 
them to parliament and that is the last anyone ever hears 
of 
them, 
they 
never 
get 
discussed, 
debated, 
the 
recommendations are not considered or even implemented.  
So I think in those regards Professor Corder’s report, 
despite being over 20 years old, I think it still has 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 43 of 202 
 
relevance today and the proposals are worthy of further 
consideration. 
MR FREUND SC:   And then I would like to move forward to 
page 247 of your report where you have a section of 
appointments to key institutions.   
Now again, there will be later evidence from Mr 
Lewis of Corruption Watch on this issue, so I do not want 
to steal all his thunder but just in broad overview what is 
your organisation’s position on the importance of improving 
the manner in which appointments to key institutions are 
10 
effected 
and 
the 
manner 
of 
improving 
parliamentary 
oversight in that regard? 
MR NAIDOO:   I think one of the things we have learnt 
from the knowledge that we now have about state capture, 
the evidence that has been led before this commission, is 
how key institutions have got task with fighting corruption, 
were 
weakened 
during 
the 
state 
capture 
years 
with 
individuals being appointed to head those institutions 
particularly those in the law enforcement sector in order to 
deliberately weaken them and undermine the capacity to 
20 
execute their mandates. 
 
So we support the proposals that are made by 
Corruption Watch and the Institute for Security Studies that 
there should be greater transparency and openness in 
these processes of appointment to key institutions such as 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 44 of 202 
 
the NPA, SAPS, the Hawks, IPID and others and that it 
should be parliamentary process rather than within the 
[indistinct] 06.24 of the executives because we have seen 
as a result of the ability of the executives to make those 
appointments without reference to parliament, people are 
appointed who ultimately end up serving the interests of 
the executive rather than the interests of the legislative 
mandate. 
 
So we propose that a more open, competitive and 
transparent process be conducted by parliament in full 
10 
view of the public so that if it is properly open and 
transparent 
process 
the 
public 
would 
have 
greater 
confidence in those individuals who are appointed to lead 
these institutions and know exactly that their capabilities, 
skills and expertise are in relation to those issues.  So we 
used the example, I think, of the process that was followed 
late in 2018, with be appointment of National Director of 
Public Prosecutions which deviated from the past where 
although that power in terms of the constitution and the 
law rests with the President to make an appointment, a 
20 
President established a panel to advise him on that 
appointment and that process was conducted and I think 
that has enhanced the credibility of the appointee and the 
institution that she now leads. 
MR FREUND SC:   Alright.  A point of relatively small detail 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 45 of 202 
 
you touch on in paragraph 119 of your report, page 249 of 
bundle 3.  There have been a number of persons who have 
expressed the opinion in this stream of evidence before the 
Commission that having regard to the importance of the 
roles 
played 
by 
chairpersons 
of 
portfolio 
committees 
consideration should be given leaving aside the current 
exception of SCOPA to providing for a more proportionate 
distribution of chairs.  I see from your report that that is a 
view that CASAC supports, is that correct?  
MR NAIDOO:   Well, it is a view that we believe needs to 
10 
be considered by parliament.  You know, this is our - you 
know, venture to say a highly controversial issue of – it is 
a [indistinct] 08.44 but I think if we look at the context of 
the particular circumstances in which we find ourselves 
within a multi-party democracy but with a dominant party 
and to give – or to instil greater public confidence in 
parliament’s ability to executive its mandate and to be 
seen as a properly multi-party body in which all voices are 
accommodated, 
parliament 
perhaps 
should 
give 
consideration to this issue.  It is not a point that, you 
20 
know, I think we are making particularly strongly but we 
are saying it is a matter of consideration. 
 
But on that point there is an associated point that I 
would like to make and this is about the presidium of 
Presiding Officers in parliament.  From the early days of 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 46 of 202 
 
this parliament, of the democratic parliament, there was 
always a member of the opposition, one of the opposition 
parties to serve as part of that presidium.  In the days of 
government of national unity it was the role of the deputy 
speaker that came from an opposition party.   
Subsequent to that, other member of opposition 
parties were appointed as house chairs or chairs of 
committees or some such position and in recent times we 
see that all of the members of the presidium are drawn 
from the majority party and once again this gives this 
10 
perception to the public that it is the majority party that is 
controlling everything in parliament and I think if there 
were to be somewhere a presentation from opposition 
parties amongst that presidium it would give the semblance 
of a multiparty democracy in which the voices of the 
opposition members are equally respects.  So I think that 
is a proposal that we will make strongly than that of 
committee chairs, per se. 
MR FREUND SC:   Then I would just like to deal because 
you stress it so much in your report the issue of a 
20 
dedicated anticorruption agency.  Now it seems to me this 
strays 
perhaps 
slightly 
from 
the 
current 
focus 
on 
parliamentary 
oversight 
but 
you 
have 
prepared 
and 
submitted an updated detailed report, and I am not going 
to take you into the detail, on the need for a single 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 47 of 202 
 
dedicated anticorruption agency.  If you would just talk to 
that extremely briefly and in summary? 
MR NAIDOO:   Certainly.  I think this follows on from the 
question we just dealt with a few moments ago about the 
appointment of heads of key institutions, particularly 
institutions in the law enforcement arena and this I think 
flows from that, is that what we have learnt from recent 
experience with regards to state capture and corruption is 
that the institutions of state were evenly captured and 
therefore prevented from carrying out their responsibilities 
10 
and we have argued for a very long time that what South 
Africa needs is a truly independent anticorruption agency 
that is insulated from undue political influence, that is 
insulated from executive influence, does not report directly 
to the executive and whose members have security of 
tenure, who have adequate resources to execute their 
mandate and report to parliament. 
 
Now these proposals, I am very pleased to say, 
finally 
been 
received 
some 
consideration 
by 
our 
government as it in the process of developing its national 
20 
anticorruption strategy and also the President mentioned in 
his State of the Nation address last week, a national 
anticorruption advisory council soon to be established 
which will be a traditional structure to see us towards some 
sort of independent anticorruption agency.  So I think 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 48 of 202 
 
progress has been made in that regard but I think the 
important point to stress is that we cannot expect the 
institutions at that have failed us in the recent past to 
succeed simply because there are new personnel at the 
head of those institutions for the moment.   
Those personnel could change in future and the  
effectiveness of those institutions would be then be 
similarly weakened so we need to take this opportunity to 
strengthen 
the 
institutional 
capacity 
of 
anticorruption 
agencies 
to 
execute 
their 
mandate 
without 
political 
10 
interference and in the interests of the country at large and 
we believe that the time for a dedicated anticorruption 
agency has come and we are certainly very pleased that it 
is something that government is now seriously considering. 
MR FREUND SC:   And I think a point you made in passing 
was that ultimately it would be accountable to parliament 
rather than to the executive. 
MR NAIDOO:   That is correct, it is a proposal that has 
been made in the national anticorruption strategy and for 
this body that it should not report directly to the executive, 
20 
that it is reporting to parliament with the enhanced 
transparency of that organisation, would enhance its levels 
on accountability to the institution of parliament and that it 
can then be held to account by parliament in an open and 
transparent manner. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 49 of 202 
 
MR FREUND SC:   And finally, Mr Naidoo, your report is 
fairly lengthy, I have cherry picked what seemed to me to 
be some core points to highlight, but I want to give you a 
final opportunity to consider whether there is anything 
material that you would have wished to have had a chance 
to mention but you have not had a chance to mention. 
MR NAIDOO:   Well, firstly, thank you, Mr Freund, for the 
opportunity to share our views on these matters, I think we 
have traversed the main recommendations that we have 
made in our reports to say – the lengthy reports, as you 
10 
say, but I think the recommendations are succinctly put 
towards the end of that report and I think we have 
adequately covered that so unless, you know, there is 
anything you wish to probe further, I think I am happy that 
we have covered the substance of the CASAC submission. 
MR FREUND SC:   Well, thank you, Mr Naidoo, I have no 
further questions, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Well, one or two questions, 
Mr Naidoo, with special reference to the notion of a 
dedicated anticorruption agency.  One of the matters that 
20 
has been in my mind since I was appointed to chair this 
Commission with regard to corruption has been whether 
after we have made whatever findings we will make at the 
end of the work of the Commission whether we should look 
at certain things being changed with regard to how existing 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 50 of 202 
 
bodies that are meant to fight corruption operate.  In other 
words, look at where the weaknesses are and recommend 
that it is strengthened so that they operate in a manner 
that will ensure effective – an effective fight against 
corruption on their part or whether one should look at 
making a recommendation about a new structure or a new 
body and one of my concerns has been that coming up with 
another body that will be an anticorruption body might be 
criticised on the basis that one is multiplying anticorruption 
bodies when there are various bodies that are there to 
10 
fight corruption and one should be strengthening them 
rather.  So there has been that issue that one has been 
thinking about. 
 
So the question that arises in relation to your 
proposal 
about 
a 
dedicated 
anticorruption 
agency 
is 
whether the proposal envisages that some of the existing 
bodies that fight corruption in our country would be 
abolished or they would all continue and this would be an 
additional body. 
MR NAIDOO:   Thank you, Chair.  I think that is an issue 
20 
we discuss in the broader paper that we have submitted as 
an annexure and it has also formed part of discussions 
towards the development of this national anticorruption 
strategy.  I think in brief, if I may respond, that the idea 
that we have a plethora agencies at the moment that deal 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 51 of 202 
 
with – or have either a constitutional or legal mandate to 
fight corruption and that is perhaps one of the problems 
that we have is that we have too many of those institutions 
so 
I 
think 
the 
proposal 
in 
terms 
of 
a 
dedicated 
anticorruption agency but it becomes – that a multi-agency 
approach is replaced with a multi-disciplinary approach 
with an umbrella structure.  So the existing capacity that 
we have and we have significant capacity to combat 
corruption. 
 
There 
is 
capacity 
within 
the 
Special 
Investigation 
Unit, 
there 
is 
capacity 
that 
is 
being 
10 
established 
at 
the 
moment 
within 
the 
investigating 
directorate at the NPA, there is capacity within the Hawks, 
the Financial Intelligence Centre and a range of other 
bodies and it is how (indistinct – recording distorted)  
harnessed those could be more effective, so – but it is 
about using the capacity that already exists, bringing it 
under the umbrella of an independent agency that is able 
to fight corruption more fearlessly and more effectively. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I take that answer to be saying yes, 
some of the existing bodies that fight corruption would 
20 
have to go but the personnel in them or at least some of 
them that might be seem to be suitable to serve in this new 
body would need to be taken over because the new body 
would need the experience and capacity that might come 
from those bodies.  So is my interpretation correct of your 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 52 of 202 
 
evidence? 
MR NAIDOO:   It is indeed, Chair, and if had to use an 
example to demonstrate that, so I think in this new body 
would not require the dissolution as a whole of the Hawks, 
as an example, because the Hawks have a broad mandate, 
that 
includes 
corruption 
but 
is 
about 
priority 
crimes 
including organised and a range of other things.  So I think 
in that context one would remove the anticorruption 
mandate or leave the Hawks to deal with other issues and 
move that anticorruption mandate into the new body. 
10 
 
With regards to an institution like the Special 
Investigating Unit, the sole focus is corruption but the 
constraints on the SIU is that they can only act on the 
[indistinct] 21.18 eventual proclamation, so if the person 
did not issue a proclamation they are unable to act and so 
you move that capacity and disband the SIU effectively 
because they had no other role to play and move that in.   
So I think it depends on the institution that were are 
talking about and if I can just perhaps add one further 
point, Chair, it is envisaged that a – this new agency will 
20 
not only be responsible for investigating corruption but 
also 
a 
broader 
mandate 
which 
we 
had 
seen 
from 
comparative studies in other countries where issues of the 
preventative role that a body needs to play as well as the 
very important public education role and then they could 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 53 of 202 
 
fall within the ambit if this structure.   
 
Currently, public education, it is largely left to civil 
society to deal with – to tell the public about corruption 
and I am sure Mr Lewis will talk about that later on today.  
So it is giving that mandate, broader mandate, because we 
need 
to 
have 
a 
much 
broader 
strategy 
of 
fighting 
corruption 
simply 
than 
rather 
just 
investigating 
and 
prosecuting, which has been the focus to date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So part of this body would do in 
CASAC’s view would be to investigate corruption and once 
10 
it has investigated corruption to then hand over the docket 
of the file, so to speak, to the NPA or – so it would not 
have to go to SAPS.  I would imagine the docket – if they 
had investigated they should just hand over to the NPA and 
the NPA does what it is supposed to do.   
But, as I understand it, that would not prevent the 
police from still investigating corruption, they could still 
investigate corruption but this will just be a dedicated body 
that focuses on corruption without taking away any power 
from the police to investigate corruption, is that correct? 
20 
MR NAIDOO:   That is indeed correct, Chair.  And, you 
know, there would need to be a working relationship 
developed between structures like that, like the SAPS to 
be able to at some point refer matters to this body, if a 
complaint is laid with SAPs, to say this body is better 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 54 of 202 
 
equipped to investigate and deal with that. 
 
Similarly, for example, with the office of the Public 
Protector, if a matter of corruption is – a complaint is laid 
with the Public Protector that office will be able to 
investigate that but in certain circumstances and, you 
know, a memorandum of agreement and so on would need 
to be established to be able to refer back to this agency 
and say you have more specialised knowledge and capacity 
to be able to deal with something like this.   
So I think, you know, those sorts of relationships 
10 
would need to be developed over time to be able to create 
an 
umbrella 
of 
bodies 
that 
can 
actually 
tackle 
the 
challenges that we face better than we have done in the 
past. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think you are also saying, which I 
think you said earlier on, in respect of some bodies – and 
you mentioned the SIU in terms of this proposal, that body 
would need to come to an end but its personnel, with the 
expertise that they have, could go to the new agency. 
MR NAIDOO:   Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But when it comes to certain bodies such 
as the Hawks, this proposal does not entail that the Hawks 
be abolished because the Hawks do not just investigate 
corruption, they have other things that – other crimes that 
they investigate, so they would continue.  In that case the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 55 of 202 
 
body will not be abolished but the – its mandate that 
relates to corruption might be taken away but you say in 
terms 
of 
the 
general 
SAPS, 
that 
there 
will 
be 
no 
interference with their power to investigate corruption.   
 
In terms of the Public Protector to the extent that 
the Public Protector also investigates corruption, that 
would not be interfered with.  So is my understanding 
correct? 
MR NAIDOO:   That is indeed correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, thank you very much, Mr 
10 
Naidoo, we appreciate that you availed yourself to assist 
us, we really appreciate it.  Thank you very much, you are 
now excused. 
MR NAIDOO:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
MR NAIDOO:   Thank you very much, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Freund? 
MR FREUND SC:   Chair, Professor Corder is ready, willing 
and able but I see it is now almost 11.30, I would imagine 
you may wish to take the tea break and we can resume as 
20 
soon as you are ready to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us take the tea break and return 
at quarter to twelve.   
MR FREUND SC:   as you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 56 of 202 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes Mr Freund.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair, Chair the next 
witness is Professor Hugh Corder who is with us, his 
evidence that is intended to be admitted is Exhibit ZZ11 in 
bundle 3 from page 270 and following.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Professor Corder are you there? 
PROF CORDER:   Yes, Chairperson I am here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Professor Corder, thank 
10 
you very much for availing yourself to come and assist the 
Commission, we appreciate that very much. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you, it is an honour to be here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, the registrar will administer 
an oath or affirmation to you depending which one you 
prefer, she will administer the oath or affirmation right now. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record? 
PROF CORDER:   Hugh Michael Corder. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
20 
prescribed oath? 
PROF CORDER:   No.  
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
PROF CORDER:   I do. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 57 of 202 
 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth, if so please raise your right hand and say so 
help me God. 
PROF CORDER:   So help me God. 
HUGH MICHAEL CORDER:   [duly sworn, states] 
CHAIRPERSON:    Thank you very much, Mr Freund you 
may proceed.  
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you, Chair, Professor Corder is 
that correct that you have prepared and submitted to the 
10 
Commission an affidavit which is to be found in bundle 3 
commencing at page 270? 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And is that your signature that appears 
on page 295, confirming that that is your affidavit? 
PROF CORDER:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you deal with in your 
affidavit is fundamentally a report that you had previously 
prepared at the request of the original Speaker of the 
Democratic Parliament, Ms Frene Ginwala, is that correct? 
20 
PROF CORDER:   That is right Dr Ginwala was the 
Speaker. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in paragraph 6.2, point 3 of your 
affidavit, which is page 273 you refer to your report but you 
make the point that because that report had already been 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 58 of 202 
 
submitted to the Commission you are not annexing it again 
as an annexure to your affidavit.  
PROF CORDER:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And your reports are just for reference 
purposes as in the reference bundle, at pages 49 to 84 and 
I think you have access to that if need be, is that correct? 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, in the light of that evidence may 
I move formerly to the affidavit of Professor Corder with 
annexures be introduced as Exhibit ZZ11. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    The affidavit of Mr Hugh Michael Corder 
starting at page 270 is together with its annexures 
admitted AS Exhibit ZZ11.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Professor Corder if I 
could take you to paragraph 4 of your affidavit.  You deal 
there with the fact that you are an Emeritus Professor of 
Public Law and you attach your curriculum vitae that is 
actually at page 296.  I do not think there is any need for 
you to turn to that but perhaps what you could do is just to 
give the Chair a very brief thumbnail sketch of your 
20 
expertise and qualifications because you do testify as it 
were in the capacity as an expert in this field. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you, Mr Freund.   I will keep it 
brief Chair and happily answer any additional questions 
you may have.  I studied my LLB degree at the University 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 59 of 202 
 
of Cape Town.  I did what is effectively a master's degree 
at Cambridge and then my doctoral thesis at Oxford in the 
year 1979 to 1982; looked at the role of the appellate 
division as it then was from 1910 to 1950 in South Africa, 
looking at the role of the judiciary in imposing unjust laws.  
I returned to South Africa and commenced my academic 
career at the University of Stellenbosch, but was appointed 
to the Chair of Public Law at the University of Cape Town 
in mid-1987.  
I think that the most important point to stress from 
10 
the balance of my CV is not what I have done at the 
University of Cape Town but my membership of the 
Technical Committee, which drafted the first bill of rights 
for South Africa, at the Kempton Park negotiations in 1993, 
which has informed some of my views in the so called 
Coder Report.  
And I need to acknowledge the assistance 22 years 
ago of Ms Sarah Jaqwance[?] and Mr Fred Sorta[?] but that 
also led to Dr Ginwala requesting me to do the three-year 
research projects.  The third one of which resulted in the 
20 
Corder Report, which are on page 2 paragraph 3, sorry, 
paragraph 5 of my affidavit, which I believe is on page 271 
of the bundle. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is correct and as you explained in 
that portion of your affidavit, you were actually asked to do 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 60 of 202 
 
three separate tasks, three separate investigations and 
reports, only one of them have direct relevance for present 
purposes. 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is the one in relation to 
parliamentary oversight. 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So if you could perhaps, it is actually 
in paragraph 6.2, that you deal with that and if you could, 
perhaps, if I take you to page 273, numbered page 4 of the 
10 
original affidavit, you indicate, as it were the terms of 
reference of relevance.  
If I take you to paragraph 7.1, I am just going to 
highlight a couple that seemed to me to be of most direct 
relevance, that you were asked by the Speaker on behalf 
of Parliament to outline and explain the nature of the 
obligation that Section 55.2 of the Constitution places on 
the National Assembly, that is the oversight provision. 
And in point 5, what mechanisms and procedures 
should be put in place to achieve the fulfilment of the 
20 
constitutional obligation of parliamentary oversight of the 
executive.  Those are the core, presently relevant parts of 
the mandate that led to you and your team producing the 
report, which we have come to know as the Corder Report, 
is that correct? 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 61 of 202 
 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you have told the Chair in 
paragraph 7.2 of your affidavit, that after a process of an 
interim report and engagement, you ultimately submitted a 
final report to the then Speak by July of 1999, is that 
correct? 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in your affidavit, you have 
extracted for convenience the executive summary of the 
report and even that executive summary, I do not propose 
10 
for present purposes to read into the record, it speaks for 
itself.  
But it seems to me that if we go to the foot of page 
274, you dive in, straight into the difficult issue and that is 
accountability and oversight and what they mean. And 
perhaps if you would like to either read into the record or 
talk to, as it were, your then executive summary of your 
views on the essence of the meaning of accountability and 
the duty of oversight in the context that we are presently 
interested in. 
20 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you Mr Freund.  I think I would 
like to sketch a very briefly some context to this report.  
We all know, and the Constitutional Court through Justice 
Mohamad said it very clearly and indeed the - what is 
known as the postamble to the interim Constitution made 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 62 of 202 
 
the point that 
the current 
constitutional dispensation 
number 1, is a rigging and decisive break from the past.  
We all know the extent to which the apartheid 
executive could have had come to dominate Parliament, 
and effectively to create it really as a lap dog to question 
the executive, that is the first point I want to make.  So 
there was a determination in the Constitution making 
process to ensure that the new constitutional dispensation 
would not fall foul or not run the risk of becoming a lap dog 
Parliament.  
10 
The second broad point is the values, which are 
contained in Section 1 of the Constitution.  If we have any 
Section of the Constitution that is more special than any 
other it is Section 1, because only a 75% majority of the 
National Assembly can change any aspect of that section, 
and I want to refer particularly to the values in 1C of the 
rule of law and the supremacy of the Constitution and the 
values in 1D, which essentially constitutionalises the 
notion of participative democracy and within that, the last 
three words are particularly important to me and I have 
20 
stressed them throughout my teaching in the area of 
administrative 
law, 
this 
is 
about 
accountability, 
responsiveness, and openness. And at that point, I think it 
will 
be 
appropriate 
to 
talk 
about 
the 
definition 
of 
accountability.  
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 63 of 202 
 
Section 55.2 requires, there is the word must there. 
Parliament cannot get away from it.  It has got to oversee 
the actions of the executive and I would say that there are 
three elements to accountability and oversight.   
Number 1, the executive has to explain what if 
Parliament asks you to do so the executive has to explain 
to clarify its actions and its decisions.  
Secondly, and the understanding of the doctrine of 
the separation of powers as being mutual respect between 
the three branches of government, the legislature, the 
10 
executive, and the judiciary, and it is mutual respect.  So I 
mean, it is not only one respecting the other, it is each 
must respect each other's proper domain, secondly, the 
executive must justify its actions to a certain extent.  
Thirdly, and this is the most I would suggest, 
controversial and difficult to demarcate.  I would argue that 
there is an aspect of accountability, and I am relying on 
some of the literature that was around already in the 
1990’s in this respect, the executive should amend is what 
is referred to as a mandatory accountability.  
20 
So the executive must explain, must justify and I 
suppose 
one 
could 
say 
in 
a 
mutually 
respectful 
relationship, and negotiate with Parliament, or at least the 
majority in Parliament as far as it is necessary the 
amending of any action or policy action taken or policy 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 64 of 202 
 
decided upon.  That is, it, so I will stop at that point so I do 
not go too long. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is a convenient point because 
now if we can focus on the actual wording of what you said 
at the time, which is the point I have taken you to at the 
foot of page 27 before.  You say in your report in your 
executive summary of your report in 1999: 
“Basically, accountability means to give a given 
account of actions or policies, or to account for 
spending and so forth.” 
10 
And then you have emphasised: 
“Accountability can be said to require a person to 
explain and justify against criteria of some kind of 
their decisions or actions.  It also requires the 
person goes on to make amends for any fault or 
error and take steps to prevent its recounts in the 
future.” 
And as you have already said, it is really that particular 
sentence that last feature, which causes the greatest 
difficulty, am I understanding you correctly? 
20 
PROF CORDER:   Yes, you are. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But notwithstanding its difficulty, you 
stand by the notion this has been referred to as an 
amendatory accountability.  You stand by the notion that 
the accountability which is owed by the executive to the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 65 of 202 
 
legislature includes obviously not limited to, but includes 
an obligation to make amends for fault or error, and to take 
steps to prevent and it empowers Parliament to take steps 
to prevent recurrences in the future, is that correct? 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct and I think I would 
emphasise those two words thought or error.  It is not 
necessarily that one policy is preferred above another or 
that one decision was made, where a contrary decision 
could have been taken is that the policy itself, the 
determination of the policy, or the decision itself, is shown 
10 
in the process of explanation and justification could have 
been based on fault or error.  
So it is quite a high standard that is set there and 
the reason for that is because it is not the proper domain 
of Parliament to determine under separation of powers, to 
determine policy or to make executive decision on a day to 
day basis. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, you make the point that I am 
reading at the foot of page 275: 
“We are of the view that Section 35.2(a) sets the 
20 
obligatory minimum standards of accountability for 
executive organs of State in the national sphere of 
government, the National Assembly must set up 
mechanisms to hold them accountable.” 
And then you go on in your report to recommend three 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 66 of 202 
 
types of legislative intervention and you start to address 
that at the foot of page 276 of your affidavit under the 
heading revising present arrangements and you say this: 
“In 
the 
light 
of 
Parliament's 
constitutional 
obligations in present practices the legislation we 
propose 
would 
provide 
for 
a 
mandatory 
accountability, 
(which 
requires 
that 
where 
deficiencies 
have 
been 
uncovered, 
they 
be 
corrected 
and 
wrongs 
be 
addressed), 
and 
prescribed 
standards 
content 
and 
format 
for 
10 
reporting.” 
And then you go onto to deal in some detail on the 
procedure on these reports and so forth.  So perhaps the 
starting point, for an understanding of your report, is an 
understanding 
of 
your 
core 
recommendation 
is 
to 
legislative reform, and why at that time, you thought 
legislative reform was appropriate? 
PROF CORDER:   Chair yes, Mr Freund, the Deputy Chief 
Justice would know that at the time we were working on the 
report 1999, late 1980’s and early 1999 two other statutes 
20 
were in the process of being drafted.  Already on the 
statute books was the prevention, The Promotion of 
Equality in the Prevention of unfair Discrimination Act, 
PEPUDA as it is commonly known, which gave greater flesh 
to the skeleton of the right to equality in Section 9 of the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 67 of 202 
 
Bill of Rights. 
But in ‘98,’99 the immediate context and I was 
involved in one of those two legislative reform or law 
reform 
processes 
saw 
the 
drafting 
of 
two 
acts 
of 
Parliament the promotion of Access to Information Act, in 
support of the right of access to information in Section 32 
of the Constitution, and the promotion of Administrative 
Justice Act departure, which was in support of Section 33 
in the Constitution, the rights to administrative justice.  
Now, the idea behind that is that the Constitution 
10 
provides a skeletal right so to speak but that further flesh 
needed to be added to the skeleton and although there was 
a direct constitutional injunction in the final Constitution of 
1996, to draft the PEPUDA, the PAJA and the PAIA and 
although there was none in relation to Section 55, to 
oversight responsibilities. 
It seemed to me, to us wise and appropriate that we 
should propose the drafting and adoption of legislation in 
the form of two acts of Parliament, which we are included, 
both in the Corder Report and in my affidavit.  Firstly, the 
20 
Accountability 
Standards 
Act 
and 
secondly 
the 
Accountability 
and 
Independence 
of 
Constitutional 
Institutions Act.  
I will not on this point expand on the necessity for 
either, but I think that there – ja, will not say more about 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 68 of 202 
 
that at this point unless it is necessary. 
ADV FREUND SC:   We can come back to that, in a 
nutshell, you proposed the adoption of legislation for 
reasons that are set out both in the report and in the 
affidavit.  You furnished your report and before we come 
back to your report and to its current relevance if any it is 
just helpful if we can just put it in its proper historical 
context. 
You furnished your report and so far as you are 
aware, what came of your report.  To what extent was it 
10 
taken up, to what extent were you engaged on the point, 
and what has been your subsequent involvement if any? 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you, Mr Freund, I would refer to 
paragraph 8 on page 278 of the bundle and I set out there 
the detail of what happened.  One of the critical elements 
is that the second democratic election took place, just 
before the submission of the report and whereas the Joint 
Rules Committee, as far as I can recall, under the first 
Parliament was our interlocutor, so to speak, because we 
did not – we reported to the Speaker but we then engaged 
20 
or I then engaged with the Joint Rules Committee. 
The membership of that committee, and the core of 
MP’s in Parliament had changed substantially between the 
first and the second Parliament and one of the when I 
appeared before the committee, one of the complaints, so 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 69 of 202 
 
to speak, was that there had been insufficient consultation 
with the members.  And that was clearly so because many 
of the members within consultation had taken place 
because an interim report had been submitted in March of 
1999.  Many of those MP’s were no longer in Parliament.  
As far as - that really was the end of my direct 
engagement with Parliament, but I followed it really at a 
distance.  And as I say, paragraph 8.1.2 to my knowledge, 
a sub-committee of the Rules Committee, or indeed, 
perhaps of the Justice Committee, Chaired by Ms Fatima 
10 
Chohan-Kota, MP considered the report and then reported 
further to the, either the Joint Rules Committee or the 
Justice Committee. I was no longer from that moment 
onwards, no longer directly involved at any stage in the 
intervening 20 years, Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you have made the point to me 
Professor Corder that as regards to the – there were 
developments 
on 
the 
ground, 
in 
Parliament, 
in 
the 
succeeding period, you defer to the greater personal 
knowledge, for example of Richard Calland and even our 
20 
last witness Lawson Naidoo, you think that really, the Chair 
should look to them to consider as a well, what happened 
subsequent to your report.  Is that a fair summary? 
PROF CORDER:   Yes, thank you Mr Freund for bringing up 
that point that is exactly so, indeed Chair I might say that, 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 70 of 202 
 
when I first approach to give evidence to submit an 
affidavit, I had no typed copy of the Coder Report and the 
only way that I could get hold of it was provided by Mr 
Freund who in turn, I think, got it from the Parliamentary 
Monitoring Group or some other group. 
I 
had 
not, 
in 
any 
way 
abandoned 
a 
general 
observation 
of 
this 
notion 
because 
it 
is 
integral 
to 
administrative law as well and administrative justice, which 
is my staple diet. But I have not had any further direct 
engagement nor had I made a direct study or research of 
10 
what had happened on oversight and accountability. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you are not particularly – you 
have had looks for purposes of this evidence, the rules of 
the 
National Assembly, 
but 
you 
are 
not 
particularly 
conversant or an expert in those rules.   
PROF CORDER:   No. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But what you can say, I think with 
some competence is that the recommended legislation that 
you proposed was not adopted. 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in preparation for giving your 
evidence today, you have been asked to consider to what 
extent if any, you stand by the view that legislation of the 
type that you propose now more than 20 years ago, would 
not be of value and I think it is fair to say that your core 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 71 of 202 
 
view is, you still think it would be of value.  Is that correct? 
PROF CORDER:   Absolutely, sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So really, I think what we want to 
focus on now for the duration of the rest of your evidence 
is really to substantiate that, to look at why you thought 
legislation was a good idea and why, notwithstanding 
everything that has happened since then, you remain of the 
view that Parliament should be encouraged to relook at the 
question of whether it supports and would be minded to 
adopt legislation of the type that you recommended some 
10 
20 years ago.  
PROF CORDER:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So why do I not leave it to you, as it 
were, talk to that in overview and then we can go into 
some more detail position issues in due course. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you.  I think in the overview as a 
matter of constitutional doctrine and as a matter of 
principle, I would refer again to the word must in Section 
55.2, that is an imperative that is a command, if you like, 
to Parliament, to provide for mechanisms for oversight.  
20 
Broad…[intervene] 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am just going to interrupt you their 
Professor Corder just to read it into the record because not 
everybody would be familiar with the wording.  What 
Section 55.2 of the Constitution says is the following: 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 72 of 202 
 
“The 
National 
Assembly 
must 
provide 
four 
mechanisms A, to ensure that all executive organs 
of State and the National sphere of government are 
accountable to it.” 
That is really the clause to what you are talking, am I 
correct? 
PROF CORDER:   That is correct.  Now, the broader 
overview of the manner in which Parliament has carried out 
its oversight role, would disclose the following, I believe, 
and I believe this would withstand any form of analysis, or 
10 
research or interrogation.  Chair, one of the roles that I 
played very early on in our democratic era was to be an 
advisor to the Theme Committee, sorry, the Portfolio 
Committee on Health in Parliament.  It was Chaired at that 
point by Dr Tshabalala-Msimang and the Chair may well 
recall the Serafina 2 incident early on, where the then 
Minister of Health Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma asked 
Mbongeni Ngema to produce the Serafina 2 as an AIDS 
awareness tool and that was done at considerable cost to 
the Viscus and it was done apparently, or at least there 
20 
were questions about the irregularity on the tender process 
there. 
I only mentioned this, because it is an incident - the 
Health Committee then summoned the Minister, please to 
come and explain why she had done so. So that was 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 73 of 202 
 
explain it and to certain extent to justify.  In the end, the 
summons was withdrawn for reasons that I do not know but 
I would guess that it could be fairly said that the first 
Parliament exercised its oversight role vigorously, in the 
true spirit in which Section 55.2 had been adopted.  
 
Things went a bit quiet after 2009, after 1999 
pardon me, after 1999 after the first Parliament, there was 
quite a revival in 2008/2009 under the presidency of 
President Motlanthe Parliament crept back in ...[indistinct 
– word cut off] from the time of Mr Zuma’s descendance to 
10 
the presidency.  I think there have been very few.  In this 
respect, the oversight role – very few people who would 
question the broad analyses that I have given.  Secondly 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on just one second Prof Corder.  I 
might have missed this. 
PROF CORDER:   Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I heard clearly that you made the point 
that during the term of the first democratic Parliament 
there was vigorous performance by Parliament of its role, 
20 
oversight role. 
 
That, of course, would have been from 1994 to 
1999.  I thought you were going to talk about the Second 
Parliament but I seem to have understood you to jump to 
2007 and so on.   
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 74 of 202 
 
 
Did I hear it correctly?  Were you suggesting that 
until around 2007, Parliament had performed its oversight 
role vigorously? 
PROF CORDER:   Chair, I apologise for that, for the 
confusion I have created.  I would argue that in – in fact, 
Parliament crept back inside its show from about 2000 
onwards during the first and incomplete second terms as 
president of President Mbeki. 
 
That it found its voice again during the presidency 
of President Motlanthe but then it went quiet again from 
10 
President Zuma’s accession to power onwards.  And I think 
that the way that I have explained it to myself and heard 
others explain it relates to the point that has been made by 
both Prof Calland and Mr Naidoo and others. 
 
It comes back to the electorate system, the 
predominance of one majority party throughout the life of 
democratic constitutional South Africa and it goes to the 
political culture which has dominated within – I would... 
 
I do not know, I am not a party politician Chair but 
I would say in both of the majority party and frankly 
20 
perhaps some of the opposition parties as well.  So I am 
not only party in one direction but that is speculation.   
 
And it seems to me and to come back to answer 
the question that Mr Freund asked me:  Why is it relevant 
now again 20-years on to have those two statutes at least 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 75 of 202 
 
or something like it – like them? 
 
And I think you could, through a process of 
research and negotiation with Parliament, draft statutes 
which encourage members of Parliament to fulfil their 
constitutional duties, to fulfil the duties imposed on them 
by their oaths of office. 
 
And to exercise the kind of oversight role by the 
legislature, which incidentally is created by almost every 
legislature in other constitutions in the world. 
 
I did a quick survey again in the previous week or 
10 
so Chair.  There is almost no constitution which does not 
require the legislature to oversee and to hold accountable 
the Executive. 
 
And it is – so and I would just add one more thing 
Chair.  That if the Parliament as one of the advantages of 
government does not create its assigned constitutional role 
according to the Constitution, then there is a vacuum and 
another body of government has to step into the breach.   
 
And I would argue, and I am working on this, that 
in the last nine to ten years in particular the courts and led 
20 
by the Constitutional Court had been placed in some ways 
unfairly in the firing line, politically and in public discourse 
because Parliament failed. 
 
So for me the failure of Parliament is shown by the 
extent to which political, broadly political questions, not 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 76 of 202 
 
necessarily party political questions but broadly political 
and constitutional questions have been thrown to the 
judiciary. 
 
And the judiciary, in my own view, has stepped up 
to the plate magnificently but there is a danger because 
the judiciary is exposed to party political attack and the - 
that leads to – and it may lead and it sometimes does, to 
an inclination on behalf of the Executive to want to 
undermine the judiciary. 
 
I will stop at that point – on that point because I do 
10 
not want to go onto a long discussion about law unless the 
Chair wants me to or unless Mr Freund wants me to. 
 
But I think it is a direct consequence of the failure 
of Parliament to do its job of oversight and that in turn, as 
my colleagues, Calland and Mr Naidoo have explained, 
relates to the electorate system, the party whip political 
culture. 
 
So whatever legislation we have, will have to 
address to some extent without undermining the party 
whip, will have to address the political culture and 
20 
persuade MP’s of every political party to do their – to do 
what is required of them under the Constitution. 
 
Perhaps I should stop here.  I have been going on 
too long already. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Prof Corder, you correctly draw 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 77 of 202 
 
attention to the three arms, the legislature, the executive 
and the judiciary and you touched on the implication for 
the judiciary when the legislature fails to do what it should 
do.   
 
But I do not know whether you heard the evidence 
or saw reports on the evidence of the very first witness to 
testify in this stream of evidence Mr Themba Godi.   
 
He had a slightly different view on the root of the 
problem.  His view would focus on the reports received by 
SCOPA from the Auditor-General, the reports issued by 
10 
SCOPA endorsed by the National Assembly. 
 
His view was that the fundamental problem is a 
failure of the Executive to respond appropriately to the 
reports and recommendations of the legislature.   
 
Now I wonder if you would like to comment on that 
because I think it connects with this issue that you have 
touched on already but which we are going to need to deal 
with in further detail on the issue of the mandatory feature 
of accountability of the Executive to the legislature. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you Mr Freund.  There are several 
20 
questions in that one question.  Firstly, I am afraid that I – 
only read the reports of Mr Godi’s evidence but it is 
significant.   
 
He 
chairs 
SCOPA 
and 
SCOPA 
is 
the 
only 
Parliamentary committee which has a chair who is not 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 78 of 202 
 
drawn from the majority party. 
 
Now one of the recommendations or at least 
suggestions I make in my affidavit and perhaps I can find 
it.  It is in paragraph 9 onwards on page 279.   
 
One of the recommendations I make there is that it 
is perfectly possible for Parliament to distribute the 
chairing role of the many portfolio and joint standing 
committees among different political parties. 
 
Frankly, the role of a chair should be a neutral 
arbitrator and manager of the proceedings of a committee 
10 
and the – it is akin to the role of the Speaker in Parliament 
in the National Assembly.   
 
And it – I would propose, as I have, that that is 
one reform that might come within the rules of Parliament.  
That does not require legislation.  It occurs to me too that 
the notion of rotating chairpersonship of committees could 
be adopted in Parliament. 
 
Parliament 
sits 
for 
five 
years. 
 
A 
term 
of 
Parliament is five years.  And it could be every 18-months 
or so the chairpersonship of a committee rotates. 
20 
 
Now the critical – the nub of the question that you 
asked me is to put to me the argument of Mr Godi that 
SCOPA did its work, that it asked the Executive to explain, 
to justify and perhaps even to amend from time to time and 
that the response came to none from the Executive. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 79 of 202 
 
 
It seems to me that the answer to that lies in...  It 
seems to me that one could explore statutory meanings to 
bolster the obligation under Section 52 in the Constitution 
in a sense to force the Executive to do such, explain 
justification and where appropriate amending. 
 
But there is a non-law and political explanation for 
the failure by the Executive and that could be, and I do not 
know, so I am speculating here.  
 
That the vast majority of opinion among members 
of Parliament of the dominant party or let us say the 
10 
political culture which has recently been described in an 
opinion piece by the Deputy Secretary-General of the ANC 
of democratic centralism. 
 
Led to those members of Parliament who wished 
for a delivery of accountability.  Led to them being 
handicapped in pushing for that kind of response from the 
Executive.  I do not know.  I am not inside the caucus. 
 
But from outside, it seems to me that that is the – 
and from other witnesses of which I have read reports, that 
is the kind of atmosphere that might have prevailed within 
20 
the caucus of the majority party. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now Prof Corder, we clearly do not 
have time to deal in detail your proposed Accountability 
Standards Act but you deal with that at pages 281 through 
to 290 of your affidavit. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 80 of 202 
 
 
And perhaps you could just try to highlight for the 
Chair, as it were, the main two or three points, if it comes 
to that, which you think you have not as yet made but that 
you feel should be drawn out to emphasise the points you 
are trying to make there. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you.  So the detail there refers to 
– prescribed minimums and accountability of administrative 
accountability and that could be expanded to executive 
accountability.   
 
That is one area which would need attention.  I 
10 
think the second area that might still need attention 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry. 
PROF CORDER:   Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I missed that first point.  Would you 
please just repeat it? 
PROF CORDER:   Yes, certainly Chair.  There is a 
reference on...  Sorry, Chair.  I just saw it a moment ago.  
On page...  Pardon me.  Page 283 of the bundle to 
prescribed 
minimum 
standards 
of 
administrative 
20 
accountability. 
 
In other words, saying to the public service and 
public servants that this is what we expect of you in order 
to help hold the Executive accountable to standards and 
similar standards could be prescribed for the Executive as 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 81 of 202 
 
well. 
 
But the point that I was about to make also as an 
additional point is that enormous members of bodies must 
report to Parliament.  This is the pattern all over the world.  
Administrative and executive bodies must report to the 
supreme legislature.   
 
Parliament...  What we proposed 20-years ago is 
that Parliament should develop sophisticated and a nuance 
system of receptacle port, tracking of reports because 
typically the reports are directed to portfolio committees 
10 
for consideration. 
 
And 
then 
keeping 
track 
of 
what 
happens 
subsequently.  So it is a matter of I suppose audits and 
record keeping.   
 
And 
we 
propose 
part 
of 
the 
Accountability 
Standards Act that a central reporting office be established 
in Parliament for the receipt and the packing of reports to 
make sure that the portfolio committees did not just look at 
the report or even less than that, received the report and 
not engage with it in any other way. 
20 
 
So we would propose a type of financial oversight 
as a compliment to the PFMA and the Public Finance 
Management Act but more from the PFMA.   
 
And that might not be necessary at this point, 
given 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
PFMA, 
the 
Public 
Finance 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 82 of 202 
 
Management Act, has been in place for so long and 
perhaps it is working well but with that – with part of what 
we propose. 
 
One more point and I am referring now to page 286 
of the bundle Chair and forgive me if I am going too quickly 
but we propose and this has been achieved to some extent 
but I believe not as sufficiently well yet.   
 
That the existing parliamentary research capacity 
to assist portfolio committees in their accountability and 
oversight function ought to be expanded.  I am afraid we 
10 
used the word beefing up in those days.   
 
And we also propose a specific standing committee 
in regard to the Auditor-General and that has, as we know, 
been established.   
 
So I think, I have to say, because I have not said it 
expressly that Parliament has to some extent done, 
whether it is in response to these recommendations or not, 
has made changes. 
 
I do not know whether Mr Freund wants me or like 
me or Chair you would like me to talk to the specific 
20 
establishment of a portfolio committee or a standing 
committee to deal with the Chapter 9 Institutions and other 
constitutional institutions. 
 
But that was very much part of our proposal at that 
point because the Chapter 9 Institutions which, I will just 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 83 of 202 
 
make this point Chair, were foreseeing the necessity of a 
Chapter 9 Institutions, were foreseeing already in our work 
at the Technical Committee for Fundamental Human Rights 
in Kempton Park in 1993 because the Human Rights 
Commission 
and 
the 
Public 
Protector ’s 
office 
were 
established from the 27 t h of April 1994.   
 
We had a massive democratic deficit at the end of 
apartheid 
and 
we 
recognised 
and 
the 
multi-party 
negotiating process recognised that we needed other 
bodies in addition to Parliament to bolster the achievement 
10 
or to facilitate the achievement of our constitutional 
democratic values. 
 
And it is in terms of the relationship between those 
constitutional institutions and Parliament to render a report 
that we felt some kind of specific standing committee ought 
to be proposed. 
 
So 
those 
were 
the 
kind 
of 
issues 
that 
we 
envisaged that stage would need to be contained in the 
Accountability Standards Act. 
 
What would have to be done if such an act is 
20 
contemplated today in 2021, would be a detailed order of 
what Parliament has done so far in the couple of decades 
and to identify the gaps. 
 
And I would suggest that Parliamentarian should 
be able to make their inputs in this regard in order to take 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 84 of 202 
 
their oversight role seriously.  I will stop at that point 
Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you professor.  Professor, you 
have run a little ahead of where I intended to be but since 
you had let us focus on what you are dealing with and that 
is the question of the institutions. 
 
And I would have I mind, not only the Auditor-
General but in particular the Public Protector, amongst 
others.   
 
And a number of people, a number of politicians 
10 
have expressed the view to me and I think some of them 
have testified before the Commission that it is really not 
the 
job 
of 
Parliament 
to 
investigate 
allegations 
of 
malfeasances.  That is for the Chapter 9 Institution. 
 
And as the Chapter 9 Institution has done their 
job, it is really not for Parliament to do anything about it.   
 
Now what we talked to here in the report is as it 
were a partnership, a relationship between the Chapter 9 
Institution and Parliament, each having their respective 
roles but nonetheless being mutually reinforcing and you 
20 
are proposing in your proposed legislation that this sort of 
be clarified and defined. 
 
We can perhaps just talk to that and correct me if I 
have put it incorrectly. 
PROF CORDER:   Chair, thank you.  That is exactly 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 85 of 202 
 
correct.  So to ensure accountability and because the 
Chapter 9 Institutions like any other institution under the 
rule of law and our constitutional democracy need to be 
able to account for their activities.   So and ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   To whom did they account? 
PROF CORDER:   They account to Parliament.  So they 
report to Parliament annually, at least, they ought to.  They 
get their budget through Parliament. 
 
And if a Public Protector or members of the Human 
Rights Commission or the Commission on Gender Equality 
10 
also on all of the Chapter 9 Institutions, if a member needs 
to be appointed, Parliament does that work. 
 
So it is quite correct.  They were seeing in their 
conception 
in 
1993 
as 
being 
complimentary, 
working 
together with Parliament while retaining an independent 
role. 
 
And that is why we proposed the accountability 
and independence.  And you will note we did not refer to 
the Chapter 9 Institutions and the counter of that chapter 
is state institutions assisting constitutional democracy. 
20 
 
We referred to constitutional institutions because 
there are some similar bodies which are not included in the 
list of Chapter 9 Institutions which play important roles to 
help 
in 
the 
constitutional 
– 
the 
realisation 
of 
the 
constitutional dream, so to speak. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 86 of 202 
 
 
And 
so 
a 
strong 
and 
respectful 
working 
relationship between those bodies we saw and I would 
argue is part of the constitutional design even today. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So let me take you to a specific 
example because we have heard specific evidence and you 
may have heard evidence but there has been specific 
evidence in this work stream on the problems at PRASA. 
 
And there has been specific evidence on the one 
hand of real concern and expressed by the Auditor-
General’s office about serious and rapidly worsening 
10 
irregular expenditure. 
 
In relation to the same entity, there have been 
evidence about the report by the Public Protector derailed 
which focussed on alleged corruption and malfeasance and 
procurement issues. 
 
There is no question that that material found its 
way 
before 
the 
relevant 
portfolio 
committee 
but 
the 
problem seems to be what to do with that.   
 
What does one expect of the portfolio committee 
and what does one expect of Parliament and how does one 
20 
use 
that 
in 
order 
to 
bring 
about 
the 
necessary 
improvements because I think it is a matter of public 
notoriety and it is common cause that the problems at 
PRASA have not as yet been resolved. 
 
So perhaps you can take that just as a case study 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 87 of 202 
 
to illustrate the propositions that you would advance in 
relation to the proper position, the proper function of the 
Chapter 9 Institutions and of Parliament principle through a 
portfolio committee. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you, Mr Freund.  I attended 
Section 181 of the Constitution which is the first section 
under Chapter 9. 
 
The Chapter 9 Institutions is a list of that.  The 
Public Protector of the Human Rights Commission, the 
commission for the promotion of protection of rights, 
10 
cultural, religious and invested communities.  They are 
seeking provision for gender equality, the AG, and the 
Auditor-General and the Electoral Commission, the IEC. 
 
You 
will 
note 
what 
used 
to 
be 
called 
the 
Independent Broadcasters Authority, now ICASA, is not 
there.  Now and those passed on.  Neither nor are any of 
the – nor is any of the state-owned entities.  Eskom is not 
there.  PRASA is not there. 
 
So the Constitution makes a distinction between 
bodies which are, let u say, there work related to the 
20 
achievement of the values of the Constitution on the one 
hand and other bodies. 
 
Now there may be – I would argue and I have 
argued orally, not in writing – that a body like ICASA given 
the importance of the medium through which I am giving 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 88 of 202 
 
evidence and we are holding this hearing today, given the 
importance of the electronic and other media. 
 
A body like ICASA is closer and it is a regulatory 
body rather than an executive although that makes – it 
takes executive and administrative decisions.  A body like 
ICASA is closer to a Chapter 9 Institution than is PRASA or 
ESKOM or as state would seem. 
 
There maybe there will be – and ICASA is an 
example, there may be others which to a certain extent 
stand closer to the Chapter 9 Institutions and therefore if 
10 
there were to a setup standing committee, a joint standing 
committee on Chapter 9 Institutions, maybe ICASA could 
go that way rather than report to the Communications 
Portfolio which I assume it does at the moment in 
Parliament. 
 
But it seems to me appropriate that PRASA should 
not report to the Transport Committee in Parliament.  
Perhaps Eskom should report to the Energy Committee in 
Parliament or to whomever it does and to the Minister of 
Public Enterprises.   
20 
 
Sorry, the Public Enterprises Committee, not the 
Energy Committee.  Maybe it will be better reporting to the 
Energy Committee, the Mines and Energy Committees.   
 
But I think that having – let us say the difficulties 
that we have seen and which have been accounted before 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 89 of 202 
 
this Commission in relation to many of the state-owned 
enterprises. 
 
If the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee has had 
the first opportunity appropriately to engage with and seek 
accountability from the board, the board of those SOE’s 
and has failed to follow up or has failed to hold them 
account – to account, then it may well be for a Chapter 9 
Institution to take it on. 
 
But I would argue the first obligation under the 
Constitution 
rests 
with 
Parliament 
and 
its 
portfolio 
10 
committees. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Thank you.  Can I now take 
you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...follow up on that Mr Freund before you 
proceed.  Prof Corder, the point you make about Chapter 9 
Institutions following up or taking up issues that primarily 
you believe Parliament should tackle.   
 
Raises 
a 
matter 
that 
crossed 
my 
mind 
when 
20 
Mr Lawson was giving evidence earlier on.  So I am 
thinking aloud.  This is not something I have had time to 
think about but I noted the one committee which is not 
chaired by ...[indistinct – word cut off] namely SCOPA 
seems generally to be taken as having done quite well in 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 90 of 202 
 
terms of trying to - in terms of its performance of its 
oversight function and holding the executive accountable.   
So one has that point and although I have heard 
some evidence to the effect that well, there are other 
parliamentary portfolio committees that have a fair amount 
of their job in terms of oversight that would be chaired by 
Chairpersons who come from the majority party, SCOPA 
seems to stand out as a committee that seems to have 
done quite well. 
 
So if one looks at that, one asks the question is it 
10 
the presence on the chair of the committee of somebody 
who does not come from the majority party that makes the 
difference in the context of – in SCOPA or is it the 
personality of the Chairperson or is it a combination of 
both?  Probably a combination of both.  So one looks at 
that. 
 
And then one looks at the position that where, for 
example, a committee has decided to conduct an inquiry 
such as the inquiry that we had into Eskom and so on in 
parliament by the Public Enterprises committee where the 
20 
evidence leader was Mr Vanara.  Now I understand that Mr 
Vanara was not a member of parliament, I do not know 
whether he was nevertheless from within the staff of 
parliament or whether he was from outside but it seems to 
me that if you bring in somebody to lead evidence in the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 91 of 202 
 
context of such an inquiry who might not be a member of 
parliament and might not be a member of the majority party 
or 
might 
not 
be 
a 
member 
of 
any 
political 
party 
representative in parliament, it may well be that that 
person might ask all the right questions that maybe even 
some of the members of the majority party might have 
wished to ask but might fear that asking those questions 
might be career-limiting.  So those are two instances where 
there might be a role to be played by somebody who is not 
from the majority party or who is not a member of 
10 
parliament at all.   
So the question that I want to ask is whether there 
might be room for having somebody who comes into a 
committee when it appears that the particular committee 
has not performed its function properly in regard to a 
matter that is really of serious public interest who could 
then ask all kinds of questions to the executive that maybe 
the majority – members of the majority party do not feel 
comfortable to ask and maybe they are asked by the 
opposition parties, they are just put by the majority.  I do 
20 
not know whether such a person could be the Chairperson 
but without necessarily being a member of parliament or 
could be somebody that could be brought in, somebody 
could make a decision to say, for example, on this issue of 
the proposal in 2016 that the DA made to say in the Public 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 92 of 202 
 
Enterprises 
committee 
let 
us 
have 
an 
inquiry 
into 
allegations that involved the Guptas, that was not agreed 
to by the majority at that time and then if it is seen that 
that committee seems to have dropped the ball or the 
majority did not want to do its job maybe somebody could 
be brought in who would be able to ask the difficult 
questions without fear or favour or prejudice.   
Obviously what I am saying is something that one 
has not thought out clearly but one just notes that here is a 
committee, SCOPA, which is chaired by somebody who is 
10 
not from the majority party and it seems to do its oversight 
function reasonably well in circumstances where there are 
a number of portfolio committees chaired by people from 
the majority party that might not do so well.  Of course 
there might be others that did well. 
Do you have some thoughts, obviously- probably 
tentative thoughts about that and it is not something that is 
flat out because not something one thinks about, has 
thought about. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you, Chair.  I fact I would 
20 
respectfully agree with your surmise earlier on that the fact 
that the Chairperson is drawn not from the dominant party 
combined with the personality of that Chair would provide 
the answer because you can get  - you could get compliant 
non-questioning people in every - I would suggest in every 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 93 of 202 
 
political party.  So it is a combination of the two. 
 
But in my very cursory research in preparation for 
this hearing, Chair, I noted that – it was in the American 
Congress 
and 
I 
hesitate 
to 
refer 
to 
the 
American 
Constitution or experience given the recent past but there 
is a government accountability office within congress, as I 
understand it.  In other words, there is capacity which is 
specifically 
directed 
towards 
assisting 
parliament 
to 
exercise its accountability duties, to fulfil its accountability 
duties and this would a statutory body, I suppose, or 
10 
maybe a body within parliament and I would hope that it 
would be staffed by independent minded competent people 
who could fulfil the kind of role that you referred to in 
regard to the Public Enterprises portfolio committee and 
the evidence leader and so on. 
 
The UK has a body within parliament called the 
National Audit Office.  That may relate more closely to the 
work in our dispensation of the auditor general but in 
principle, if there is a National Audit Office within the UK, 
parliament has no reason why there could not be a 
20 
National Accountability Office within our own parliament as 
a practical suggestion. 
 
One of the points that just occurs to me, which I 
intended in my affidavit which I would just mention at this 
point, Chair, is that I noted that the National Assembly 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 94 of 202 
 
rules require a member of parliament who is not able to 
attend a portfolio committee meeting to seek leave for their 
absence from the Chief Whip of the party and it seems to 
be that that is odd.  It is logical from one point of view 
because if the Chief Whip knows that MP X is going be 
missing, they might want to supplement the membership 
with MP Y but it indicates a locus of power to a certain 
extent with the portfolio committee structure which does 
not lie with the Chair but which lies with the Chief Whip of 
the party. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you very much.  Mr 
Freund? 
MR FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair.  Prof Corder, the 
witness to follow you is an experienced observer of 
portfolio committees in their day-to-day ordinary work and 
she will raise a number of very practical problems that 
inhibit effective oversight and it seems to me that a great 
deal of your Accountability Standards Act, as proposed, is 
actually addressed at trying to resolve some of those 
problems so I would like in the few minutes available to us 
20 
just to focus on some sort of nuts and bolts issues which 
you propose in your Act should be addressed such as – 
and I am really looking from page 281 and following of your 
affidavit as it is bundled in the Commission’s bundling and 
you propose that this Accountability Standards Act: 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 95 of 202 
 
(ii) 
It 
would 
set 
the 
broad 
framework 
and 
minimum requirements for accountability. 
(iii) 
Provide 
an 
authoritative 
and 
mandatory 
framework within which committee members 
can perform their oversight past. 
And then you go on elsewhere to talk about the questions 
of timing, when presentations should be submitted, that 
there should be standards against which accountability can 
be assessed.   
One needs have standards in order to measure.  
10 
And so if you could just talk briefly – obviously this is not a 
draft bill and we do not even have time comprehensively to 
deal with the issues but if you could get the Chair some 
sense of the flavour of what you think could be achieved by 
an Accountability Standards Act which attempts to address 
some of the logistical and practical problems because at 
the end of the day we have relatively small number of MPs 
faced with a large volume of work of which they do not 
necessarily have particular expertise and yet what we are 
trying to achieve is effective oversight.  So if you could 
20 
just talk briefly to some of the sort of pragmatic level of 
the proposals you made which I would assume were 
informed by the observations you were making even then 
about the practical difficulties of exercising oversight. 
PROF CORDER:   Ja, thank you for that.  I take as my – 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 96 of 202 
 
well, 
really 
extremes 
at 
– 
in 
thinking 
about 
such 
legislation.  On the one hand of the spectrum would be the 
Promotion 
of Access 
to 
Information Act 
which 
is 
a 
substantial Act going into enormous amount of detail, runs 
through many tens of pages. 
 
On the other hand, the Promotion of Administrative 
Justice Act runs to less than ten pages and I so I would 
think that a statute that somehow that somehow managed 
to – I will not say straddle the divide but being closer to 
the middle of spectrum may be better. In other words, not 
10 
so detailed and prescriptive because I think it would be 
inappropriate to prescribe to parliament too closely given 
that these are the elected representatives of the people, of 
the – ja, of the people. 
 
But I would think that where one would have to start 
is precisely with the evidence that is going to be given 
next, 
which 
I 
have 
not 
seen, 
but 
engagement 
with 
parliamentarians, both currently and in the past to find out 
from them what are the stumbling blocks, what makes it so 
difficult?  I, you know, I am aware that there are – there is 
20 
a whole group of small minority parties in parliament and 
they are entitled to representation on all the portfolio 
committees and if you have got three MPs for your party, 
they have to make [indistinct] 14.21 on 20, 30 portfolio 
committees, they cannot possibly do their work much as 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 97 of 202 
 
they 
insist 
on, 
physically 
impossible 
or 
intellectually 
possible. 
 
So there needs to be the practical infrastructure 
within parliament and I would suggest the office of the 
Speaker would be the one who would not best and the 
committee of Chief Whips would help in identifying also 
where the shortcomings are and then it would be a matter 
of – either in the rules or including it in the statutes which 
I 
have 
proposed, 
the 
establishment 
of 
that 
kind 
of 
infrastructure and of course then one have to find a budget 
10 
for it but my understanding is that the research capacity, 
for example, of parliament has increased quite a lot over 
the past 20 years and that is a fairly good thing.  I hope 
that those… 
MR FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you.  And I would like to take 
up one particular detail which we find at the foot of page 
286 where you propose prescribed reporting standards.  
Now just by way of background, such evidence, as I have 
seen and my investigation shows, that there is a profusion 
of material that is produced and placed before portfolio 
20 
committees 
very 
often 
in 
the 
form 
of 
PowerPoint 
presentations, very often at the eleventh hour and very 
often not in detail which enables, as it were, exposure of 
problematic 
aspects 
but 
a 
sort 
of 
broad 
overview 
generality.  What you proposed – we read this at the page 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 98 of 202 
 
of 286 is that you say: 
“Accountability in its simplest form is linked to oral 
and written or electronic reports but this should 
remain 
one 
of 
the 
main 
conduits 
for 
feeding 
information to parliament but it is obvious that 
absence of requirements and guidelines with which 
written reports must imply results in ineffective 
accountability, 
reports 
may 
contain 
too 
much 
information overwhelming the accounting body with 
massive detail or may contain too little information 
10 
to allow assessment of the body’s performance.” 
And you continue.  Now maybe with reference to that you 
could, as it were, elaborate on the point that you were 
making that if there is to be legislation, it needs, as it 
were, to be an appropriate level, it needs to impose some 
type of useful rigor but, on the other hand, obviously not 
be overly prescriptive. 
PROF CORDER:   Yes, I do not have an enormous amount 
to add to the sentences from that bottom of page 286 
which you have read.  There is a reference thereto, I am 
20 
afraid,   a Commission of Inquiry that was held in the 
apartheid days, 1989 it reported, but I believe that the 
recommendations 
made 
by 
the 
Brown 
Commission 
contained the seeds of what would be required here. 
 
In other words, a broad brush strokes framework for 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 99 of 202 
 
reporting which would assist because – assist the partners 
of state in their reporting function because I can imagine 
that if I am a – I would not be so, perhaps a DG or the DG 
says to somebody in the department please prepare a 
report for parliament, they are not going to necessarily 
know what model to use, how much to include, how little to 
include and so on and so on and so on.  So some broad 
outline framework would be required, that is the nub of that 
recommendation. 
MR FREUND SC:   Alright.  And finally, if I could you take 
10 
you to page 290.  This is, as it were, towards the end of an 
overview on your section on mandatory accountability and 
you deal in a series of bullet points with requiring certain 
information to be produced but then you continue: 
“With the support of the majority of the members of 
the committee to put the minister to terms in 
respect of remedial action to satisfy executive 
accountability, to stipulate appropriately urgent and 
regular report-backs to the committee, to give 
appropriate publicity of these actions through the 
20 
media to the broader electorate, to engage the 
speaker of parliament on her own or in consultation 
with 
the 
Chief 
Whips 
of 
the 
political 
parties 
represented in parliament, to exert her authority as 
head of the legislature and to intercede with the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 100 of 202 
 
President as head of the National Executive to 
ensure compliance by ministers with the obligation 
to amend.” 
Now I take it that remains your view as contained in your 
report.  Would you like to talk to that because this is an 
issue that has been canvassed with other witnesses but it 
seems 
to 
me 
it 
is 
an 
issue 
of 
some 
considerable 
importance. 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you.  That in fact was not in the 
Corder Report, that is, as indicated by the typeface, my 
10 
current thinking in the preparation of this affidavit.  But 
just the preceding paragraph, Chair, at the bottom of page 
289, I would like to read it quickly so that one gets the 
context.  So it is paragraph 9.7.1.3 at the bottom of page 
289 and I quote: 
“On the understanding that the primary focus for 
accountability would be through the committee 
system in parliament and in the knowledge that the 
committees 
are 
relatively 
well-supported 
by 
research and administrative capacity.” 
20 
I am hoping that that is the case.  That may be wishful 
thinking, but I believe it to be the case. 
“It could be provided, for example, that a significant 
number of the members of each committee say at 
least 30% so that frivolous or meddlesome inquiries 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 101 of 202 
 
do not cause bottlenecks but not on majority so that 
the apparently errant minister cannot be shielded by 
the representatives of the majority party alone, 
should be authorised to take some or all of the 
following steps.” 
So this is an attempt to avoid – and I am not saying it is 
applicable to us but there is well-known phrase called the 
tyranny of the majority and I am not saying that that 
applies in our country.  I want to be very clear on that.  But 
I am saying that a significant level of support, if shown, 
10 
within a portfolio committee for the steps that you read 
then which appear as bullet points on page 290 may be an 
example of a mechanism that could be introduced in an 
Accountability Standards Act or similar.  But you started off 
with the bullet point which is halfway down which says: 
“With the support of a majority of the members of 
the committee.” 
So what I am suggesting there is that while 30% of the 
members of the committee may try to get some answers 
and some accountability, some explanation out of the 
20 
minister in bullets points, the first and second, it would 
need to majority of the committee to put the minister to 
terms and in doing so, I hope that I am being nuanced 
enough to recognise the balance of political party power 
within parliament.  So that is the way that I would certainly 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 102 of 202 
 
stand by, that set of proposals, but I recognise that it may 
not always be feasible.  Thank you. 
MR FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, that is as far 
as I think I have time to take the matter and I have no 
further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Professor Corder, 
for your input, we appreciate it.  If later other issues arise 
concerning these matters I am sure you will avail yourself 
to further assist.  Thank you very much, you are now 
excused. 
10 
PROF CORDER:   Thank you, Chair, and I certainly will 
avail myself, if requested.  Thank you very much and all 
good wishes to you and the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, thank you.  Mr 
Freund? 
MR FREUND SC:   Chair, there are two further witnesses 
but I presume we take the lunch adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, unless you think it would be a good 
idea for us to fast and skip lunch. 
MR FREUND SC:   No, I do not mind doing that but I think 
20 
we should manage reasonably comfortably in the two hours 
between two and four to get to the two remaining 
witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, not that is fine.  Let us take 
the lunch adjournment, it is now nine minutes past one.  
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 103 of 202 
 
Let us resume at ten past two.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:    Mr Freund are we ready? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes we are Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair the next witness will be Ms 
Jennifer Rault-Smith.  She is here to testify about three 
separate reports that she has prepared, they all form part 
of Exhibit ZZ8 in Bundle 2, from page 754 and following. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes thank you.   Ms Rault-Smith are you 
there? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes, good afternoon Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon to you, thank you very 
much for availing yourself to assist the Commission, we 
appreciate that very much.  The Registrar will administer 
the oath or affirmation, depending on which one you prefer, 
thank you. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
20 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Jennifer Phyllis Rault-Smith. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to make the 
prescribed affirmation? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   No I don’t. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you affirm that the evidence you will 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 104 of 202 
 
give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the 
truth, if so please raise your right hand and say I truly 
affirm. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:    I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Mr Freund you 
may proceed.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.   Ms Rault-Smith is it 
correct that you have on behalf of the Parliamentary 
Monitoring Group prepared and submitted three separate 
reports, one dealing with oversight in respect of BOSASA, 
10 
one dealing with oversight in respect of PRASA and one 
dealing 
generally 
with 
the 
question 
Parliamentary 
oversight?   
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is correct.    
ADV FREUND SC:   And if you turn to page 755 ...[audio 
distorted] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Freund you froze for a few 
seconds.  Can you hear me?   Can you hear me Mr 
Freund?  I think he cannot hear me.   Yes he cannot hear 
me.   You need about ten minutes, okay, is – let me see if 
20 
he is – is he going to appear maybe by any chance?   He is 
not going to appear, okay I am going to adjourn for ten 
minutes.   
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 105 of 202 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us hope the problem has been 
sorted out.   You froze while you were asking your question 
Mr Freund and you couldn’t hear me speaking to you but I 
understand the problem has been sorted out so you may 
proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair yes, I hear you 
clearly [audio distorted].   Ms Rault-Smith is it correct that 
you deposed to a confirmatory affidavit at pages 755 to 
762 in which you confirm your authorship of the report 
10 
that’s annexed in respect of BOSASA and which you 
confirm by way of an affidavit.    
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Quite correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am going to come back to that, but I 
would like to take you now to page 825.   
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Right. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Is it correct that that is a further 
affidavit to which deposed, to which you annex your report 
on Parliamentary oversight over PRASA. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that confirmatory affidavit runs 
from pages 825 to 831. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in that affidavit you explain that 
you are the author of the report and you explain the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 106 of 202 
 
background to that report, is that correct? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then we have a difficulty, if I can 
take you to page 876.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I have got it Mr Freund, 876. 
ADV FREUND SC:   876, do you have it Ms Rault-Smith, it 
is a further confirmatory affidavit.  Now on the face of it 
this is a further confirmatory affidavit and if one turns to 
page 883 one finds what is annexed is the report that you 
prepared 
for 
the 
Parliamentary 
Monitoring 
Group 
on 
10 
Parliamentary oversight, but when one studies the actual 
text of the affidavit and in particular when one studies what 
appears in paragraph 3 which starts at page 876 and goes 
through to 877 you find that what has happened here is 
that the wrong – the affidavit refers to the wrong report 
here, 
or 
was 
intended 
to 
annexe 
your 
report 
on 
Parliamentary oversight erroneously says what is annexed 
is your report on PRASA, which is the same as what we 
referred to a moment ago, is that correct? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now notwithstanding that error, I 
understand that you have indicated that you would be 
perfectly willing in due course and as soon as possible to 
rectify this by means of a further brief supplementary 
affidavit correcting this and confirming that you are in fact 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 107 of 202 
 
the author of the report on Parliamentary oversight and 
that that is what was intended to have been referred to in 
paragraph 3 ...[intervenes]  
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes I am happy to do that. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you can confirm  under oath today 
before the Chair that you are indeed the author of this 
report and that the balance of the content of your 
confirmatory affidavit is correct? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair against that background 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Rault-Smith just wait until Mr Freund 
has finished his question ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   ...against the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So that you don’t give an answer while 
he is still finishing his question so the two of you don’t 
speak 
over 
each 
other, 
because 
that 
won’t 
– 
the 
transcribers will have a problem with that.  So just wait for 
him to complete his question and then you answer.  Are 
you able to see Mr Freund and are you able to see me?  
20 
Ms Rault-Smith? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:    Yes I am. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, is there some delay 
...[intervenes]  
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes I can see you and hear you. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 108 of 202 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is there some delay when I speak 
before you hear what I am saying?  She has – you had 
frozen Ms Rault-Smith, I don’t know if you can hear me 
now.  Hello Ms Rault-Smith?  No, she cannot hear me.   
 
Okay, we will adjourn for ten minutes.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes I can hear you. 
TECHNICIAN:    We apologise SC, we have got some 
10 
network challenges which is beyond our control, we have 
just done a speed test from our network, it dips in and out, 
and it seems that we are going to be having that challenge, 
because when we test now it looks better, but it drops, it 
fluctuates in and out and it is something that is beyond our 
control, it is with the towers, I am not sure what is 
happening with Vodacom network and other networks that 
are currently giving us signal.   I don’t know what will be 
your proposal to the Chair but it is beyond our control. 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The morning session was quite smooth.  
There were no technical duties but this afternoon it is 
different.  But let us keep on trying. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 109 of 202 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, with pleasure.  I should just 
indicate to you.  Although I hear you clearly, I do not see 
you at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that is strange.  Let us see if the - 
because maybe the witness will not see me either.   
ADV FREUND SC:   We are both looking at a TV screen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughs]  Ms Rault-Smith, you also 
cannot see me? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes, I can hear you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can you see me now Mr Freund? 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   I can see you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Rault-Smith, can you see me? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   [Indistinct] [distortion present – 
speaker inaudible] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just say something so you can appear 
on the screen because I cannot see you. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Can you hear me quite well and 
can you see me? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes, thank you.  I can see you Chair. 
20 
[distortion present – speaker barely audible] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I cannot hear you.  I can see you 
but I cannot hear you.  Just speak again.  Let us see if it is 
going to be better now. 
MS 
RAULT-SMITH: 
 
 
[distortion 
present 
– 
speaker 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 110 of 202 
 
inaudible] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is not very good.  Your voice is 
vibrating and as a result I cannot hear what you are 
saying.  Let me ask you to say something again and see 
whether it is going to be better.  Just say something. 
MS 
RAULT-SMITH: 
 
 
[distortion 
present 
– 
speaker 
inaudible] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is not better. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes.  Chair, may I intervene and just 
ask a question? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV FREUND SC:   We have Mr Lewis on standby and if 
his connection is strong which it may be, would you be 
willing to interpose Mr Lewis and bring Ms Smith back 
when the connection to her is stronger? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we can do that because we have 
already lost about an hour.  So maybe let us do that and 
we will – and then once we are done with Mr Lewis we can 
take it from there. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, can I just ask Mr Lewis?  I am 
20 
hoping he is listening to this.  And if he can just come on 
screen and turn on so that we can see if he is visible. 
MR LEWIS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   There he is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Lewis, can you see me?  Can you 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 111 of 202 
 
hear me? 
MR LEWIS:   I can see you and ja, I can hear you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, thank you.  Good afternoon to you. 
MR LEWIS:   Good afternoon to you as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you for availing yourself to assist 
us.  We appreciate it very much.  Now the technicians are 
showing me Ms Smith...  I do not know if you did hear 
Ms Rault-Smith?  We are going to temporarily release you.  
Okay.   
MS RAULT-SMITH:   [No audible reply]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Rault-Smith, we are going to 
listen to Mr Lewis’ evidence because we are hoping he has 
got a better connection and when we are done with his 
evidence we will decide whether you – I hear your evidence 
after that or we make other arrangements for another time 
because we have lost about an hour.  So but be ready to 
be connected with us as soon as we are done with 
Mr Lewis. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  I was saying.  Thank you 
20 
very much Mr Lewis for availing yourself to come and 
assist the Commission.  We appreciate it very much. 
MR LEWIS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, each time I thank Mr Lewis for 
availing 
himself, 
Ms Rault-Smith 
comes 
back 
on 
the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 112 of 202 
 
screen. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Lewis, can I just check that you are 
not muted? 
MR LEWIS:   No, I am not muted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I am not going to repeat, thank you 
Mr Lewis because... [laughs]  There might just be another 
problem.  So I think the registrar will administer the oath or 
affirmation to you and then Mr Freund can proceed after 
that.  Let us hope the connection will be smooth. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Sure. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   It is David Harris Lewis. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you any objection to making the 
prescribed affirmation? 
WITNESS:   No, I do not. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you affirm that the evidence you are 
about to give, will be the truth the whole truth and nothing 
else but the whole truth?  If so, please raise up your right 
hand and say, I truly affirm. 
20 
WITNESS:   I truly affirm. 
DAVID HARRIS LEWIS:  (affirmed) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank 
you very much 
Mr Lewis.  
Mr Freund. 
EXAMINATION BY ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 113 of 202 
 
Mr Lewis is it correct that you are the Executive Director of 
Corruption Watch? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And is it correct that under your 
leadership and guidance, Corruption Watch has prepared a 
submission to the Commission which is annexed to an 
affidavit that you have submitted. 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, the affidavit and the annexed 
report are intended to be Exhibit ZZ-14 to be found in 
10 
Bundle 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   On page 966 onwards of Bundle 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I have got it Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Lewis, is it 
correct that your affidavit – that you deposed to the 
affidavit over pages 966 to 968 to which the report is 
annexed? 
MR LEWIS:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I move that Exhibit ZZ-14 be 
20 
admitted into the evidence from pages 966 and following, 
Bundle 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you said it should be Exhibit ZZ. 
ADV FREUND SC:   14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  The affidavit of Mr David 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 114 of 202 
 
Harris Lewis that starts at page 966 is admitted. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Does it have annexures? 
ADV FREUND SC:   It has an annexure, the Corruption 
Watch Report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So the main bundle is the annexure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, together with its annexure as an 
exhibit and it will be marked as Exhibit ZZ-14.  Okay 
alright. 
10 
AFFIDAVIT WITH ANNEXURE OF DAVID HARRIS LEWIS 
IS ADMITTED AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT ZZ-14 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  You may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Now Mr Lewis, could 
you just briefly describe the function of Corruption Watch, 
its mission and very broadly but briefly what it does? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, Corruption Watched was established in 
January 2012 and it is purpose is to encourage and enable 
public participation in combating corruption and to engage 
in activities generally which combat corruption.   
20 
 
The primary manner in which we encourage public 
participation 
is 
to 
encourage 
the 
public 
to 
report 
experiences of corruption to us which they do in significant 
numbers. 
 
We do this to, you know, basically for the worth of 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 115 of 202 
 
the data that we gather, the intelligence it offers us, the 
legitimacy it offers us and because it underlines the 
importance of whistle-blowing in conducting corruption. 
 
With these reports and you know with other 
information and intelligence we engage an investigation of 
a selected number of the reports.  We can only investigate 
a tiny number of reports that we get. 
 
But we also engage in strategic impact litigation 
and other forms of litigation, in research, in policy 
formulation and in advocacy. 
10 
 
And all that goes into maintaining a constant 
communication through the media, both our own media 
platforms as well as commercial and community media 
platforms. 
 
A constant engagement with the public and that 
has been our modus operandi since we started and the 
manner in which we have chosen to combat corruption. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Nor Mr Lewis, if we look at page 967 
of Bundle 5, that is page 2 of your affidavit, in paragraph 5 
on that page you explain, as it were, what is the primary 
20 
purpose of the report that you had prepared for the 
Commission. 
 
So by way of overview, could you just describe 
what is the task you set yourselves and what are the 
scope, broadly speaking, of the submission that you have 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 116 of 202 
 
prepared for the Commission? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, thank you.  We – you know, we lay much 
store by the putative ability and power and resources of 
Parliament to hold the Executive to account that we have 
been somewhat disappointed back then and now. 
 
As they say, it is neither here nor there.  It is 
incumbent upon us to keep on trying and to keep on 
pushing the envelope because we do view it, as I say, 
putatively as the premier institution capable of holding the 
Executive to account. 
10 
 
So we have a constant and extensive engagement 
with Parliament.  And the two platforms, if you like, or the 
two parliamentary functions that we have engaged with but 
firstly in the formulation of policy and the preparation of 
legislation where we constantly making submissions to 
Parliament and engaging with them and that part of their 
work. 
 
But we have made a particular, if you like, 
speciality of engaging with Parliament in the role that they 
play in appointing the leadership of key institutions, where 
20 
later on in the affidavit we list the number of institutions 
and the names of the institutions that Parliament is 
responsible for appointing the leadership of. 
 
And we view this as particularly important for 
reasons that you know if you want, I am of course happy to 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 117 of 202 
 
outline but this affidavit is confined to that activity, where 
we have, you know as I say, a considerable and fairly 
unique experience and some of the experience being quite 
sanitary and others being quite disappointing. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So you are focussing on Parliament’s 
role in the appointment process of leaders of specific types 
of institutions.  Is that a correct summary? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now that report itself commences in 
Bundle 5 at page 969 and after describing at that page 
10 
briefly what is the mandate of Corruption Watch.  Are you 
with me? 
MR LEWIS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   You refer at the foot of page 966 to an 
earlier joint submission made by Corruption Watch to this 
Commission, which as it were, is a precursor to this 
particular submission you are now making.  Is that correct? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Against that background, what is the 
previous submission about? 
20 
MR LEWIS:   The previous submission was about the 
capture of the Criminal Justice System and we identify, as 
many others have, the critical role of the appointment of 
the leadership of those – of many of the institutions in the 
Criminal Justice System. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 118 of 202 
 
 
You know, we are able to identify quite clearly the 
decline of those institutions from the nature of the 
leadership that was appointed. 
 
And that leadership was appointed, was able to be 
appointed because of the particular form that the process 
or lack of process governing the appointments of these 
critical leadership positions.   
 
In fact, in several of the key leadership position, 
not least of all, the Head of the National Prosecuting 
Authority and the Head of the South African Police Service, 
10 
the President has an absolutely unvetted power to appoint 
those leaders.  He need not even consult with anybody and 
I am not sure that in some cases you know presidents ever 
have.   
 
And that was – I mean, the report is a very 
extensive report on the Criminal Justice System but as I 
say, it identifies the appointment of leadership as the key 
element enabling the capture of those critical agencies. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then what you do in the present 
report, building on that, is to address the question of the 
20 
role that has been or should be played by Parliament in 
bringing about a better appointment process, both as a 
matter of procedure, as a matter of substance.  Is that 
correct? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, yes.  And our remarks, you know, in 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 119 of 202 
 
many instances may apply to the manner in which those 
leaders who are, whose appointment is the responsibility in 
Parliament as well as those leaders whose responsibility is 
not the appointment of Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, indeed.  And you referred a 
moment ago to the fact that in this report you list a number 
of appointments what Parliament does by existing statute 
play a role.  That we find at the foot of page 970.  Is that 
correct? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, that is right. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And perhaps if you can just highlight 
the 
principle 
institutions 
because 
not 
everybody 
has 
access to your report. 
MR LEWIS:   They are mostly, not entirely, the Chapter 9 
Institutions.  So it is the: 
-  Public Protector 
-  The Auditor-General 
-  The 
South 
African 
Human 
Rights 
Commission 
-  The Commission on Gender Equality 
20 
-  The Commission of the Promotion  
-  And the Protection of the Rights of Culture, 
Religious and Linguistic Communities 
-  The Independence Electoral Commission 
-  The Inspector-General of Intelligence 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 120 of 202 
 
-  The 
Independent 
Police 
Investigating 
Directorate. 
 
And 
that 
is 
to 
approving 
the 
minister 
of...  
[distortion in transmission – speaker unclear.] 
ADV FREUND SC:   In relation to those institutions or 
persons, existing legislation confers on Parliament a role.  
And you deal in this report on how that has been done and 
how it should be done. 
 
But you have also just made the point that some of 
the principles that you are now referring to ought to be 
10 
extended 
beyond 
the 
appointments 
already 
– 
which 
Parliament has already mandated to make. 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, that is right. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I am going to leave it to you, as it 
were, guide me in how you think better we should present 
this but it seems to be that a useful point of departure is 
your experience in respect of the 2016 appointment of the 
Public Protector.  Would you agree that is a convenient 
way to illustrate? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   As it were, the positives and the 
negatives? 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So perhaps you should explain.  What 
was the practise prior to 2016?  And then, what happened 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 121 of 202 
 
in 2016 in relation to the appointment of the Public 
Protector, the selection process in that particular year. 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, it may be – it may be an idea to tell you 
what our objective was in 2016 and that by way of contrast 
with the manner in which appointments were made or 
parliamentary appointments were made prior to this. 
 
The appointment of the Public Protector was our 
first significant in this area of Parliament’s duties and 
functions.  It was the end of the Public Protector Thuli 
Madonsela’s terms of office, non-renewable term of office. 
10 
 
She or her office had for reasons that I guess are 
obvious been a tremendous support for organisations like 
ourselves during her tenure.   
 
And we were concerned about who the next Public 
Protector was going to be.  So we determined to engage 
with the process.   
 
And there were three objectives in doing so.  The 
first 
was 
to 
create 
public 
awareness 
around 
the 
appointment process through a mass media campaign 
which we did. 
20 
 
We invested considerable resources in profiling, in 
raising the profile on the appointment of a new Public 
Protector.   
 
And secondly, it is was our aim and our intention 
to 
create 
avenues 
for 
public 
participation 
in 
the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 122 of 202 
 
proceeding.   
 
In the previous – in the appointment of Professor 
Madonsela, there was to our knowledge hardly any public 
involvement in the process.   
 
The office at that stage was little know and it was 
obviously much a much higher profile now and for us to 
encourage public participation and it would have been 
seven years prior to that. 
 
And 
thirdly, 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
process 
was 
transparent.  You know, in a world of anticorruption NGO’s 
10 
the principle method of combating corruption if you like.   
 
And 
the 
engaging 
public 
participation 
is 
to 
advocate 
for 
and 
secure 
the 
transparency 
of 
those 
processes.  And those were our three objectives.   
 
And in order to meet those objectives, we engaged 
extensively with the Ad-hoc Committee that was appointed 
and made responsible for this appointment. 
 
And we secured the considerable names if you 
like.  You know, I think somewhat lacking in the choice, in 
Parliament’s choice and the chair of that committee.  It was 
20 
an ANC MP who was, I think, appeared before you, 
Makhosi Khoza. 
 
And this was, you know, an unusually confident 
and large personality who did not seem to take orders from 
anybody without evaluating the quality of the audience.  So 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 123 of 202 
 
she was open to our participation.   
 
And so we secured a number of advances that 
have 
never 
been 
made 
before. 
 
They 
included 
the 
publication on Parliament’s website on the CV’s of the 
candidates who applied who were nominated to the position 
of Public Protector.   
 
They 
allowed 
public 
comment 
on 
the 
– 
or 
objections to the candidate and these public comments 
were 
furnished 
to 
the 
committee 
when 
interviewing 
candidates who were taken into consideration. 
10 
 
We made publicly available the questionnaires that 
were completed by shortlisted candidates.   
 
The committee agreed to provide Corruption Watch 
with 
the 
identity 
numbers 
of 
candidates 
and 
the 
organisation could conduct financial and security vetting, 
the result of which were provided to the committee and 
used to scrutinise candidates in the interview process. 
 
And we persuaded the committee to agree to 
ensure that the interview process was televised.  So, you 
know, we were – you know, we were very pleased that – at 
20 
the willingness shown by the committee to – by the chair 
certainly to deal with this. 
 
And 
these 
gains 
now 
reflected 
in 
future 
appointments, for example, in all future appointments of 
this sort without necessarily our intervention, the CV’s of 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 124 of 202 
 
candidates be put up on the parliamentary website and 
time has been set aside in the appointment process for 
public comment. 
 
So you know this was – this represented a great 
and unusual gain for us in securing greater transparency 
and greater public participation.  And you know, so it 
represented a significant gain.   
 
Unfortunately, in this particular process, we – the 
gains ended at that point and particularly the short listing 
process 
and 
the 
interviewing 
process, 
I 
think, 
were 
10 
responsible for less than optimal outcome. 
 
That they were conducted in a manner that would 
have been alien in both fairness, good order, transparency 
to the appointment of the loneliest employee in almost any 
private or public enterprise or institution. 
 
The short listing process was an exercise in 
complete chaos.  After all this vetting and questioning and 
questionnaires and the like, the short listing process was 
simply done by way of saying who do you – to the 
committee – who – by the chair, who do you want from the 
20 
shortlist. 
 
And various parties would put their favourite 
candidates on the shortlist without ever providing any 
reasons why X or Mr X or Ms Y should go onto the 
shortlist.   
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 125 of 202 
 
 
It was just a matter of calling out names, so much 
so that, you know, certain names got onto the shortlist who 
did not even technically qualify according to the given 
criteria for being on the shortlist. 
 
And the same lack of order and chaos followed in 
the interviewing process.  For some reason or another it 
was decided that all interviews had to be conducted 
consecutively and that there could not be a break in the 
interview process. 
 
And so the interview with started at eight on a 
10 
given morning.  They concluded at two the following 
morning where the last candidate was interviewed.   
 
They know very well who would be the best 
candidate but by then, you know, nobody was in a position 
to judge.  The candidate was certainly not in a position to 
give it.  But the interview process, there was no right 
interview process.   
 
And candidates were asked – were not asked 
candid questions.  Some were asked if they supported land 
expropriation without compensation.  Others were not 
20 
asked this. 
 
The whole process was highly, highly politicised.  
And so, you know, it produced the outcome it produced.  I 
mean, under no circumstances could this produce best 
possible outcome except by sheer luck.  And so I came 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 126 of 202 
 
away from that process determined to think further about 
appointment 
processes 
both 
in 
parliament 
and 
those 
beyond parliament that would rectify this unfortunate 
situation 
because 
these 
were 
incredibly 
important 
decisions that were being made.  And as, you know, you 
raised earlier in the questions that you proposed, you 
know, we were firmly convinced by that stage that the most 
important role that the President, in particularly the 
selections that he was responsible for, that an institution 
like parliament played in the whole process of state 
10 
capture was in the very identity of people who were 
appointed to lead critical institutions whether, you know, 
whether by direct will and purpose of by accident, many of 
these appointments were not qualified either by virtue of 
their technical competence or their record of integrity and 
honesty to lead the institutions that they were appointed to 
lead. 
 
So we came, as I say, urgently wanting to think 
deeply about appointment processes and engage ourselves 
in them and we have done that ever since.  In the 
20 
parliament 
sphere 
the 
most 
important 
that 
we 
have 
engaged with have been those of the independent  police, 
investigating directorate and of the auditor general and 
those too were very distinct experiences. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 127 of 202 
 
MR FREUND SC:   Well, before we deal with those factual 
experiences, I think it would be as well to focus on the 
assessment that you make. I am looking at page 972 of the 
bundle.  Having described the gains as regards inclusivity 
and some measure of transparency you say in the middle 
of the page: 
“However, the lack of a robust process to scrutinise 
candidates using merit based and objective criteria 
gave rise to certain consequences.” 
So perhaps if you could just focus on this question of 
10 
criteria and the need for criteria in appointment processes 
generally and these particular appointment processes in 
particular. 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, you know, that partly goes to an earlier 
remark I made about there being no consistent questions 
that were posed to the candidate and if you look at the – 
even just the candidates for parliament you see that there 
is a real, you know – forgive the analogy a real dog’s 
breakfast of criteria that are presented there.  I mean, I 
cannot remember exactly which these apply to but I know 
20 
that in one case a qualifying criteria is employment 
experience in the public sector.  In the case of another 
candidate a disqualifying criteria is employment in the 
public service, so there are no standardised criteria and I 
accept, you know, there would be different obviously 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 128 of 202 
 
technical criteria from becoming the auditor general or the 
head of the IEC but particularly lacking or any indicators 
of, as I say, integrity and honesty and service, public and 
community service, so there is no criteria.   
If you want to take that broader, you know, and old 
hoary war story of these is that to become – the criteria for 
becoming a constable in the South African Police Service 
are infinitely more extensive and more rigorous than 
becoming the Commissioner of the South African Police 
Service.   
10 
 
So there are no standardised criteria and there are 
missing in many of the appointments a lack of pretty, you 
know, one would have thought self-evident criteria that the 
candidate needs to meet.  I think in the case of the SAPS 
Commissioner, the only criteria to be 18 years of age and 
to be a South African citizen, I do not think that the SAPS 
Act specifies any other criteria at all and so this is what, 
you know, in the recommendations that we make, merit 
based 
and 
objective 
criteria 
are 
amongst 
the 
most 
important and they apply – they are not, you know, rocket 
20 
science, this would be pretty standard human resource 
practice but it does not seem to apply to – and that applies 
across a lot of the public service, it does not apply to 
these – seemingly to these high level appointments with 
any degree of consistency. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 129 of 202 
 
MR FREUND SC:   Now I am going to come back to that 
because 
as 
you 
say, 
when 
you 
come 
to 
your 
recommendations that is pretty fundamental to it, but I just 
interrupted you when you were in transition between your 
experienced apropos of a particular appointment of a 
Public Protector and your experience in 2019 on the 
process to decide whether or not to renew the term of 
office of the Director of Independent Policing Investigative 
Directorate commonly referred to as IPID so perhaps you 
would like to pick up the thread at that point. 
10 
MR LEWIS:   Ja.  You know, IPID again, an institution that 
is very important for the realisation of our mission. 
Obviously 
the 
police 
are 
incredibly 
important 
actors, 
potentially, at any rate, in combat and corruption and 
corruption within the ranks of the police is very extensive, 
certainly judging by the volume of reports that we receive 
in this regard.  So we have engaged, you know, pretty 
extensively with the police portfolio committee both on 
policy matters and on matters of appointment and the 
important appointment that came up arose when the term 
20 
of office of the then head of IPID, Robert McBride, came to 
an end but unlike in the case of the Public Protector he 
was eligible, rightly or wrongly, from a – not sure what the 
term is, from the point of view of ensuring some integrity of 
a second term of office.  He was – I am not sure that it 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 130 of 202 
 
would necessarily pass constitutional muster but anyway, 
he came up – his term came up for renewal, we did not 
have a, you know, an overwhelmingly strong view on 
whether he should be renewed or not although we thought 
that he had done a job, a piece of work worth evaluating 
under any circumstances.  The committee in this – this is 
an unusual appointment process in that the Minister of 
Police makes the appointment subject to the approval of 
the committee, the Minister of Police has to put his 
selection to the committee both for appointment and for 
10 
renewal of appointment to the portfolio committee and 
there we discovered that there had been no assessment 
made of the – I think seven, or was it five?   Excuse me, I 
speak under correction here, whose five year term of office 
that McBride had already served.  The committee had 
during that five years met with him 43 times so we thought 
that they were in a very privileged position, if you like, to 
be able to assess his character and his performance but 
the minister was having none of it.  The minister and the 
committee were having none of it.   
20 
The minister decided that he was not to reappointed 
and the committee without really receiving reasons from 
the minister, without questioning the minister, simply 
accepted the minister ’s decision, you know, which goes to 
some of the earlier issues you were traversing today with 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 131 of 202 
 
some of the other witnesses regarding the subservience of 
some committees and some committee chairs to their sort 
of executive counterparts and this to us seemed like a 
particularly blatant example of total subservience because, 
you know, here you have an important appointment, 
admittedly 
a 
controversial 
candidate, 
but 
you 
know, 
somebody who many thought had done a robust job and 
who, above all, had been independent in executing his job 
and who we felt at least should have had the courtesy of 
being heard and being examined and being assessed in an 
10 
objective manner.   
In fact there was no assessment, there was no 
hearing, there was simply a ministerial decision made 
extremely late in the day and that was that.  I contrasted 
markedly 
on 
the 
other 
hand 
with 
our 
more 
recent 
experience which is not in this affidavit and I do not know 
if that precludes me from referring …[intervenes] 
MR FREUND SC:   Please go ahead. 
MR LEWIS:   The experience that we had with the 
appointment of the new auditor general.  You know, this is 
20 
again an incredibly important experience from the point of 
view – appointment from the point of view of combating 
corruption and maladministration. 
 
And 
there 
we 
found, 
you 
know, 
very 
active 
parliamentary – little team of parliament researchers for 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 132 of 202 
 
the committee that did the appointment, a committee that 
took its task and the committee chairperson that took its 
task very seriously.  We made a series of recommendations 
which we possibly should have annexed to this affidavit 
and I am happy to share with you.  We, in correspondence 
with the committee, made a series of recommendations as 
to transparency, public participation.  They received the 
recommendation. 
 
They even called for a – they even commissioned or 
briefed 
counsel 
on 
the 
quality, 
if 
you 
like 
of 
our 
10 
submissions to them, but – and in fact, you know, we were 
delighted that the response that came back from the 
counsel, who was briefed, was that our advice and our 
proposals to the committee accorded perfectly with the 
constitutional requirements for fairness and transparency 
and these were the principles and the practices that the 
committee adopted in making its appointment and I have to 
say by luck or otherwise, but I prefer to think by virtue of 
the process that was followed, an excellent candidate was 
appointed and this office is secure. 
20 
 
And so, you know, Deputy Chief Justice I think 
raised, you know, earlier in some of the submissions was 
this a function of personality or a process and it is a 
difficult thing to answer and I think the answer that you 
were given, I cannot remember by whom at the time, was I 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 133 of 202 
 
think …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a combination of both, I think. 
MR LEWIS:   Yes, I think it is a combination of two 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A combination of both, ja. 
MR LEWIS:   You know and so, you know, you have just, I 
suppose, win some and lose some, but you could eradicate 
the uncertainty by, you know, providing for standardised 
processes and to some degree standardise criteria was 
obviously – the smoke criteria built-in given the technical 
10 
nature of the job that is on offer or is under consideration 
and that could eliminate some of the sort of lottery-like 
character of who you were going to get out of these 
processes, both the parliamentary processes and the 
external processes. 
 
And then just to conclude this by saying that we 
were particularly cheered and encouraged by the manner in 
which the President chose to make the appointments of the 
heads of the NPA and the South African Police Service 
because there, as I pointed earlier, he has an absolute 
20 
unfettered discretion to do that on his own but he chose 
not to do that, he chose to appoint in each instances 
committees of people with expertise in policing and 
prosecuting and lawyering generally and these people 
constituted, you know, an advisory recommendation to him 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 134 of 202 
 
but they did an interviewing process, they developed 
criteria for doing the interviewing and then made their 
recommendation to the President, so nobody challenged, 
you know, and whether it should be or should not be 
challenged is an interesting question, the President’s sole 
rights to actually make the appointment but they did – but 
the process that he followed did provide him with the kind 
of necessary intelligence information and consideration to 
actually make a rational appointment, similarly, you know, 
in the work that we have done with parliament, we are not 
10 
necessarily saying that, you know, we may want to say that 
parliament’s role should be removed in actually making in 
the National Assembly actually making the decision on the 
basis 
of 
the 
recommendation 
if 
you 
see 
it 
in 
the 
parliamentary committee but there has got to be a rational 
process to do so and I am pleased that we are able to say 
that in the process that has been decided on to – on 
whether or not to remove the current Public Protector from 
office, the Speaker has set up a similar process where 
experts are – a small expert committee has been set up in 
20 
order to determine in the first instance whether there are – 
whether the grounds for removal have been met and this 
committee will advise the parliamentary committee, this 
committee 
of 
experts 
will 
advise 
the 
parliamentary 
committee on whether the grounds exist and the parliament 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 135 of 202 
 
committee will then be the decision-maker.  But, as I say, 
again, as in the case of the President’s decision regarding 
the appointment of the heads of the NPA and SAPS, some 
group of experts have been invited to consider the 
question and advise them that assist the committee in the 
incredibly important decision that it makes. 
MR FREUND SC:   Now, Mr Lewis, you also refer in your 
report to the recent inquiry headed by Judge Robert 
Nugent. 
MR LEWIS:   Yes. 
10 
MR FREUND SC:  On the question of the appointment of 
the Commissioner of the South African Revenue Service 
and really it is to the same effect, is it not, as what you are 
now asserting. 
MR LEWIS:   In fact thank you for that because it was not 
the head of SAPS, it was head of SARS that the President 
appointed the other committee.  Yes, you know, Judge 
Nugent’s advice in his recommendation in his Commission 
report, you know, supports both, you know, what we would 
like to see and it also, I should add, certainly in the case 
20 
of the head of the NPA, who he was not dealing with here, 
supports the advice of the recommendation of the national 
development plan where, you know, it said you set up the 
panel of experts, a multi-stakeholder committee, so they 
are not only, you know, technical experts, but people with, 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 136 of 202 
 
you know, expertise in policy-making in civil society 
arguably and these are the appropriate forms of making 
these appointments.  I think there is a big question about, 
you know, whether – Judge Nugent advocates a very strong 
de-politicisation of the process.   
There is a question over whether any form of 
politics should be able to intrude into the process.  I mean, 
we have been – maybe because we do not have direct 
experience of this and we are not experts in this, we have 
been struck by the Judicial Services Commission process 
10 
of the appointment of judges.  It seems to come closest to 
what we want because there is certainly more than a 
degree of politics in that process, I mean, I think that there 
is something like – I speak under correction but eight or 
ten members of parliament involved in that process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the majority are politicians, if I 
am not mistaken. 
MR LEWIS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR LEWIS:   And a minister involved in that process but 
20 
there are also – you know, there is also the Chief Justice 
and her Judge President and some heavy hitting senior 
counsel involved in it and I would imagine that they get 
heard, if you like. 
 
So, you know, that seems to us to be a role model 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 137 of 202 
 
worthy of consideration but so do the remarks of Judge 
Nugent 
or 
his 
recommendations, 
so 
do 
the 
recommendations of the national development plan with 
respect to the NPA and so do I say, with respect, does our 
own experience bear consideration because the system or 
systems at the moment are not producing the desired 
results with catastrophic consequences in some instances. 
MR FREUND SC:   Mr Lewis, you have laid a strong 
foundation 
but 
I 
would 
like 
to 
take 
you 
to 
your 
recommendations which we find at 976 and following in the 
10 
bundle and if I could maybe make this observation that 
your evidence and experience suggests that sometimes 
things work reasonably well and sometimes they do not, 
without intervention, yet you are proposing here that this 
Commission should intervene in the sense of making 
certain recommendations and so the question remains 
why?  Why should we not just be happy with things as they 
are? 
MR LEWIS:   Well, you know, firstly I do not think that one 
should be happy with a sort of win some, lose some 
20 
consideration when one can remove at least some of the 
uncertainty from that.  I mean, selection processes and I 
am sure, you know, all of us have been involved in them 
are never perfect processes and they often do not produce 
perfect outcomes with the best processes in the world but I 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 138 of 202 
 
think they should be given a chance and, you know, the 
recommendations here I think, again with respect, give 
them the best possible chance. 
 
And 
then 
I 
think 
because, 
you 
know, 
this 
Commission dealing with how to ensure, best ensure that 
state capture does not happen again are I am sure bound 
to make recommendations as to how that can be prevented 
and because of the clear importance – and I am not only 
talking about the kind of institutions mentioned here, I am 
talking of the heads of state owned enterprises, the boards 
10 
of state owned enterprises, the heads of these institution 
and I cannot say this strongly enough, were absolutely 
instrumental in the capture of the state and I would go 
further and say that the most important – I think I have 
said this already – most important role that the President 
played in securing state capture lay in his powers of 
appointments and his influence over other appointments, 
people who were appointed manifestly to secure access to 
procurement 
budgets, 
people 
who 
were 
appointed 
manifestly to secure access to the regulatory systems in 
20 
the mining sector, people who were appointed manifestly to 
ensure a compliant law enforcement or criminal justice 
system rather than a robust and independent criminal 
justice system. 
 
So that is why I think the Commission should 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 139 of 202 
 
concern itself with this question. 
MR FREUND SC:   Well, against that background would 
you 
just 
take 
us 
through 
the 
five 
principle 
recommendations which you make at pages …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second, Mr Freund, just one 
second.  I just want to say, Mr Lewis, those matters that 
you have just mentioned, the appointments of certain 
people to certain entities within the state are really very 
important matters when one considers what seems to have 
happened in terms of the evidence that the Commission 
10 
has heard and they are going to be very important in terms 
of the recommendations that the Commission should make 
in order to try and ensure that measures will be put in 
place to try and prevent a recurrence of what seems to 
have happened.  So you are right to emphasise that the 
Commission should pay special attention to how certain 
appointments seem to have been made with a view to 
facilitating wrongdoing and how the appointment processes 
should be looked at in regard to SOEs and other entities, 
maybe to try and make sure that prospects that something 
20 
similar could happen in the future are minimised.  So those 
are really important issues, we are keeping our focus on as 
well.  So I just thought I would mention that I think you are 
spot on in saying they deserve special attention. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 140 of 202 
 
MR LEWIS:   Thank you, Chair, that is very encouraging.  
Do you want me to go through these recommendations? 
MR FREUND SC:   I think you should not least because 
many people who will be listening or watching will not have 
an opportunity to have read this, so we need to just place 
on record the gist of what you are proposing. 
MR LEWIS:   Ja, we make five recommendations here.  You 
know, the first is to review the legislation and it would be 
quite a lot of legislation, to review the legislation that 
provides 
guidance 
on 
fair 
and 
objective 
appointment 
10 
processes.  You know, at the moment there is no single 
piece of legislation that governs the appointment of senior 
officials, it is spread throughout the legislation.  You know, 
I am not sure from a governance point of view whether 
there are good arguments to saying there should be single 
piece of legislation that governs all of this but  - or 
whether 
this 
standardised 
thing 
should 
be 
repeated 
through – those requirements should be repeated through 
various statutes that provide for the appointment of 
particular posts, but requirements were impartial, effective 
20 
and transparent processes that are set in law with 
prescribed criteria which candidates must adhere to can 
lead to fair appointments and appropriate and competent 
leaders, that can assist in protecting institutions from 
political interference without adequate laws such as in the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 141 of 202 
 
case 
of 
the 
IPID, 
appointments 
can 
legally 
happen, 
unilaterally with very few avenues for accountability.  So, 
you know as we recounted in the Police Committee 
experience, the Minister made the decision and the – 
provided no reasons for it and the Committee simply rubber 
stamped it.   
Secondly to develop a multi stakeholder structure to 
oversee the appointments, proceedings – I’m not sure that 
oversee is the right word there, to effectively, make the 
appointments, to be the selection Committees in these 
10 
instances and these – the models that we suggested there 
are the JSE, the selection committees established by the 
President to appoint the SARS – in a recent appointment, 
relatively recent appointment of the SARS Commissioner 
and the NDBP as well as the recent proposal by Parliament 
to institute an independent panel comprised of legal 
experts to consider whether there is a prima facie case to 
remove the current Public Protector.  Those and our 
experience of the Auditor General appointment, seemed to 
us to be the kind of role models that we should follow, 
20 
each of which involve expert stakeholders appropriate to 
the appointment that is being made.  
Secondly, where Parliament had, indeed – I don’t  - 
other 
processes 
are 
utilised 
to 
ensure 
that 
all 
Parliamentary 
succession 
selection 
processes 
are 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 142 of 202 
 
transparent and open and in, you know, what we have said 
here is that transparency should involve widely publishing 
the advertisement for the available position.  Publishing 
both the long lists and short lists of candidates as well as 
any 
supporting 
information 
provided 
by 
candidates.  
Sharing 
the 
budgets 
and 
expenditure 
related 
to 
appointments and ensuring that interviews and deliberation 
processes are open and accessible to the public.  Again, it 
seems to me, that the JSE is a good role model in this 
regard.  Fourthly the candidates must be tested for 
10 
integrity and ethics as well as their skills and expertise 
using clear merit based and objective criteria.  There are 
well tested HR methods for testing for things like integrity, 
elusive as these may see but they are well tried and tested 
mechanisms for doing so and how one can appoint the 
head of some of these institutions without integrity testing 
really boggles the mind but there should be proper 
screening of candidates.  Adequate vetting based on the 
objective criteria of which ethical conduct in the past is 
paramount.  So, that’s the fourth recommendation and then 
20 
fifthly to ensure that the principle, the public participation 
is a virtual tenant in Parliamentary appointment processes.  
This would allow for the public as well as for employees in 
the various oversight institutions where the appointments 
are being made, to be appraised of the ability as in 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 143 of 202 
 
characteristics that the new appointee should bring to the 
job.   
In the Public Protector case, one of the things that 
we did, was to send around a questionnaire to every 
employee in the Public Protector Service to ask them, what 
they 
think 
should 
be 
the 
qualities 
that 
should 
be 
foregrounded in the selection of the Public Protector and it 
produced really interesting results, interesting outcomes, 
managerial skills and quality were favoured by some, 
integrity was favoured by others, some wanted only judges 
10 
or former judges to qualify for – to be head of the Public 
Protector but they were informative and as I say, cost 
nothing, to ask of people who’d actually worked in the 
Public Protector ’s office, who were working in the Public 
Protector ’s office, what sort of head they would like to see.  
So, we would really like to, you know, as one of the 
recommendations 
that 
we 
make 
is 
to 
ensure 
that 
opportunities for public participation really be maximised 
because they do not always produce the results that you 
imagine that they might produce, and they do provide for 
20 
much greater legitimacy at the end of the appointment 
processes.  So those were the appointments that – those 
were the recommendations that we made.  As I say, we 
have not made a recommendation as to whether we think 
Parliament should be a decision maker or the President 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 144 of 202 
 
should make be a decision maker, you know, that maybe 
should be debated and considered, I’m not sure but to my 
mind what is paramount is that whoever the decision maker 
is, should be informed by a public participation process by 
expertise by integrity testing and that seems to me, 
whether it’s Parliament of the President who makes the 
final decision, they should be informed by a process that 
allows for an informed, intelligent, rational decision to be 
made. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Mr Lewis, I have no further 
10 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
Mr 
Lewis, 
I 
think 
the 
recommendations that you make, that you have just dealt 
with now, seem to cover the important pillars as I would 
call them that need to be looked at, if one wishes to 
improve the quality of the candidates who get appointed to 
some of the institutions, I means, speaking within the 
context of SOE’s, I certainly have been thinking that it’s 
going to be important to look at the kind of criteria that 
should be looked at in selecting people who will be 
20 
considered as members of Boards of SOE’s.  So, one talks 
about the criteria, what criteria they must meet and then 
apart from that, you need to look at the process or 
appointment, what type of process should it be and what 
should it be, it’s main features and transparency becomes 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 145 of 202 
 
an important feature, should be an important feature of 
that process and then there’s the question of, who should 
make the appointment within the context of the SOE’s if 
one 
talks 
about 
the 
SOE’s 
which 
have 
featured, 
prominently in the investigation of the Commission, one 
talks 
about 
appointments 
that 
have 
been 
made 
by 
politicians 
and 
if 
one 
looks 
at 
the 
SOE’s 
that 
the 
Commission has been looking at.  If that is anything to go 
by, the politicians have, to a very large extent, done a very 
bad job in terms of appointments but maybe that is 
10 
because the processes that were in place were not 
processes that enabled or promoted quality appointments.  
Obviously, at least in some case, one would imagine there 
would be politicians, or at least some of them wouldn’t 
have, deliberately, wanted to appointment – make wrong 
appointments but there’s a suggestion in the evidence – or 
the evidence does suggest that there may be case, and 
there may be a number of them where the appointments 
were made in order to facilitate wrongdoing.  So your 
recommendations seem to talk to all of those pillars that 
20 
I’m talking about, the criteria that must be met by 
candidates, the processes that must be followed before 
those candidates are appointed and the question of who 
should make the appointments and you said that, in regard 
to who should make the appointments you have not put up 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 146 of 202 
 
any strong recommendations but it may well be that if, for 
example, a politician is going to make the decision there 
should be a body prior to the politician making that 
decision, that appointment, which makes a recommendation 
and the politician is not, at large to go against that 
recommendation.  So, one may have to look at matters 
such as that, I don’t know whether you want to say 
anything about that kind of scenario, for example.  Namely 
not just leaving it at saying it might not matter who makes 
the appointment as long as – the appointments as long as 
10 
they make informed decisions but saying well, maybe 
somebody must make a recommendation and somebody 
else must make a decision but the one who makes the 
decision 
should 
not, 
lightly, 
go 
against 
the 
recommendation. Have you got something to say about that 
Mr Lewis? 
MR LEWIS:   You know, my understanding, Chair, is that – 
it that in the case of the appointment of the Boards of 
SOE’s, these are largely made by way of a Minister, the 
Minister responsible for the SOE making recommendations 
20 
to Cabinet which are rarely rejected although I think 
sometimes 
are 
really 
questioned 
although 
maybe 
sometimes are and I think, in the case of SOE’s there is a 
very good argument with setting up a structure that filters 
candidates 
for 
Board 
membership 
and 
that 
makes 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 147 of 202 
 
recommendations to the Minister.  Whether the Minister 
should be given absolutely no discretion or not, I don’t 
know, I think probably you’d prefer a situation like the JSE 
again 
where 
more 
recommendations 
are 
made 
than 
positions that are available to give the Minister some 
discretions but it’s absolutely vital in the case of SOE’s 
that this be done, you know,  I’m not of the school that 
believes that you have to be an expert, sort of, Electrical 
Engineer to be on the Board of Eskom or a Transport 
Economist to be on the Board of Transnet but you’ve got to 
10 
have some people who know about how – about energy and  
you’ve got to know some people who you know about 
finance and then you’ve got to just have some people who 
are honest, smart, experienced people in governing huge 
and complex institutions, who maybe have no particular 
technical expertise to appoint.   
So, you need to have an intelligent view of what mix 
of skills do you need on a Boards of these incredibly 
complex institutions and they are more complex institutions 
than private sector Boards because you have the real 
20 
difficulty of having to balance the public interest together 
with commercial and financial sustainability and this is a 
very, very complex, difficult mix to manage and so you 
need people with very special skills. You need people with 
skills in Development Economics or Development work but 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 148 of 202 
 
there should be a Committee that is able to assess the 
suitability of candidates for this work and you could even 
work up a pool of suitable candidates from whom choices 
could be made when the need arises.  They needn’t only be 
– the suitable candidates need not only be identified when 
the time comes to appoint a Board.   
So, I think this is a very important consideration 
because, definitely, in the case of some of the SOE’s and 
the State Capture stories that have come out of it, there 
was a mixture of, if you like, bad faith and incompetence.  
10 
You know, people who just served on Boards that they had 
no particular competence to serve on, they may have been 
people, very competent in other spheres of life but to go 
onto the Boards of one of these massive organisations 
without some particular skill, and as I say, it needn’t 
necessarily be a technical skill that you bring to the party, 
is a recipe for disaster. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I heard evidence in regard to one 
of the SOE’s that when a certain Board that was said to 
have done extremely well during its term and the Minister 
20 
had spoken in high praise of the Board but then – and 
there had been talk that it’s term would be extended the 
way they were doing well but then, suddenly a decision 
was taken not to extend their term and they were all 
allowed to go except, I think I was told, to one member just 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 149 of 202 
 
for continuity but the one member who – of the Board who 
was retained was said, in the evidence before me, to be a 
member who had been very quiet throughout the previous 
term so that’s what was said.  Okay, alright, thank you.  Mr 
Freund did you say you are done, you have no further 
questions? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I have no further questions Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you very much Mr 
Lewis for coming to assist us, we appreciate it, and you 
are now excused. 
10 
MR LEWIS:   Thank you and thank you for the opportunity 
to make these submissions to you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I believe you’re quite possibly 
under considerable time constraints, Ms Rault-Smith, I see 
is still with us, I would be only too happy to go back and 
try and lead her evidence, but I don’t know if you have 
other commitments? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t see the next team for the evening 
session as yet, so I think let’s start with Ms Rault-Smith 
20 
and see how we go, what’s your estimate of how long she 
might be? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I would have thought an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.  I think, let’s just take 
five minutes adjournment, ten minutes adjournment – ten 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 150 of 202 
 
minutes adjournment not five and then we’ll resume and 
then let’s continue with her, we adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:    All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, Chair.  And it seems that we have 
good connection.  Now Chair, you will recall that we 
interposed 
because 
of 
connection 
issues. 
 
We 
had 
commenced the evidence under affirmation of Ms Rault-
10 
Smith.  Her evidence is in Exhibit ZZ-8. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Which is on pages 754 and following. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can you just repeat the file?  I just want 
to see whether it is the same one I have or is another 
bundle. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Bundle 2 which you would have had 
before but it would not been the same bundle as Mr Lewis. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV FREUND SC:   ZZ-8, it starts from page 754. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I have got it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Miss ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   And Chair, you will recall that at the 
moment we were interrupted, I had taken the witness 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 151 of 202 
 
through the existence of three reports that she had 
compiled.   
 
I had taken her through two confirmatory that were 
in good order but I had taken her through a third 
confirmatory that had an error in it. 
 
And the witness had said that she will attend with 
the assistance of the Commission, no doubt, to a short 
subsequent affidavit to rectify the error so as to make clear 
that was intended to be annexed was the parliamentary 
oversight report and not the PRASA report as it is stated in 
10 
error. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It was in those circumstances that I 
was in the process of asking you Chair provisionally and 
subject 
to 
that 
further 
confirmatory 
being 
received 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV FREUND SC:   ...to admit into the bundle as Exhibit 
ZZ-8 the three affidavits and their annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are they each standalone affidavits in 
20 
the sense that they are not ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   They...  So the first point starts at 755. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV FREUND SC:   And goes through to 825. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 152 of 202 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And there are, as far as I am aware, 
no difficulties with that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay it goes to eight.. 762 and then 
their annexures, is that right? 
ADV FREUND SC:   With annexures it goes up to 825. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   755 to 825 is the first one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this should be Exhibit ZZ? 
ADV FREUND SC:   ZZ-8.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   8.1.  The affidavit of Ms Jennifer Phyllis 
10 
Rault-Smith which starts at 875 is admitted together with 
its annexures and would be marked as Exhibit ZZ-8.1.  
Okay. 
AFFIDAVIT WITH ANNEXURES OF JENNIFER PHYLLIS 
RAULT-SMITH STARTING AT PAGE 875 IS ADMITTED 
AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT ZZ-8.1 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Then similarly, from 
page 825 through to page 875 to be admitted as Annexure 
ZZ-8.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Ms Jennifer Phyllis 
20 
Rault-Smith 
starting 
at 
page 
825 
together 
with 
its 
annexures is admitted and will be marked as Exhibit ZZ-
8.2.   
AFFIDAVIT WITH ANNEXURES OF JENNIFER PHYLLIS 
RAULT-SMITH STARTING AT PAGE 825 IS ADMITTED 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 153 of 202 
 
AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT ZZ-8.2 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  And then Chair the 
third one is from 876 through to 899.  That is the one 
where I have indicated to you that there is a mistake in the 
confirmatory which needs to be sorted out.   
 
It has been sorted out by the evidence under 
affirmation by the witness to you this afternoon.  And 
really, what it does is that it points out that the annexure 
that was intended to be referred to in the affidavit or that 
the affidavit refers to the wrong annexure. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It says it is incorporating the PRASA 
Report when it is meant to be incorporating the report on 
parliamentary oversight. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 
 
But 
notwithstanding 
that, 
my 
submission is that there is no reason why you should not 
admit as Exhibit ZZ-8.3 the affidavit at 876 through to 899 
as an exhibit before the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am just thinking whether it is enough to 
20 
do it that way or whether it is better or her – simply give 
her oral evidence without referring to this confirmatory 
affidavit and dealing with the correct report. 
 
And then afterwards, the correct confirmatory 
affidavit can be put in together with the correct report.  And 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 154 of 202 
 
in the confirmatory affidavit, what happened today can just 
be indicated that she gave evidence without referring to 
this affidavit. 
 
This is what has happened but this is what should 
have been put in and it is now been put in. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes.  Judge, that will certainly be in 
order from our perspective. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But the implicating, if I understand you 
correctly, is the actual report which is the report that starts 
10 
at page 883. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It runs through to 899, will be referred 
to by the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And therefore should be admitted as 
an exhibit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes, yes.   
ADV FREUND SC:   So I will then ask you to admit by 
whatever number you think appropriate but perhaps it 
20 
would be 8.3(a), the exhibit that runs from pages 883 
through to 899. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You say this will be exhibit...? 
ADV FREUND SC:   8.3(a). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Starting with ZZ or not? 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 155 of 202 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   ZZ, yes.  Sorry, ZZ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   ZZ-8.3(a) and it is to be found in 
Bundle 2 from page 883 and following. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  The report starting at page 883 is 
admitted as an exhibit and will be marked as Exhibit ZZ-
8.3(a).  Is that right? 
ADV FREUND SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.   
10 
REPORT STARTING AT PAGE 883 AS PART OF THE 
WITNESS, 
JENNIFER 
PHYLLIS 
RAULT-SMITH’S 
AFFIDAVITS IS SUBMITTED AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT 
ZZ-8.3(A) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Now Ms Rault-
Smith, can I now take you back to the first of those 
affidavits, starting from page 755? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us check that you can hear.  The last 
20 
time you – there was a problem.  Can you see me and can 
you hear me well? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes, thank you Chair I can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I can hear you quite well as well.  So 
the oath or affirmation that took earlier on continues to 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 156 of 202 
 
apply, okay? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Thank you. 
JENNIFER PHYLLIS RAULT-SMITH:  (still affirmed) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright.  Mr Freund.   
EXAMINATION 
BY 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC 
(CONTINUES):   
Thank you Chair.  If you go please to Bundle 2, page 755.  
That is the first page of your first affidavit.   
MS RAULT-SMITH:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   And you will recall that this is the 
affidavit that annexes the report that you did on BOSASA. 
10 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Right. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now what I would like you to do is just 
with reference with what you say in paragraphs 4 through 
to 10 of your affidavit.  Just summarise very briefly.  What 
is the Parliamentary Monitoring Group and how does it go 
about its business? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Thank you.  The Parliamentary 
Monitoring Group came into existence in about 1995 when 
a number of Ngo’s realised that the committee system of 
the new Parliament is really important. 
20 
 
And it was important for them to observe what 
decisions would be taken in the committees.  They were 
constructing a whole new democratic society but obviously, 
with nearly 50 committees, one little NGO was not able to 
monitor all of the committees. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 157 of 202 
 
 
And so it was decided by these NGO’s, the three of 
them that got together and I know Prof Calland mentioned 
also last week. 
 
And they decided to institute an organisation, 
exactly the same as about 220 others in the world and it is 
called the Parliamentary Monitoring Group. 
 
So it is not a unique group but it is unique to South 
Africa.  And this group got together, created a very small 
organisation, maybe half a dozen full time people. 
 
In addition to that, the actual people who go and 
10 
monitor are volunteers who get paid like a stipend and you 
can apply to go and monitor. 
 
There are processes for and criteria for checking 
that you are able to do what you have to do.  And PMG is 
very strongly supported by various faculties at the local 
universities. 
 
And so a lot of our monitors are postgraduate 
students who are studying Law, International Relations, 
Political Science and so on. 
 
And so by monitoring, not only do they contribute 
20 
towards 
this 
democratic 
process 
but 
they 
are 
also 
extending their own understanding of their field. 
 
So that is how it is set up.  And what happens is, 
you go – you allocate to a committee.  You go to the 
committee, you take an MP3 player, you take audio 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 158 of 202 
 
recording of the entire meeting and that gets uploaded 
onto the website. 
 
So at any time anybody can listen to the entire 
meeting of the audio.  So if a recorded tenders to miss 
something it would still be there in the audio. 
 
Then you take your copy of the recording home, 
you have made notes, especially who is speaking at you 
are listening to it, and you write out a slim a report as you 
possibly can.   
 
It is very much like the Hansard but it is in 
10 
reported speech.  And then once you have done that it gets 
send back to the Parliamentary Monitoring Group.   
 
They do an edit of it and they do a quality control 
of it and then that gets loaded up onto the website together 
with all the documentation that was presented at that 
particular meeting. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, in terms, would record it, report 
it and the also bring back and make available public to all 
documents tabled before that particular portfolio committee 
and all of that in due course is processed on the PMG 
20 
website. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes.  The intention to get it all up 
within three days of a meeting.  So the audio recording 
goes up immediately with all the other documentation. 
 
And it also includes an attendance list of which 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 159 of 202 
 
parliamentarians were there, who from that committee, 
maybe the Minister and other people. 
 
So all of that goes up.  And basically that is what – 
there must be about 50 monitors who do that and there are 
people who drawn from all walks of life. 
 
As 
I 
said, 
there 
are 
a 
large 
of 
number 
of 
postgraduate students.  And on the website, you can 
access all of this information but there is a subscription 
fee for business and government departments, simply to 
help maintain the organisation. 
10 
 
So the subscriptions maintain about a quarter of 
the operating costs and then there are some who supports 
democracy that substitutes the rest of the costs. 
 
I think I can say there are reports – I would not 
call them minutes because there is a special meaning to 
the word minutes and Parliament does have its own 
minutes. 
 
But our reports are pretty accurate.  They have 
been used by tens of thousands of people over the past 
two decades.  And we have got a very positive relationship 
20 
with Parliament.  Parliament helps us to access all of those 
documents if you have difficulty in the committee or 
something. 
 
So we are actually quite grateful to Parliament for 
supporting us in a way we try and support Parliament and 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 160 of 202 
 
democracy. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the reason why the service is 
necessary because Hansard which covers debates on the 
floor of the National Assembly and presumable the NCOP, 
does not keep records of portfolio committee meetings and 
that was the gap that your organisation was essentially 
founded in order to address.  Is that correct? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is exactly it.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now having regard to yourself 
personally, if I can refer you to paragraph 15 of your 
10 
confirmatory 
affidavit 
at 
page 
759. 
 
You 
had 
a 
distinguished career before you became a monitor.   
 
And really, if you can just explain to the Chair what 
your background is and that you have experience of 
dealing with the parliamentary committees, not only as a 
monitor 
but 
as 
a 
person 
reporting 
to 
parliamentary 
committees. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes.  I started out as an educator in 
Bonteheuwel.  And eventually ended up working for the 
Department of Education.  I worked with Western Cape 
20 
Department of Education.  I was head of matric exams and 
curriculum.   
 
And obviously, we often got questions or there was 
a meeting in Parliament and our department had to present 
and if you were directed upwards then you could have been 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 161 of 202 
 
chosen to go along to the parliamentary meeting.  So I 
went a number of times. 
 
And specifically when there were questions asked, 
Parliament...  Well, provincial legislature questions, then 
they would be on exams or they have done incorrectly and 
then I would have to answer those questions and present 
them to the DG to the Minister to be able to answer. 
 
And from there, I went up to Pretoria to the 
National Department of Education and I was a Chief 
Director for curriculum and some of the assessments there 
10 
as well. 
 
And exactly the same thing there.  I was actually 
asked 
to 
go 
to 
Parliament, 
present 
sometimes 
and 
definitely answer a lot of questions to Parliament. 
 
So I had seen Parliament from the other side and I 
was very familiar with the workings of the departments.  I 
know exactly how a department works. 
 
So when the course of events left a huge gap in 
my life.  I heard about the Parliamentary Monitoring Group 
and I decided that – I studied Political Science in my 
20 
degree.  So similar background. 
 
And so then I – it is now been four years that I 
have been doing it.  And then because I was doing two 
sometimes 
even 
three 
meetings 
a 
week 
and 
really 
enjoying, I must say.  I learnt a lot. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 162 of 202 
 
 
And then this issue came up.  I was asked to write 
the report, basically, because I understood Parliament 
quite well.  I understood departments and I knew my way 
around the PMG website which is quite an immense 
website. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  Now when you say when this 
issue came up, I think you must be alluding to the fact that 
I 
had 
some... 
with 
the 
senior 
people 
within 
the 
Parliamentary Monitoring Group and the PMG equipped to 
assist the Commission and eventually decided, at least in 
10 
the first instance, to commission two reports.   
 
One on oversight on BOSASA by the Portfolio 
Committee on Correctional Services and one on oversight 
by the Portfolio Committee on Transport.  And you were 
requested by the PMG to actually prepare those reports.  Is 
that correct. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you say in your affidavit is 
essentially this.  You went through the massive material in 
both issues – relevant to both issues and searched through 
20 
the material of the PMG to find any instances that were 
relevant to the question of oversight, whether they were 
good oversight or bad oversight. 
 
You then compiled long and detailed reports as to 
what actually happened in those portfolio committees we 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 163 of 202 
 
described and also other portfolio committees and question 
in The House and so forth. 
 
You trawled through the PMG records in order to 
prepare these two reports.  Would that be correct? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And let me focus firstly on the report 
that is annexed to the first affidavit.  This is the report on 
BOSASA.  If I can take you to paragraph 16 of your 
affidavit at page 759. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   You say the following in your affidavit 
as appear from the initial portion of the report annexed to 
this affidavit under the heading Scope of this Report: 
“It is designed to follow the attempts of 
Parliament through its system of committees to 
have 
oversight 
over 
the 
Department 
of 
Correctional Services as regards to contract 
with the BOSA group of companies and the... 
to policy and acts of Parliament including the 
Public Finance Management Act”. 
20 
 
So that was really the purpose of the report. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you explained...  You explain 
how the original Portfolio Committee evolved into a slightly 
different Portfolio Committee and how you followed its 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 164 of 202 
 
work, how you followed SCOPA, how you looked at The 
House or questions in The House, how you looked at press 
reports, how you correlated the press reports with what 
appeared in these reports of portfolio committees, and that 
all appears from the text of your report itself.  Am I right? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then I am not going to take you at 
all through the substantive content of your BOSASA report 
but you do make the observation that – this is what you 
say in paragraph 19 of your affidavit, page 751.   
10 
 
You say - you draw comfort from the fact that 
Mr James himself, an MP, who attended many of the 
meetings, has had regard to your report and attended 
most, if not all of those meetings, and confirmed that he 
thinks this is a good report that properly summarises the 
events. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I sit correct that you really did virtually 
the same type of exercise.  I am now moving to page 785.  
Is it the same type of exercise in relation to parliamentary 
20 
oversight over the Passenger Transport Agency of South 
Africa, generally known as PRASA? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And your report as you we have 
already mentioned on PRASA, starts at page 832.  It is a 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 165 of 202 
 
lengthy and detailed report but your methodology was 
precisely the same. 
 
You were looking at the extent of parliamentary 
oversight in relation to PRASA.  You focussed in part or 
largely on the Transport Portfolio Committee but if the 
issue came before SCOPA, if the issue gave rise to 
question in The House, you noted that. 
 
And you deal from and extracted and put into your 
report the records of the PMG on those incidents and 
issues.  Is that correct? 
10 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is correct.  The PRASA report 
begin with the Fourth Parliament in 2009 because PRASA 
was only constituted just before that. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is correct.  And indeed, when it 
all came about the BOSASA report, it went back earlier 
than that because in fact the issues of alleged corruption 
involving the BOSASA group of companies went back 
earlier. 
 
So you in fact, went right back to the beginning of 
the essence of the relationship between that department 
20 
and that portfolio committee and how its understanding of 
its function evolved. 
 
How it took some time for it to come to the view 
that it actually was required to look at issues of alleged 
corruption.  And it did address that and you followed the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 166 of 202 
 
whole history of that in your report.   
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes, I did.  Yes.   
ADV FREUND SC:   So I do not propose to take you any 
further on either of those two reports today.  I think the 
documents speaks for themselves.   
 
It is safe perhaps to make the observation again 
that in paragraph 19 of your affidavit at page 830 you say 
you draw comfort from the fact that Mr Manny de Freitas, 
MP, who attended many of the meetings referred to in your 
report, has confirmed that in his view, the PMG reports are 
10 
reasonable accurate. 
 
And he is going to depose to an affidavit to that 
effect.  He did depose to an affidavit to that effect.  And he 
did testify before the Commission that he thought that the 
report was a reasonable reflection or to the best of his 
knowledge of what happened on those issues. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now what I would like to take you to in 
a bit more detail is your third report.  And that is the one 
where I am not going to take you through the affidavit that 
20 
has the error. 
 
But I would like to take you to your report that 
starts at page 883.  And it runs through, so far as I am 
aware, including its appendixes 899.  Is that correct? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 167 of 202 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now that report, as I understand it 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   ...actually grew out of your earlier 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   In the process of compiling your 
PRASA report, in the process of compiling your BOSASA 
report ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund.  I am sorry.  
10 
Ms Rault-Smith, was that answer a yes?  I think there is 
something that Mr Freund asked you about the last page of 
your report and the answer was not audible, at least to me. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is my last page, 900. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
MS RAULT-SMITH:   But you know that I am a bit wary of 
this ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, my last page is 899 and I suspect 
Mr Freund’s one is 899.  But Mr Freund, is the question 
that you had asked her and I think it may have been to 
20 
confirm that that report goes up to page 899. 
 
So I did not hear answer.  That is what I wanted to 
confirm but you might wish to ask that question again so 
that we know whether we have the same number of pages 
or not. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 168 of 202 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, let me do that a little bit more 
carefully.  Am I correct Ms Rault-Smith that it starts at – 
the main body of the report starts at 883 and it goes 
through to 894 before we come to the first annexure? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Uhm ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Sorry.  Having said that ...[intervenes]  
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   May I was right.  Yes, I think I was 
right because on my copy, the top of 895 is the beginning 
of Appendix 1.  Do you have the same? 
10 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Okay.  [laughs]  This is the one that I 
had to print out because it was not included.  So on the 
page that says Annexure A, Report by the Parliamentary 
Monitoring Group on Parliamentary Oversight, for me that 
is page 884. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  So I am one page out all the 
way through. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is alright.  I will follow. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Because that is your first page, 884 
the end of Appendix 2, you say, comes to 900 whereas in 
20 
the records of the Chair and myself it goes to 899.   
MS RAULT-SMITH:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is a consequence of the fact 
that you live in Cape Town and documents have had to be 
emailed to you and you have done some pagination 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 169 of 202 
 
yourself.  Is that correct? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes.  Well, it is printed on here that 
page but then I did not get a hard copy of it but it is fine.  
Go with your page numbers.  I will – I really have no 
problem at all. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think it should be possible because 
it looks like you are one page ahead of us.  So Mr Freund, 
you just mentioned the page numbers are according to 
what we have and you will know that you have to go one 
10 
page further.  Okay Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you.  Now before I take you 
to any specific pages.  I was asking you a general question 
and it relates to the original of this third report.  And I was 
putting it to your comment.  You can correct me or confirm.   
 
That really what happened is that in the process of 
compiling your first two reports, the BOSASA report and 
the PRASA report. 
 
You 
tend 
to 
some 
sort 
of 
more 
general 
observations and you also sought a little bit about your 
20 
experience on other committees beyond those committees.   
 
And you started to think about incorporating into 
those reports some general observations.  And then in 
discussion with me it was agreed that rather than doing 
that you would extract that. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 170 of 202 
 
 
And you would make that a separate self-standing 
report 
that 
deals 
generally 
with 
the 
question 
of 
parliamentary oversight and its effectiveness.  Is that a fair 
summary? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is exactly what happened.  I was 
being very careful because PMG is neutral, none part of 
and does not take sides and I did not want to say PMG 
thinks this but it is inevitable that observations will come 
out.  So what I really put in my observations and maybe a 
comment on the observations. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And really what I am interested 
in, placing as evidence before the Chair today, is really 
some of your observations. 
 
So you deal in this report by way of background, 
with the material that the Commission is well-familiar with.  
The legislative background and the rules and so forth. 
 
And what I would like to do is.  I would like to take 
you really from page 885 on my pagination, that is typed 
page 3 at the foot of the page. 
 
And you then start dealing with parliamentary 
20 
committees and you explain how they are established 
under the rules and then from page – from the next page, 
page 886 you start to emerge yourself in the detail of your 
experience as an observer of portfolio committees.  And 
that is really the meat of what I want to try and – and try to 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 171 of 202 
 
give on the record this afternoon.   
 
Now in the third paragraph of page 866 of my 
papers, you talk about the work of each committee in 
producing a budgetary review and recommendation report 
known as the ...[indistinct – word cut off].   If you could 
briefly describe what that is and what a big job that is and 
how much of the committee’s time that takes. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Well, every committee has to produce 
this, BRRR, in order for the department to get its funding 
and so what it requires is consideration of the annual plan 
10 
of the medium term expenditure framework, they had to go 
through the budgets, they have to look a previous budgets, 
they have to see what they have spent and they have to 
draw up this plan and this one of the issues about the 
committee is when they draw up the BRRR it is their 
committee, their department.  So I am transport and this is 
my department and I want to make sure they get the most 
money and so on. 
 
But then, on the other hand, if they get that money 
and 
they 
do 
not 
spend 
it 
properly 
then 
that 
same 
20 
committee has got to censure them or at least do some sort 
of oversight.  So really, that BRRR report is an enormous 
report, a lot of is done by the committee staff and the 
committee staff basically write most of the reports and then 
leave 
the 
recommendations 
and 
the 
findings 
to 
the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 172 of 202 
 
committee and the committee then puts that down and that 
is what goes through as the key part of their report. 
MR FREUND SC:   So this is intended to enable parliament 
to make an input on the whole process of budgeting which, 
of course, has to in due course go to finance and 
ultimately result in an approved national budget in which 
an allocation will be made by the department and the 
committee plays a role in that process through its annual 
BRRR report. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is correct, yes. 
10 
MR FREUND SC:   Now you make the point in the next 
paragraph that the most effective power the portfolio 
committee has, to enforce adherence to legislation and 
policy lies in not approving the budget of a department and 
that is a theoretical sanction but it is very drastic and you 
make the point that it is just – it has never been done 
although occasionally that [indistinct] 02.21 has been 
made. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   That is correct, it is far too drastic 
because it basically would close down a department and so 
20 
at least one, if not more, committees has threatened to do 
it, but nobody has actually done it because it is really 
drastic, it means you will not have a Department of 
Transport or Home Affairs or whatever it happens to be and 
I think something would have to be very drastic to take that 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 173 of 202 
 
kind of a step. 
MR FREUND SC:   Right.  And then what you do is you 
move on, I am looking at the third last paragraph on the 
same page, you explain the nuts and bolts of monitoring 
and oversight.  You say: 
“Despite other mechanisms, committees rely largely 
on self-reporting by departments or entities as other 
methods can incur costs and be time-consuming.” 
And you now – you deal in some detail with the inherent 
limitations in oversight which takes place largely by 
10 
listening to presentations presented by the overseen entity.  
Would you just like to talk to that briefly? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Well, the department has to come and 
present this is what we have done for the year, here is my 
quarterly report, here is my annual report, this is what we 
have achieved, these are the challenges we faced, but a 
department is not going to come and self-incriminate.  
They are not going to come and say oh, we misused some 
money, or whatever, they will present challenges which 
would be along the line of we did not get enough budget to 
20 
be able to meet these targets or we could not fill all of our 
posts because there was a limit on the number of posts 
that you are allowed to fill.  So those challenges are 
presented and they are fair, they have got nothing to do 
with the department but a department will never say we are 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 174 of 202 
 
in trouble because we did not have internal audit taking 
control of it and one cannot expect anybody to self-
incriminate, I do not think, and that is where the problem 
comes.   
And making it worse is that they tend to present 
these hugely elaborate reports, PowerPoint presentations, 
sometimes like over a hundred PowerPoint slides and it is 
just impossible to get through it and a [indistinct] 4.51 that 
says that well, this is our mandate and this is the 
legislation, I mean, things that everybody knows.   
10 
 
So there is time spent on things that are no 
importance in terms of their achievements or their budget 
or whatever but they do not actually get to the nitty gritty 
of this is what is going wrong or this is what – well, I 
suppose they often say this is what has gone right. 
MR FREUND SC:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just let me ask some question about 
that.  It may be that if one is looking at whatever may have 
gone wrong in a particular department being of a criminal 
nature and involving the person who must report to a 
20 
particular portfolio committee it may well be that they might 
not want to incriminate themselves but I do not see why 
you would not expect a department, because you seem not 
to expect them to say that, to say we have not done as well 
as we should have in the past financial year or in the past 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 175 of 202 
 
12 months, we had aimed to – we had the following 
problems at the beginning of the past 12 months, a, b, c, d, 
we had identified them, these are the measures we put in 
place to try and get – to address those problems and we 
were sure that by the end of the 12 month period half of 
them would have been sorted out or all of them would have 
been sorted out but we have failed, we admit that we have 
failed.  We have only solved two out of the six major 
problems we wanted to sort out but we know we have 
failed.  This is why we have failed and because we have 
10 
identified precisely what it is that made us fail; we now 
know what to do in the next 12 months to make sure that 
we are sorted out.  So there you have somebody or a 
department that owns up to its failures but puts in place 
measures to improve.  So why do you not expect them to 
do that kind of thing? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Chair, you are exactly correct.  If I 
may say, you could be a DG talking.  That is exactly what 
they do do because they have got a number of targets and 
they will come and say we have met five targets, five we 
20 
were not able to meet but maybe I am focusing too much 
on this concept of corruption and things.  That they cannot 
tell.  They can say to you we did not have enough to meet 
this, we did not have enough staff, this did not work out, 
we – maybe it was a contract that did not work out and 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 176 of 202 
 
there was an appeal and we had to re-advertise the tender.  
So there are reasons for that but, you know, to say I have 
done – this is not finished, that is not completed, I have 
not met these targets, that is what parliament can deal with 
perfectly.  Parliament can deal with the things that are 
normal, above board and they do and they say to them 
well, what do have in place to fix this up?  And that works 
very well but there is more wrong then it is below the table, 
so to speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, of course, I would imagine that 
10 
what may encourage them not to give parliament full 
disclosure of what has gone wrong is if they know that 
chances that parliament is going to find out what they have 
not disclosed that has gone wrong are minimal then they 
may be encouraged not to tell parliament. 
 
But 
if 
they 
knew 
that 
the 
particular 
portfolio 
committee exercises proper oversight and even if they do 
not tell the committee some of the wrong things that have 
happened, the committee will find out, then they may 
decide well, we rather be, you know, be candid with the 
20 
committee because if it finds out on its own then they will 
say to us why did we not include this in the report and if 
you are the DG you are going to be in trouble because it 
would mean you were misleading parliament by hiding 
something that they should know that has gone wrong in 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 177 of 202 
 
the department but if they know that it is unlikely that 
parliament will find out what we have not told them then 
they would feel quite comfortable not disclosing those 
things.  Would you not agree? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Parliament can find out quite a bit if 
they read the auditor ’s report because where parliament 
cannot go in and check … [intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what I have been told – and I am 
sorry, I am interrupting you - from what I have heard it 
looks like very few members of parliament read the 
10 
auditor ’s report or do anything about most of those reports.  
That is just what I have heard, you know, the auditor 
general has filed – the late auditor general had prepared 
an affidavit which he was not able to sign, which we have 
got here, which suggests that year in, year out the auditor 
general will send his reports to parliament and there will 
be no improvement on things that have been pointed out in 
the previous year ’s report should be fixed.  I interrupted 
you, I am sorry, but I thought I could not resist when you 
said they read the AG’s reports I remembered that 
20 
evidence seems to suggest that either not many enough 
members of parliament read those reports or, if they do 
read them, not much happens to fix problems that are 
pointed out in those reports. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Well, if I can say, they do not even 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 178 of 202 
 
have to read the AG’s report because the AG always sends 
somebody to present it.  So the parliamentary committee 
actually gets a presentation on the AG’s report, so they do 
get an insight into a lot.  But, on the other hand, you have 
to accept that an AG’s report, the one that gets published 
in their annual report, does not give the detail because is a 
public document.   
The AG also gives a department what is called a 
management report and that is where he details exactly 
what is wrong.  But I have to agree that every year they 
10 
will present and the committee might say I see you are in 
the red, you know, the colour, the achievement of the 
department, and you are not getting any better and so it 
happens the following year again.   
So there is a lot of that and I think the problem is, 
is a lot of talk and what is wrong this and fix it up but there 
is not action, there is no consequence, it is talk and, you 
know, it comes back to the same thing time and time again 
and I also find that a lot of the reports are these fancy 
reports and then if the committee gets now a chance to ask 
20 
questions, then they start delving into things, if the 
Chairperson allows them to.  And then what happens is the 
department 
has 
to 
say 
well, 
we 
do 
not 
have 
that 
information at our fingertips, we will send you a written 
report. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 179 of 202 
 
Now as the public we never get to see those written 
reports so we do not know if they are sent, if they are read 
by the committee or what happens to them and that is one 
of the things that we noted that it is a public document 
because it was raised in parliament and it was agreed and 
therefore it should be available to everybody.  But, as I 
say, we do not see those, so we cannot follow that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Mr Freund? 
MR FREUND SC:  Now I want to take you to page 887 on 
our numbering, it is the section called 2.3: 
10 
“Effectiveness 
of 
South 
African 
Parliamentary 
Oversight.” 
Because really, that is what we are interested in.  And you 
pose a question in the first paragraph as to: 
“In the light of the mechanisms of oversight, the 
questions are frequently asked, how could so much 
fraud and corruption have prevailed in government 
departments and state owned entities in the past 
decade?  Did the parliamentary system of oversight 
fail in the country?” 
20 
And then you say in the next paragraph that: 
“It is like an aeroplane crash, very often it does not 
have a single cause, it is the combination of a 
series of problems” 
Which 
in 
your 
analysis 
ultimately 
explains 
the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 180 of 202 
 
ineffectiveness of the systems.  Am I fairly summarising 
your…? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes. 
MR FREUND SC:   So what I would like to [indistinct] 14.52 
what those factors are and you deal right at the beginning 
with 
the 
question 
of 
accountability 
of 
members 
of 
parliament and I do not want to go through – back to the – 
or the debate about electoral systems, that has been 
canvassed by [indistinct] 15.06 but you say this at the end 
of the paragraph and [indistinct] 15.15 flow chart, that: 
10 
“Parliamentarians on both sides of the house are 
generally very quick to hold department [indistinct] 
15.19 
accountable 
and 
to 
make 
demands 
on 
[indistinct] 15.22 but some [indistinct] 15.25 are 
certainly hesitant to hold the executive to account, 
are 
highly 
defensive 
of 
any 
criticism 
of 
the 
governing party or its policies.” 
And you continue: 
“The consequence that much of the oversight is 
then [indistinct] 15.40.” 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Freund …[intervenes] 
MR FREUND SC:   And I would just like you to elaborate on 
this question of the – your debate about the roles played 
by opposition MPs and the roles played by governing party 
MPs. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 181 of 202 
 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Right, the interesting part is once the 
presentation has been made and the questions begin.  
Usually opposition party asks questions first and they tend 
to have come with specific questions, they have usually 
read the presentation or whatever if they can actually 
manage their way through but then also, if they had read 
previous minutes and recalled what happened in the past 
they can then compare and say well, what happened here 
but the opposition party members tend to ask questions 
very directly, but what happened here, why is this not 
10 
here?  They question them, question them quite severely in 
some cases.  I mean, you have had the example of 
opposition MPs who really made life difficult in their 
committees because they always have questions to ask, 
where has the money gone, why is there no money to this, 
why has that not been done?  That target was the target 
last year and still has not been achieved.  Those kind of 
specific things. 
 
They usually start by saying well, we appreciate it 
and you have done some good work here and there but 
20 
then once they have asked their questions then the ruling 
party gets a chance and it is inevitably, you have done so 
well and only the good side and I really have to praise you 
for this and if there is something that they are picking on 
then it is going to be something that is pre-decided and 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 182 of 202 
 
they will have decided well, this is a problem.  But on the 
whole they do not demand answers to difficult questions 
from the departments.  Their role is more to say you guys 
have done a great job. 
 
And remember, of course, whether it is a DG or a 
head of an SOE, they often just as much as the executive, 
people of the same ruling party, [indistinct] 18.07 they are 
there, so it is very difficult for somebody who is just a back 
bencher to say to a DG who, you know, has some clout in 
the party, do not like what you are doing.  
10 
 
So it becomes a complex human scenario.  So we 
can look at should you do this, should you do that, but on 
the other hand this is the livelihood, the job of those 
parliamentarians and some of them do not want to go 
without this particular job but I generally feel that if you 
look at PRASA, I have to say that it was one DA member 
that really plugged at it time after time after time and the 
same with BOSASA, I think it was one or two DA members. 
 
The other opposition parties tend to be too small to 
have enough research capacity or sometimes even the kind 
20 
of speaking with authority that somebody in a bigger 
opposition party has and they may ask some questions and 
then it depends entirely on the individual. 
 
For example, in one party that I sit in, the leader of 
the party is in that committee and he asks some very hard 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 183 of 202 
 
questions but he has got the confidence personally and so, 
as an opposition member and as a confidant person and as 
one who does a lot of homework, he is able to ask the 
questions but if it has been decided in a study committee 
beforehand, do not question and [indistinct] 19.54 question 
that is negative. 
MR FREUND SC:  Now can I follow up on that by asking 
you this?  You have explained and other witnesses have 
explained that there is certain opportunity which is taken 
up 
by 
members 
of 
portfolio 
committees 
to 
ask 
10 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, just one second, there is 
some echo as you speak and I realise that when I speak 
too there is echo.  There seems to be no echo when Ms 
Rault-Smith speaks.  I want to check with the technicians 
whether that is going to place any problem in the 
preparation of the transcript because I can hear you, but 
there is echo, but I can hear you, if it is not going to create 
any problem in terms of the transcript, then we can 
continue but if it is going to create a problem we might 
20 
have to stop.  We can continue.  Okay, they say we can 
continue.  Let us continue. 
MR FREUND SC:  I continue [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Repeat your question. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 184 of 202 
 
MR FREUND SC:  Yes, the question was this.  There is 
plenty of evidence to indicate that members of portfolio 
committees have an opportunity to ask questions and ask 
questions and you have described that they tend, when 
they come from opposition parties, to be probing, you have 
suggested that sometimes from a ruling party MPs, they 
are less probing.  But what I am interested in is the 
process.  Does every question get answered?  Is question 
one answered before you get to question two?  Are all the 
questions answered and is this an effective probing 
10 
process? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Alright, in SCOPA it is decided 
beforehand who is going to lead the questions and once 
that person has finished then the others get a chance to 
ask and the lead asks the question and gets an answer 
immediately thereafter or maybe they will decide to take 
three questions and get three answers whereas in most of 
the other committees it is a round robin and everybody 
goes – they go around to everyone and they all ask their 
questions 
and 
then 
the 
department 
answers 
all 
the 
20 
questions and it could be the DG or he could ask one of his 
DDGs or CFO or whoever has come along to assist him. 
 
But 
it 
means 
that 
there 
could 
be 
dozens 
of 
questions and I know that because I write them down, 
there are many, many, many questions and it is a little bit 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 185 of 202 
 
of a scattershot kind of approach, some deep probing, 
some fairly superficial, some detailed, it is just a complete 
range of questions and then the DG has to answer them.  
Now the Chairperson usually does not have a list of the 
questions because the Chairperson is paying attention to 
what is happened.   
In a good committee a secretary will note all the 
questions and sit next to the Chairperson and say okay, we 
are going through, but on the whole it is a case of the DG, 
if they DG is thorough, and some of them are very good, 
10 
and they answer each question and they allocate questions 
but I have noticed in a number of them they pick and 
choose and they will spend ages on one question and run 
out of time to answer the other questions and say oh, we 
will send you a written report and I do not know if some of 
the questions ever get answered.  You are on mute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund?  Mr Freund probably cannot 
hear me or if he does hear me I cannot hear him. 
MR FREUND SC:   Sorry, it seems that I was on mute, I do 
not know how I went on mute but it seems I went on mute, 
20 
can you hear me now, Chair?  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, you did hear her answer? 
MR FREUND SC:  I did hear her answer and I am mystified 
as to how my machine decided to mute but it did.  Anyway, 
it resolved.  The question of financial skills and skills 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 186 of 202 
 
generally, would you comment on – if we could – if there 
was such thing as an average MP, whether – what your 
assessment is of the capacity of average MPs or many MPs 
to engage in some quite complex oversight functions. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Well, fortunately the average MP is 
just an average citizen, which is exactly what it is 
supposed 
to 
be, 
they 
are 
supposed 
to 
be 
people 
representing the people but oversight is being done over 
departments and SOEs that deal with billions of rand, 
absolutely billions.  In fact I have said to a couple of DGs I 
10 
do not know how you keep track of everything that is going 
on in your department and so I am not too sure how the 
average citizen can deal with it.  I know that one of the 
late MPs said to me once I wish they had given us more 
training in finance because I really have difficulty in 
reading these financial reports.  Now I know they do get 
brief training but if you have got no background in finance 
it can be quite tricky.   
 
SCOPA trains their people pretty well and I know 
the particularly the opposition party tends to make so they 
20 
have got somebody in SCOPA who knows how to read such 
reports and so on but unlike – I think it was previous 
witness who was talking about a board that needs a range 
of skills, there is no such range of skills on a committee, I 
am not too sure how people get chosen to be on the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 187 of 202 
 
committee.   
I have got an idea that, you know, certain people 
are chair people, it is – they do their – you know, you have 
to have earned the right to be a Chairperson in whatever 
way you will earn the right, you have to have earned the 
right to be a whip but how other people are allocated to 
committees, I am not too sure but it can end up that a 
committee really is not able to grasp the detail of the 
finance even after the AG has presented the situation. 
MR FREUND SC:  Now related to that question is the 
10 
question of support.  I do not know if you have heard 
Professor Corder this morning but he made what struck me 
as a fairly optimistic assumption that the resources and 
support 
and 
advice 
available 
to 
committees 
has 
substantially improved and is generally adequate to the 
task.  What is your sense? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Well, I can tell you if you ask those 
staff members they will tell you they are hopelessly 
understaffed, they are always complaining that they just 
cannot get around everything that they have to do.  I do 
20 
know for a fact that there are more researchers than there 
were in the past, some committees even now have two 
secretaries because there are no many meetings that – 
three, four meetings in a week, but I do not think they have 
got – I really do not think they have got the capacity to do 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 188 of 202 
 
the all the kind of research that they need and they do not 
have the expertise because they are generalists, they will 
research on a topic but they do not have the expertise and, 
if I may, I sat through the entire political party funding 
committee, it was an ad hoc committee and that committee 
actually called in Professor [indistinct] 28.29 and asked 
him for expert advice and input and also had a couple of 
sessions where people like even Lawson Naidoo and others 
were called to ask and come and give some input and that 
to me was incredibly valuable because those people were 
10 
specialists, they knew what they were talking about, they 
worked with the researcher in the committee and it was 
very powerful and so, I mean, it was simply a case of civil 
society working with parliament and producing really good 
results. 
MR FREUND SC:  I would like to take you to the top of the 
next page of your report, 889 in my pagination.  You say 
something that strikes me, as a reader, as somewhat 
curious.  You say: 
“Portfolio committees generally see their primary 
20 
task as being able to support and assist “their” 
departments.  They often offer to help where a 
department or entity is experiencing difficulties.” 
And you say later on: 
“Generally, a committee in the department reporting 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 189 of 202 
 
to meet frequently and become familiar with each 
other making it difficult for a committee to be both 
supportive and to censure a department.” 
So you are focusing on this dual relationship where, on the 
one hand, probably quite legitimately, a focus is on trans 
... [indistinct – word cut off] cooperation to procure 
improvement? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But on the other hand there is an 
oversight responsibility which actually requires sometimes 
10 
confrontation, and do you stand by the general perspective 
that they see their core function more as supportive than 
oversight and criticism? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   It would depend on the committee, but 
very much you are responsible for that committee, that 
departments and so it will reflect badly on my committee if 
my department is not doing well.  So there is - and they 
often say, well, would you like us to speak to the Minister 
about that, could we change some legislation to make your 
tasks easier and so on. 
20 
So they are, they are supportive and helpful and 
they do become pretty friendly with the DG’s, DDG’s, and 
so on, they meet them endlessly.  Sometimes they are 
meeting twice a week for weeks and weeks on end.  So it is 
quite difficult to build that collegial relationship and the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 190 of 202 
 
other hand just step back and to say, no, you are doing this 
incorrectly.  
You know, because at the bottom of everything 
these are human beings, these are people and give the 
difficulties that people do have, and the politician really 
needs to get acceptance by people in order to keep their 
position.  So they do not want to be totally antagonistic 
and I think that is something that an opposition party 
member can do, because they are there to fight for 
whatever they see is missing but it is not that easy.  I know 
10 
one Chairperson, she is since retired and she was really 
quite strict, you know, and she had several of those 
Boards, SOE Boards over the coals, because they were not 
doing what they were supposed to but she was an 
exceptionally strong person and I think a lot has to do with 
who is the Chairperson. 
Now, you were talking about criteria for somebody 
who is the head of an SOE.  So what is the criteria for a 
Chairperson, a Chairperson who does not have good 
leadership, good management, good administration, good 
20 
timekeeping skills, is really going to battle to manage that 
committee, and allow that committee to do what it wants 
to?  
In committees where the Chairperson does not have 
good timekeeping skills, and they do not get the Secretary 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 191 of 202 
 
to assist them with that, they always run out of time, 
always and things are always incomplete or they go on for 
hours in the afternoon and eventually, the bells starts 
ringing and they have to pack and go.  
So there is something about the criteria for a 
Chairperson that they need to be able to do the job that 
they have to do and it is not always the case, really, I have 
actually seen some excellent Chairpersons but I have seen 
some others, not so good.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, something that you have alluded 
10 
to already but I want to take you back to, we find it in the 
second last paragraph of page 889, that is paginated page 
7 at the foot. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I take it you are not far from finishing Mr 
Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am close to finished Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You talk about the question of study 
groups and you say this: 
“In 
some 
cases, 
members 
are 
given 
prepared 
20 
questions during the study group meeting, which 
they themselves do not fully understand and so 
cannot determine whether a question has been 
satisfactorily answered or not.” 
If you could talk to that and talk generally, to your 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 192 of 202 
 
observations about the impact of what happens in study 
groups on what happens in committee meetings? 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   On - it bothered me a lot and maybe I 
should not be saying it, but it particularly bothered me 
because I found quite a number woman would give - and 
my next question is, and my question two is, and my 
question three is, and the answer came back and you could 
see that is there was no understanding of it and I thought 
that was unfair.  The study group if they want somebody to 
answer the question they actually need prepare them 
10 
properly for that.  It is simply throwing out the questions, 
you can have this one and you have the responsibility to 
everybody who is participating.  
So the study group actually does determine what is 
going to happen, what is the outcome of that committee, 
but the ruling party has three ways of managing a 
committee, it has got the Chairperson who decides, I will 
come back to it on an agenda etcetera and he manages the 
meeting and says, okay, we - you can only have three 
questions or no more questions or it is alright we will take 
20 
your answers in writing. 
Then you have also got the numbers, if the is a vote 
of obviously the ruling party is going to come in but the 
third thing is that there is a Management Committee known 
as MANCO and that committee is the Whip and the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 193 of 202 
 
Chairperson and the staff and they determine the program 
which is then approved by the committee, and they 
determine who will be coming to speak and how things are 
going to be arranged.  
So that management of the committee is also in the 
hands of the ruling party and I have often thought, you 
know, the opposition members get very frustrated, because 
the only thing they can do is ask some questions, and hope 
they get answers.  They have got no – they are very 
frustrated that they do not have any engagement with the 
10 
committee and how it does its work, etcetera.  Some of 
them are more forceful, and really try and push their way 
and make things happen but it is not the case in all the 
committee's. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So in conclusion, can I take you back 
to where we started on this portion of your evidence.  You 
asked the question, how much fraud and corruption have 
prevailed?  Did the parliamentary system of oversight fail? 
What is your own perspective on if there was a failure, 
what accounts for that failure? 
20 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   I do think oversight failed in that 
sense, because everyone knew what was going on in 
PRASA, everyone knew that BOSASA had contracts of up 
to R6billion just from Correctional Services.  So they did 
see it but what happened was, there was no action.  You 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 194 of 202 
 
know, they talked to DG’s all the time, what consequent 
management have you enacted.  
But I do not know they know or I know what a 
committee is supposed to do once they have uncovered 
something that is wrong.  That is where it comes to an end.  
So they say, this is wrong, you spent too much money, you 
have done this, you have got too many irregularities, 
sorted out and so on but if it does not, where do they go 
then. 
They went to SIU in one case, and SIU handed over 
10 
there dockets, and the docket was then transferred to the 
HAWKS, and I think was it BOSASA - and the HAWKS 
appointed one officer to take the matter forward.  So it gets 
passed down the line until it just evaporates.  So that is 
really to me the bottom line.  Whereas you can do a lot 
more to interrogate what comes through.   
You could ask questions beforehand, you can say to 
a committee, to a department when you come and tell us 
about your budget, I want to know about this, this and this 
and give them five things to talk about that you have 
20 
researched and say this is where the problems lie and I 
want to know how you are dealing with those. But then 
what if they do not improve?  What if nothing happens?  
That is the big question.  I know that one MP once said so 
what must we do when we find fraud, must we give it to 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 195 of 202 
 
SCOPA or what?  I also say or what?  Sorry.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Ms Rault-Smith there is a 
lot more detail in your report, but I am conscious of time 
considerations.  We can read your report.  Chair, I think I 
have no further questions unless there are issues you 
would want to raise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That Thank you, Mr Freund.  Thank you, 
Ms Rault-Smith, we appreciate that you came to assist the 
Commission and I will now excuse you, you are excused. 
MS RAULT-SMITH:   Thank you so much, thank you, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair that disposes of my available 
witnesses for today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and then next week, we will have 
what is it?  Two or three during evening sessions? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, the current expectation is two 
evening sessions, quite possibly Monday and Wednesday, 
but to be confirmed tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay and then after those two, we 
would be - you would be left with one more plus one or two 
20 
people from Parliament.  
ADV FREUND SC:   I would be left with one major witness 
and or Chair, you are aware that there is a potentially 
significant submission, which has not yet been received. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 196 of 202 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   So yes, in order to just to decide what 
to do with it.  I should also say Chair that even as I speak, 
I am receiving messages from people who want to place 
information before the Commission so I will have to 
investigate that and see about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that that is fine but just in terms 
of planning I think, as we speak after next week your work 
stream would be having that one major witness plus one, 
maybe two major witnesses arising from connected with 
this submission that you are still waiting for. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is true, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and anything else might just arise 
from other things, but in terms of planning, that that would 
be it okay no that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were to mention something about 
some correspondence. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I can mention it now Chair if that is 
convenient to you. I have refrained from doing that only 
because although I have a great deal of correspondence. 
20 
There may be yet more, but I can certainly place on record 
what I have and then if there is more, we can place it on 
record in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe we could do it on Monday 
evening session, or what do you think. 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 197 of 202 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   We can do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because of the constraints now, ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   We can do that.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  I guess this is the time 
when I should excuse you to. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Unfortunately, I am going to be starting 
my evening shift but thank you very much, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  I am going to take ten 
10 
minutes’ adjournment to enable the evening team to set up 
and then we will start after that, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...after lunch and after we came back 
from lunch with the previous witnesses but it looked like 
they were sorted out in some way from a certain time but I 
am told I adjourned at about six o’clock. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It was five minutes to six when you 
adjourned Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Five minutes to six. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Approximately. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh approximately, ja that means there’s 
been a delay of about 30 minutes, I think that is too long, 
so I think we should just adjourn on the basis that these 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 198 of 202 
 
problems, these technical problems seem to be too much 
for today, I don’t know exactly what the problems are but I 
have been told of some technical, I have been given some 
technical language about what the problems are.  
 
So I think that we will adjourn and arrange for 
another day, hopefully then there won’t be problems, I 
don’t want to wait 45 minutes when we are already at this 
time. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Counsel for Mr Mhlongo are they 
10 
listening, do you know? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   We were first checking Mr Joubert’s 
bandwidth and his connectivity; I am not sure whether they 
have Mr Mhlongo’s or Mr Mhlongo’s counsel joined yet.   I 
know that they were having problems about ten minutes 
ago, I am not sure if those problems have been sorted out 
yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, well today seems to be quite 
problematic.  I think what we should do is Mr Joubert and 
Mr 
Mhlongo 
and 
his 
legal 
team, 
I 
hope 
they 
will 
20 
understand, we will have to fix another date and hopefully 
on that date there won’t be too many problems.   I think we 
must look at the week after next week.   Maybe it is easier 
if I provisionally fix the date and if we are looking at an 
evening session and then we can – I can be advised in the 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 199 of 202 
 
next few days whether the date is fine for everybody.   I am 
thinking of Tuesday of the week after next week, I don’t 
know what the date is but we would do an evening session 
and I would say that if everybody would be available from 
four o’clock, we might end up starting at five but everybody 
would be available and then ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:   That would be March the 4 t h? 
CHAIRPERSON:   March the 4 t h. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   As I read it on my calendar.  Pardon 
me Chair, it is March the 2 n d sorry. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   March the 2 n d, ja okay that is the 
Tuesday of the week after next week. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has Mr Mhlongo filed his affidavit 
responding to the substance of the allegations in Mr 
Joubert’s affidavit, first affidavit? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   As far as I am aware he has not filed 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, well I would say that he would need 
to file next week ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   You may recall that he has undertaken 
to file it by today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He had undertaken to file by today, let’s 
say he must file by end of the day on Tuesday next week, if 
he has not already filed, and I see Mr Joubert is now – Mr 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 200 of 202 
 
Joubert are you able to hear me?   Mr Joubert can you 
hear me?   It looks like he cannot hear me.  Can you hear 
me?   No he cannot hear me.  So I think we will need to do 
that, we are not going to proceed, we have lost too much 
time now, because he cannot hear me and I assume Mr 
Mhlongo’s lawyers also cannot hear me.  Counsel for Mr 
Mhlongo can you hear me? 
ADV MANALA:   We can hear you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay thank you.   The technology 
has been giving us problems this afternoon, so it continues 
10 
to give us problems, we have lost quite some time, so I am 
saying let us adjourn and come back on a date  hopefully 
when the technology will be working well.  Sometimes it 
works 
quite 
well 
and 
with 
just 
minor 
glitches 
but 
occasionally it gives us serious problems, so I have just 
said to Mr Hulley let us adjourn and adjourn until Tuesday 
of the week after next week in the evening, Mr Hulley tells 
me that will be the 2 n d of March, we would be looking at an 
evening session just like today but if possible if everybody 
would be available at four we might end up starting at five, 
20 
if – depending on the day witnesses that I will be hearing.  
Would that be fine with everybody, and hopefully on that 
day the technology will not give us the kinds of problems it 
has been giving us today.   Mr Manala can you hear me, is 
that fine with you? 
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 201 of 202 
 
ADV MANALA:   Yes Chairperson the Tuesday afternoon 
as you suggest will work well for us.  The commitment that 
we have is a commitment of early  morning as you would 
know the court sessions would conclude at half past three 
and even then we would also ask that you afford us the 
same privilege to appear before you remotely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine, you can appear remotely 
on that day as well. 
ADV MANALA:   Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and Mr Joubert is that fine with you 
10 
as well? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is fine with me Chair, I will avail 
myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, okay, thank you very 
much, we are then going to adjourn and for the benefit of 
the public tomorrow the Commission will start its session 
not at the usual time ten o’clock, but at two o’clock to hear 
the evidence of Ms Suzanne Daniels in regards to Eskom 
so that – so we will start at two o’clock tomorrow and that 
is the Eskom work stream that I will be dealing with. 
20 
 
So the hearing of the evidence of Mr Joubert is 
adjourned to Tuesday the 2 n d of March 2021, the idea is to 
start at four but there may be a delay and we will start at 
five and the legal team for Mr Mhlongo will be allowed to 
appear remotely.    
18 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 345 
 
Page 202 of 202 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 19 FEBRUARY 2021 
