 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
19 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 286 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 231 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
19 OCTOBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 3 of 231 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 19 OCTOBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
  
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Myburgh, 
good 
morning everybody. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Good morning Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning you may be seated Mr 
Mkwanazi. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Are you ready Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Chairperson I have just received I 
think what is referred to as a supplementary statement or 
affidavit which I understand Mr Mkwanazi wants – wants to 
hand up obviously with your leave.  It is a short document 
– it is about five pages long.  It addresses the things that 
he accepted were outstanding.  We personally do not have 
any objection to its introduction.  The Secretariat is in the 
process of making copies and will add it to the bundle at 
tea time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In my submission it need not hold up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The continuation of – of the 
questioning of Mr Mkwanazi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no that will be in order.  But in 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 4 of 231 
 
the meantime we can continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Good morning Mr 
Mkwanazi. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Good morning Advocate Myburgh. 
ADV. MKWANAZI:  Morning. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When we broke on Friday evening I 
was questioning you about the two bits of advice you 
received from [00:01:45] or advice with their input that 
being the memorandum of the 15 February followed by 
their report on the 22 February.  These are two bits of 
10 
advises that came either side of the board meeting on the 
16 February.  Do you remember that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But perhaps I could just take you to 
that advice.  If you turn please to Bundle 2. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And if you could turn up page 13 that 
is the memorandum of the 15 t h and then as you know at 
page 19 is the report of the 22 n d.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now I would just ask you to confirm 
that your evidence was that the first bit of advice in other 
words the memorandum of the 15 t h if my notes serve me 
correctly your evidence was that you accepted that that 
memorandum and the advice was poor, is that correct? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 5 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I did admit that it was not thorough – 
it was poor yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Would you accept then that on the 
face of it when you say it was poor and not thorough it 
certainly was not persuasive? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Certain aspects of it were persuasive but 
if a better analysis could have been done it could have 
been a better advice for instance yes.  But that analysis 
was not very clear at the time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And it was on that basis if I 
10 
understand your evidence correctly that you asked Deneys 
Reitz in the word that you used was to augment their 
advice, is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes Chairman I think we did because 
even as a sub-committee and board when we got that initial 
advice we were not impressed. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But then why did you follow it?  This 
is what I do not understand.  Why – why did you think it 
was appropriate having received a piece of legal advice 
that you were not persuaded by – why did allow Deneys 
20 
Reitz the opportunity of augmenting it after the board 
meeting of the 16 February? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairman we did allow Deneys Reitz 
and also you – you – you will have to understand that there 
were three issues that sort of Deneys Reitz was trying to 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 6 of 231 
 
give advice on.  And they did not give advice specific to 
certain issues which frankly would have been a better 
approach.   
Where they should have taken the first matter, 
second matter and third matter and gave advice on the 
three almost independently.  They somehow tried to give 
summary advice on all three matters.   
And in my interpretation the gravity of the three 
matters was not the same but having said that I do not 
have a serious problem with the advice say on the first two 
10 
offences which relate to procurement.  But I have a 
problem with the advice on the third matter which related 
to the attack of Mr Gama on the executives and board of 
Transnet.   
But on the first two other matters – because do not 
forget from – at the time from where I sat the issues – the 
focus was on procurement where the – irregular – other 
irregularities – yes the focus on procurement.  But I truly 
say that advice did not address the issues individually and 
I suspect the outcome could have been different. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You suspect the outcome could have 
been different? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Felt from the board as well? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If the three – the three issues had been 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 7 of 231 
 
handled specific. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But… 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mkwanazi really what I am driving 
at is you get poor legal advice; it does not deal with 
everything but you still take the decision on the 16 
February.  You do not wait for the augmented legal advice, 
correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is that correct? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja – yes you are correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  So let us then go to this 
augmented legal advice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburgh.  Mr Mkwanazi 
you see if on 16 February you and the board realised that 
the advice from Deneys Reitz is poor advice; it needed to 
be augmented and you do not wait for them to augment 
their advice before you take a decision it gives the 
impression that you have made up your mind by the 16 t h 
that irrespective of what whether the advice that gets 
20 
augmented or the augmentation of the advice puts the 
advice at an acceptable level in terms of its legal strength 
you do not – when you do not wait for that it gives the 
impression that you have made up your mind and it does 
not matter what the augmentation will produce you are 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 8 of 231 
 
going ahead because you are clear in your mind that this is 
the decision you must take. 
 
Do you have something to say on that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman I am in agreement with your 
observation but again I need to sort of qualify it in that that 
advice although it was almost a generic advice was not 
thorough in dealing with the three matters separately that 
advice was required on. 
 
On the procurement matters that advice somehow I 
– I indicate that it could have been appropriate.  But on the 
10 
questioning of the attack on executives and the board that 
advice said nothing about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  And I think as I indicated it could have 
been oversight on the side of the board or not particularly 
following up on that issue of the attack on the executives 
and the board members. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you.  Now just to go to this 
augmented legal advice that you receive on the 22 
20 
February which you find at page 19.  Mr Mkwanazi it also 
does not deal with all three charges.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Advocate you are correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You still then do not go back to 
Deneys Reitz and say but what about charge 3 or where is 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 9 of 231 
 
the analysis?  All they do is they repeat the generic advice 
that they gave you before.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Advocate Myburgh you are correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But why did you not go back to them?  
I mean the truth is you had no sustainable legal advice.  
You had generic advice which did not deal with one of the 
charges at all.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I agree with you Advocate Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then there is a bigger problem 
and that is you; yourself accept that Deneys Reitz’ 
10 
augmented legal advice was contradictory, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I agree with you Advocate Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But still you do not go back to them 
and say, but hang on I do not understand what you actually 
saying, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I agree with you Advocate ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It really bears out your desire and 
the desire of the board to reinstate Mr Gama at all costs, 
does it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Maybe not but as you rightfully point out 
20 
if ideally at the time in retrospect the board should have 
even sent back the second advice to say, hold it you are 
still not specific enough.  Yes I agree with you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But the board had already made up 
its mind by that time on the 16 February? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 10 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Advocate; ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So let us – let me press me if I might 
in relation to paragraph 1.1 at page 20 of Bundle 2.   
MR MKWANAZI:  I am there Advocate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At paragraph 1.1 it says there: 
“There is opinions that have been obtained 
from 
reputable 
firms 
of 
attorneys 
with 
regard to prospects of success of Mr Gama 
in successfully challenging his dismissal by 
the company.  All the opinions including 
10 
ours 
which 
we 
gave 
after 
perusing 
documents pertaining to the disciplinary 
inquiry were of the view that Mr Gama’s 
chances 
of 
successfully 
challenging 
his 
dismissal are not good.” 
 
Did you receive that legal advice from Deneys 
Reitz? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes we – we did – we did Advocate yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  And then after that did you 
receive the memorandum of the 15 t h that they gave input 
20 
into? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No do not forget that memorandum of the 
15 t h is earlier than this so call augmented advice.  Yes we 
– ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So well let me – I am not sure. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 11 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  This was done on the 22 n d if I recall. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
And 
that 
other 
memorandum 
was 
prepared on the 14 t h or 15 t h February. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes but Mr Mkwanazi they dealing 
with the history here. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  They say: 
“All the opinions including ours that we 
gave 
after 
perusing 
the 
documents 
10 
pertaining to the disciplinary inquiry were of 
the 
view 
that 
Mr 
Gama’s 
chances 
of 
successfully challenging his dismissal are 
not good.” 
 
Had you seen that advice? 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
I 
am 
not 
sure 
if 
it 
was 
in 
the 
memorandum of the 15 t h but I see what you are saying post 
the first memorandum of the 15 t h then comes this advice on 
the 22 n d.  But their advice goes further to still create doubt 
that this matter in the Transnet Bargaining Council can go 
20 
either way; yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But here they say… 
MR MKWANAZI:  I agree with your assessment. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mkwanazi here they refer to an 
opinion where they said that Mr Gama’s prospects of 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 12 of 231 
 
success are not good.   
MR MKWANAZI:  I – I see what you are talking to. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You cannot explain this?  Was that in 
their memorandum of the 15 t h or was it in some other 
document? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No I do not recall – it was their 
memorandum of the 15 t h I am not sure now what it said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But just so that you understand. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Just to refresh your memory.  
10 
Remember the memorandum of the 15 t h it had… 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It was produced with the input of 
Deneys Reitz. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But your testimony was that it was 
presented to the board or the committee as a memorandum 
from Group Legal. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So had you seen a prior opinion from 
20 
Deneys Reitz that said that Mr Gama’s prospects of 
success were poor? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I might have – I do not recall a specific 
one other than this one of the 22 n d.  But on that one of the 
15 t h February or 14 t h February if that goes on to create 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 13 of 231 
 
doubt about whether we will win at Transnet Bargaining 
Council.  But again having indicted earlier that – even that 
memorandum that of the 14 t h or 15 t h February was not 
specific to the three items. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That any unfairness could have been 
identified.  That was not specific. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So I have got two more questions. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Depends of [00:14:47]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I have got two more questions for you 
10 
before I move on here.  Firstly why did you not go back to 
Deneys Reitz and raise with them the contradiction in this 
opinion?  At 1.1 they are saying we have given you opinion 
saying his prospects of success are poor and then in their 
conclusion as you put it they raised out.  Why did you not 
go to them and say, clarify this?  What actually are you 
saying?  Why did you not do that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No at the time we did not do that 
Advocate; yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes but that – we know that.  My 
20 
question is, why did you not do that?  It seems so obvious 
does it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No it does not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  And then having specifically 
asked them to augment their advice you say because they 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 14 of 231 
 
did not deal with the third charge they do not deal with it 
here you still do not go back to them and say, deal with the 
third charge, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No – no we did not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why not? 
MR MKWANAZI:  We omitted that.  No we did not at the 
time, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It seems the obvious thing to do does 
it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Not really. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mkwanazi please just let me 
understand.  You go to Deneys Reitz you ask them to 
augment their opinion.  Amongst the reasons that you want 
them to do that you say is that they do not deal with the 
third charge on 15 February.  They then provide an 
augmented opinion and they still do not deal with it. 
MR MKWANAZI:  They still do not deal with it ja. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
Are 
you 
suggesting 
to 
the 
Chairperson that you did not think it was the obvious thing 
to do to go back to them and say, you have not done what I 
20 
wanted you to do? 
MR MKWANAZI:  We did not do that on the 15 t h February 
yes and even on the 22 n d we did not go back to them and 
say, but you have not dealt with the third matter in terms of 
the issues that you are supposed to deal with. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 15 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you cannot explain why you did 
not do that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No I know we did not go back. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you and the board – when you were 
dealing with these matters – with this Gama matter – 
remember that there was a charge which had got nothing to 
do with procurement. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did remember? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  No I am aware yes Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes, no I am talking more then 
rather than now.  You were aware at the time that there 
were three charges? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For which he was dismissed? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman at the time the focus was on 
the procurement issues.  The focus was not on the last 
matter of the attack by Mr Gama on the executives and the 
board.  The focus was on the procurement issues and I 
20 
think if it was an oversight of the board not to have 
focussed even on the third and just thought that the 
procurement issues were sufficient to deal with this issue 
in a particular way.  Ja it was an oversight. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you agree that it would appear 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 16 of 231 
 
that it was – that Mr Gigaba if your evidence is true may 
have also suffered from the same oversight because when 
he – on your evidence instructed you to review Mr Gama’s 
case he does not seem to have said anything about the 
third 
charge; 
he 
talked 
about 
condonation 
and 
procurement. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No Chairman your analysis could be 
correct but I assume that Mr Gigaba is also going to come 
and have his say and also Mr Gama is going to come and 
have his say on these issues. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I would sense that what you saying is 
true Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  No Mr Gigaba will come also at 
some stage and give evidence.  Okay thank you Mr 
Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Could you 
please go to the draft settlement agreement? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburgh.  Of course Mr 
Mkwanazi is it not remarkable that so many people in the 
board 
overlook 
if 
it 
was 
overlooking 
something 
so 
important to say why do we not – why are we not talking 
about 
the 
charge 
that 
has 
got 
nothing 
to 
do 
with 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 17 of 231 
 
procurement?  And Deneys Reitz the attorneys also seem 
to – to lose sight of that.  Why are they not – why is there 
not a single person in the board who say, but hang on we 
are talking about taking – reinstating Mr Gama on the basis 
of condonation but condonation has – does not apply to the 
other charge – what do we have to say about that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman your observation is spot on but 
then I just need to highlight one small matter that at the 
time when this matter was being dealt with the board’s 
focus was on procurement and the perceived unfairness of 
10 
how Mr Gama was not afforded the other process of 
condonation.   
In 
other 
words 
the 
– 
the 
focus 
was 
on 
the 
unfairness on the first two charges and that is why even 
maybe at board no board member then said, hold it but it is 
not only these issues there is this other major issue which 
was the third charge of him attacking the executives and 
the board?   
Yes the board neglected that angle and in hindsight 
the board should have – somebody should have said, hold 
20 
it but these are not only the two issues that we are dealing 
with yes these are procurement but here is this other one 
of attacking the executives and the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you see.. 
MR MKWANAZI:  It was not raised by any board member at 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 18 of 231 
 
the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you see it is exactly that that I am 
asking – I am asking you about whether it is not 
remarkable?  Namely that despite the fact that Mr Gama 
had been dismissed for three charges; despite the fact that 
the board had available to it a detailed rulings of the 
Chairperson of the disciplinary hearing which made it clear 
there were three charges and that one of them did not have 
anything to do with procurement.  Despite the fact that the 
board had available to it Mr Todd’s opinion / report which 
10 
made it clear that there were three charges one of which 
had nothing to do with procurement.  Is it not remarkable 
that the whole board left out this particular charge which 
has got nothing to do with procurement?  It is; is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:  It is Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  It is a serious oversight. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  By that whole board and the – I admit 
that it was a serious oversight. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Of course somebody analysing this 
or 
listening 
to 
the 
evidence 
relating 
to 
Mr 
Gama’s 
reinstatement and so on somebody might say, well it was 
oversight and that is it.  Somebody else might say, maybe 
it was oversight that happened because the board was too 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 19 of 231 
 
keen to take Mr Gama back and that is why they 
overlooked something so – that was right there in front of 
them.  Maybe somebody might say, you see they had found 
what they believed was an answer to procurement.  There 
was no answer to the other charge.  So focussing on this 
other charge would spoil the – the arrangement now.  
Because if we do not have an answer to this other charge 
how do we take Mr Gama back?  So let us focus on 
procurement.  You want to say something Mr Mkwanazi to 
the various scenarios I am saying people listening to the 
10 
evidence might think about? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair – Chairman your observation is 
correct but as I indicate that board for some reason I hope 
other people would come in and actually give more 
information on how the environment, the atmosphere 
etcetera on this matter was 
because particularly on 
procurement issues.  There was a – a strange perception 
that maybe Mr Gama was targeted because there were 
certain similar – although they are not similar – in terms of 
procurement there might be but this other last charge 
20 
frankly was something unique and maybe the first time that 
– and that board should have looked into at the time to 
say, yes there are three issues; two are procurement, one 
is this attack on the executives.  Unfortunately Chairman at 
the time that board did not focus on that matter because it 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 20 of 231 
 
focussed on procurement issues thinking that there was no 
consistency 
in 
the 
organisation 
in 
dealing 
with 
procurement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see that almost all the members of the 
board who deposed to affidavits and that have been given 
to the commission say there was – they were not aware of 
any role played by anybody outside of the board or outside 
of Transnet in the reinstatement of Mr Gama.  
But Mr Mapoma did say there was pressure that was 
put on him by Mr Siyabonga Mahlangu the special advisor 
10 
to Minister Gigaba.  Of course Mr Mahlangu has denied 
that he put any pressure.   
You did not have any pressure brought upon you to 
try and make sure that the board agreed to reinstate Mr 
Gama? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I would not call it pressure.  Yes there 
was a request to review if the sanctions of dismissal were 
– were fair – that was by the shareholder.  Yes there was a 
request that we review the sanction of dismissal.  And – 
and have I lost sound? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  No we can hear you. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Then having said that that is why then 
even I think even when we looked at alternative advice the 
shortcoming of the advice we got it did not deal specifically 
with the three issues as the advice from Mr Todd did deal 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 21 of 231 
 
with the three issues.   
 
Now therefore the advice that we used from Deneys 
Reitz came with almost a general recommendation which I 
must say was not the best advice because they should 
have said you have got chances with one and two but you 
have got no chances with three.  
 
 
Then that board I doubt if it would have come to the 
same decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Of course you know the – the 
advice from Deneys Reitz one has got to go back to it.  As 
10 
I recall it does not deal for example with the issue of 
condonation if I recall correctly.  It says:  
“We have previously given an opinion that 
says; Mr Gama has no good prospects of 
succeeding in his dismissal claim – unfair 
dismissal claim.  But then later on it says 
there is a probability that the Bargaining 
Council 
or 
record 
also 
during 
the 
appropriate correctness of the sanction of 
dismissal may reach the conclusion that 
20 
dismissal was not appropriate having regard 
to the challenge and sanction advanced by 
him.”   
And then it – I think the earlier one tells you about 
– the one of the 15 t h tells you about different cases where 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 22 of 231 
 
courts can come to different views on sanction. 
So I do not know whether your recollection is 
different but my recollection is that they do not seem to 
talk 
about 
condonation 
– 
Deneys 
Reitz. 
 
Is 
your 
recollection different? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman yes they do not talk about – 
they are not specific.  That is why I say in hindsight it was 
not the best advice because they should have dealt with 
the three issues.  And also, they should have dealt with even 
this condonation matter as advisors because condonation, at 
10 
the time, did not necessarily imply that then you are free 
from any potential disciplinary action post condonation.   
 
Because my understanding of that condonation policy.  
There must be consequences for the fact that you even go to 
the extent of requesting condonation.  Why did you not do 
your homework properly before?  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:   But yes, the advice from T Richard was 
not the best advice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Myburgh. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  So Mr Mkwanazi, 
what you have accepted is that it was, as you put it, a 
serious oversight on the part of the board not to consider the 
third charge on the 16 t h of February? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct ...[intervenes]  
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 23 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you say if the board had done so, 
its decision might very well have been very different.  
Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Actually, I agree advocate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, advocate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But what I do not understand is that 
you knew of the shortcoming because you went back to 
Deneys Reitz so that they could augment their opinion in 
respect of the third charge.  That is your own evidence.  You 
10 
see the contradiction? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Advocate, maybe let me try and...  We felt 
that as a board, the advice we had got on the 14t h or 
15t h of February was weak and therefore we said augment it.   
 
And funny enough, even after augmenting, they came 
back with what I can call weak advice because they did not 
deal 
with 
the 
specifics 
of 
the 
three 
issues 
and 
the 
possibilities of winning at the Transnet Bargaining Council or 
losing at Transnet Bargaining Council.   
 
So yes, they did not touch on the third matter of an 
20 
attack of executives. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi, perhaps you are not 
following my question.  It was not an oversight.  You 
identified the failure and you asked Deneys Reitz to address 
it.  When they did not address it, you just pushed on in any 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 24 of 231 
 
case.   
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It was not an oversight.  You are... on 
your version, you identified the failure.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, that is correct.  I do not know 
whether it is failure or weakness of their submission.  I 
would call it more weakness because it did not deal with... 
my understanding, if you deal with, I want advice on this 
issue and these are the three issues.   
 
Then the advice should have addressed the first issue, 
10 
second issue and third issue.  And Deneys Reitz’ advise did 
not even articulate the three issues. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But then why did you not go back to 
them when they did not address the failure or the weakness 
that you had identified? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, at the time we... the doubt 
created of winning or not winning at Transnet Bargaining 
Council sort of played a prominent role in us making that 
decision then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why did you and the board not take the 
20 
following position:  We as the board know that we have 
received three opinions, legal opinions from three reputable 
law firms and they all say we have a good case.  Mr Gama 
has a poor case.   
 
They say Mr Gama has no reasonable prospects of 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 25 of 231 
 
wining this case against Transnet.  Having got those 
opinions from three different law firms.   
 
We have one of the law firms which gave one of those 
opinion saying in this legal advice there is some... there is 
probability.  They are coming up with something that seems 
to go against what they have already said.   
 
And what they are saying is not persuasive this time 
around.  It is not substantiated.   
 
Let us take with the position given by three different law 
firms, namely we have a good case and Mr Gama has a poor 
10 
case.  We have good chances of winning.   
 
Let us make our decision based on that.  Why did you 
and your board take that position?   
 
Why did you take a position that is supported by a legal 
advice 
that 
contradicts 
legal 
advice 
that 
was 
given 
previously by the same law firm that is now weak, that goes 
against what has been given two other law firms and by 
itself?   
 
Why do you choose a position that is not supported by 
sound legal advice when you know you do have the benefit 
20 
of sound legal advice? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, as I might have indicated in the 
past here.  We did get good sound legal advice from a 
number of legal firms including Mr Todd’s note.  And at the 
time, we felt that hold it.  Let us pursue, because we have 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 26 of 231 
 
time to review the sanction.   
 
Then we indicate that let us then get a different law firm 
with different legal advice because my sense, by the way, 
based on the legal advice that we have had before, I doubt if 
the companies that were involved in the actual disciplinary 
process in Transnet would have come with a different legal 
advice.   
 
But yes, be as it may, we felt that let us test if is there a 
different legal advice out there.   
 
Unfortunately, it came and it was not very strong legal 
10 
advice because it did not touch on one of the key issues 
which is not procurement related. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But was that not the problem Mr 
Mkwanazi, namely ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Namely...  I am sorry.  Was that not the 
problem ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Please continue, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, can you hear me? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I can hear you Chairman. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Is the problem... was the 
problem not exactly that, namely that you and the board 
were looking for a different advice?   
 
You were not looking for another advice which could be 
the same as the advice that had been given before by 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 27 of 231 
 
Bowman’s and from Mr Todd?   
 
So as long as you had not received a different advice, 
you would not be happy?  You wanted a different advice and 
when you got it, even if it was poor, you were happy to rely 
on it?   
 
Is that not the problem that you should not have been 
looking for a different advice?  You could have been looking 
for a different law firm to give advice on the same issues 
that Mr Todd had given and mister...  
 
I mean, Webber Wentzel had given but the advice did 
10 
not need to be different from theirs.  You should have simply 
been looking for another advice that may not be different.  If 
it was different, fine.   
 
Then if it was different you would compare its soundness 
with the soundness of the other advices that you had 
received.   
 
Do you understand what I am saying?  That maybe the 
problem is that you were looking for a different advice? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, what you are indicating could 
be true but maybe let me retrace the process a little bit.  On 
20 
the procurement issues, the two procurement issues.   
 
The advice could have been different in that the so-
called similar procurement, the irregularities in Transnet had 
not been considered when that sanction was determined on 
the first two matters.   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 28 of 231 
 
 
So on those two matters, I do think there was a need to 
get sort of a review of... on the similar case matters relating 
to procurement.  What was done?   
 
And these matters went back as early as 2005.  So on 
those, there could have been a different legal opinion on 
review.   
 
But on the third matter, irrespective of whatever review 
you would have had, my sense is that that review would have 
come out and said on the third matter, the sanction is a fair 
sanction.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No.  Thank you.  Before I let Mr Myburgh 
continue, I just mention this.  As I understand the position.  
Mr Gama has raised the issue of condonation at the 
disciplinary hearing.   
 
He had raised the issue of inconsistency at the hearing.  
Now, one of the issues which I think, I if am correct in that, 
one of the issues that the board should have thought about 
was to say:  Why should we as the board get involved in 
reviewing Mr Gama’s case?   
 
And maybe that is what you should have said to Mr 
20 
Gigaba.  Maybe on not on the day that he approached you 
but after you had fully informed yourself on the case.   
 
Why should we as the board get involved in reviewing 
this case because Transnet has taken the trouble to offer to 
Mr Gigaba a very fair process which has got an independent 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 29 of 231 
 
chairperson.   
 
Transnet is going and spend money, paying senior 
counsel to sit as a chairperson in a disciplinary inquiry so 
that Mr Gama has got a fair process.   
 
Because if maybe it was one of the senior executives 
chairing his disciplinary inquiry, he would complain that it 
was not fair.  We have paid for senior counsel to sit at the 
disciplinary hearing.   
 
And I take it that Mr Gigaba did not contribute, would not 
have contribute to the cost of the chairperson, you know.  
10 
Those costs were born by Transnet.   
 
That chairperson sat for 14-days, hearing evidence.  
That is a lot of money.   
 
Apart from that, there would have been a lot of time that 
is spend preparing for the hearing and afterwards preparing 
those very thorough and detailed rulings that he had 
prepared.   
 
You did all of that as Transnet.  It might have been the 
previous board.  That was all done in order to advance 
fairness and transparency.   
20 
 
So now, in that process, Mr Gama was free to bring 
whatever evidence he could bring to the disciplinary inquiry 
to show that he had been treated unfairly including the issue 
of condonation including the issue of saying there were other 
executives who had done the same thing but had been 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 30 of 231 
 
treated differently.   
 
He had the opportunity of bringing those cases before an 
independent chairperson.  He was allowed to be represented 
by his own legal team.   
 
I do not think every employee at Transnet gets allowed 
in a disciplinary inquiry to be presented by outside lawyers 
but he was allowed.   
 
I am not saying he was the only one but he was allowed.  
Now why did you and your board not say:  Here is a very fair 
process and a very fair forum which had been provided to 
10 
Mr Gama.   
 
If he makes out his case there and wins, we as the 
board will accept that outcome and take him back.  If he fails 
to make out his case in that forum, then we will abide.  We 
will give effect to that decision.   
 
Now he has failed in that disciplinary inquiry.  He is 
going to the Bargaining Council.  Even though that is called 
the Transnet Bargaining Council, it was still an independent 
body in the sense that the arbitrators who sit there are not 
employees of Transnet.  They are independent lawyers.   
20 
 
So why did you not say:  Mr Gama has an independent 
and fair forum at which he can put his case.  Let him put his 
case there and we will abide by whatever decision.   
 
Why did you and your board not take that principled 
decision and say:  We are not going to interfere.   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 31 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I need to go back a little bit and 
indicate that there was a Public Protector later, around the 
22n d of December twenty... I do not know the exact date, 
2010.  Ja.  Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think 22 December ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   In 2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:   22 December 2010 is the letter. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, yes.  In 2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Now in a way, it is that Public Protector 
10 
letter which elevated the letter to the chairman’s office.  And 
your analyses is correct but then once this matter was then 
elevated to the chairman’s office, the company then had to 
respond to the Public Protector and as part of that, certain 
allegations were made there.   
 
And as part of that response, the initial process was to 
appoint KPMG and Nkonki to look into the facts now.  And 
then they did and for some reason, if I recall, their first draft 
report was sometime in January.   
 
But that draft report as... in retrospect, they sort of file 
20 
on Monday once it was brought in by some staff members.   
 
No, 
on 
Friday, last 
week 
Friday from the 
Zondo 
Commission.  That first draft report did not contain the 
details I thought it did in terms of dealing with this issue.   
 
But yes, what triggered the matter to go to board was 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 32 of 231 
 
the Public Protector’s complaint, if I can call it that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   And the, it became sort of a board 
member, a board matter, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But even with that.  I do not think that the 
Public Protector would have had any problem if the board 
said with regard to Mr Gama’s dismissal, we have set up an 
independent forum and a fair process at which Mr Gama is 
ready to put his case as fully as he wants.   
 
He has done so.  This is the outcome.  He is now going 
10 
to another independent forum.  There too, he will have a 
process where he can make out his case and we as the 
board will abide by the decisions of that independent forum.   
 
Why did you and the board not take that principled 
approach? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chair, at the time as a board we did not 
take that approach, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh.   
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Thank 
you, 
Mr 
Chairman.  
Mr Mkwanazi, please just turn to page 6 of Bundle 2.  The 
20 
agreement of settlement. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Signed in draft form.  Signed by Mr 
Gama on the 10t h of February 2011. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 33 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have said that you were the lead 
negotiator.  Is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So by the 10t h ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   By the 10 t h of February, you had 
already, at least for yourself, decided that Mr Gama should 
be reinstated as the Chief Executive of TFR, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That, of course, was before Deneys 
10 
Reitz’ advice? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair.  But let me qualify 
that.  You know, these things, when you look at them ten 
years or nine year later, there were other reports that were 
produced in Transnet which were indicating...  
 
I am focussing on the procurement matters, that there 
could have been unfairness on the procurement issues.  That 
is correct Chair, yes.   
 
And still today, I do not have those reports and 
hopefully, one day they will surface. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, but the point is that your 
evidence has been that you appointed Deneys Reitz to bring 
fresh eyes to bear on this issue.  What you land up doing is 
deciding for yourself that the man must be reinstated before 
those fresh eyes produced any advice, correct? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 34 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  But does that not bear out then 
Mr Mkwanazi that, really what you were looking for is legal 
advice that accorded with your decision, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   You could be correct in indicating that but 
yes, I could... wrong legal advice at the ...[indistinct], yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is it not so that you had decided to 
reinstate Mr Gama even before you went to Denys Reitz? 
MR MKWANAZI:   To say decide is too strong a word but we 
were in discussions based on the information we had, even 
10 
as early as the 1s t of February, if I recall.  I am not sure what 
sub-committee that was, et cetera.  We were in discussions 
on some form of review of the Gama sanction issues, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But you have repeatedly told the 
Chairperson that why you went to Deneys Reitz, is you 
wanted them to bring fresh eyes to bear.  It does not seem to 
me that you waited for their advice.  You had already 
decided.  Certainly, you yourself had decided that Mr Gama 
was to be reinstated before that advice. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It was a consultation process at the time 
20 
and with no final decision because only around the 14t h, 
15t h of February, would then a final decision be taken by a 
sub-committee of the board and also elevated to the board.   
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Let 
me 
take 
you 
please 
to 
Mr Mhlango’s affidavit.   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 35 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That you find in Bundle 1.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Bundle 1...   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I would like you to turn to page 170.  
One, seven, zero. 
MR MKWANAZI:   One, seven, zero.  Ja, that is the one.  
Okay.  Thank you.. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [No audible reply]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I have got that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So on Friday, we dealt with 
10 
paragraph 7 at page 170.  I want to direct your attention to 
paragraph 6 and then I want us to read the two paragraphs 
together.  At paragraph 6, Mr Mhlango says: 
“I was not involved directly or indirectly in the 
settlement discussions leading to the reinstatement 
of Mr Gama.  The only insight I had on the 
discussions was when I was informed by Nkomazi, 
the then chairperson of Transnet and acting Chief 
Executive Officer at the time that the company 
intended to reinstate Mr Gama.” 
20 
 
So in that paragraph he says you informed him that the 
company 
intended 
to 
reinstate 
Mr 
Gama. 
 
The 
next 
paragraph says: 
“Due to the passage of time, I cannot recall the 
exact reason for or context of my discussion with 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 36 of 231 
 
Mr Mkwanazi.” 
 
In other words, the discussion that you had with him 
when you informed him of Transnet’s decision to reinstate Mr 
Gama, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is what he is referring to.  He 
goes on to say: 
“He conferred with me on a variety of matters in my 
capacity as Special Advisor.” 
 
And then the next sentence says: 
10 
“I 
recall 
that 
during 
my 
conversation 
with 
Mr Mkwanazi...” 
 
Now when you read the two paragraphs together, he is 
talking about when you informed him that Transnet had 
decided to reinstate Mr Gama. 
“I 
recall 
that 
during 
my 
conversation 
with 
Mr Mkwanazi, I advised that it was prudent for 
Transnet to seek legal advice on the company’s 
proposed course of action.  We discussed a few 
options on eminent labour lawyers that he could 
20 
consult.  One of the names that came up was Mr 
Sbu Gule.” 
 
So what I want to suggest to you.  That when you read 
these 
two 
paragraphs, 
it 
seems 
to 
be 
Mr 
Mhlango’s 
recollection that even before you went to Mr Gule, you had 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 37 of 231 
 
decided to reinstate Mr Gama.   
MR MKWANAZI:   I would not call that a decision.  I would 
all that part of a review process which had been requested 
by the shareholder much earlier on.   
 
And also, if I do recall, there was some other information 
that I had seen in January, much earlier in January on 
irregular procurement in Transnet.  A number of cases.   
 
It was a matrix of some Excel spreadsheet which 
indicated offences by certain executives, et cetera and 
condonations granted, et cetera, et cetera.  And the amounts 
10 
involved but that information is not available.   
 
So at... like knowing what the system information was at 
the time, I was aware that there was something not on about 
the 
fairness 
of 
the 
sanctions 
on 
Gama 
on 
the 
two 
procurement issues.  That I was aware of.   
 
And then of course, in discussing with the board even 
before the 1 s t of February, the board was then made aware 
that I was in consultation with Mr Gama on some of the 
issues that would have come out of his disciplinary process.  
But having said I was in consultation.   
20 
 
Even at that time, the consultation was more of the 
procurement issues and, therefore, that is why some legal 
eyes were needed into looking into these issues.   
 
And what is interesting even if it is legalised, it did not 
focus on the third issue or the third offence of criticising 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 38 of 231 
 
executives.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi, perhaps I could just ask 
you for a direct answer.  Did you ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...or did you not tell Mr Mhlango 
before you had even appointed Deneys Reitz that Transnet 
intended to reinstate Mr Gama, yes or not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It intended to review, not reinstate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you did not tell him this? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is a strong word.  To review. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But how does he get it so wrong?  
Reviewing and reinstatement are two completely different 
concepts. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It should be.  It is a review because yes 
that review that had been requested by the shareholder in 
October 2010.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, you simply ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Not reinstate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You simply repeating your evidence.  
Do you remember my question?  My question is, how does 
20 
he get it so wrong? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I am not sure.  But he is coming, I am 
assuming, as well to have his say on the Zondo Commission. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if we go to his emails. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 39 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Page 178.  I think ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 178. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think you have told the Chairperson 
as well that he got it wrong. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Where you told the minister on the 
18t h of January that you were nearing a settlement.  He also 
got that wrong.  Is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   If I got it wrong?  Yes, he got it wrong. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I see.  Were you... you say though 
10 
that you were speaking to Mr Mhlango around this time.  Is 
that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, that is correct.  I am not sure around 
which time exactly but yes I would have been talking to him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And did you speak to him about Mr 
Gama’s reinstatement? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, the review that had been requested by 
the minister, not the reinstatement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, I think that is very important 
evidence.  Did you speak to him about the fact that, on your 
20 
version at least, the minister had instructed you to undertake 
a review of Mr Gama’s dismissal.  Did you talk to him about 
that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes.  Yes, I think I did.  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.  And if you go to page 181.  
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 40 of 231 
 
There is an email from ...[indistinct] to Mr Gigaba on the 4 
February 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And he said: 
“Dear Minister, my meeting with Cheer(?)...” 
He is referring to you there, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You had had a meeting with him 
about your negotiations with Mr Gama and his position in 
relation to applying for the GCE vacancy, correct?  
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Phew!  Let me take out that piece of 
paper, for which Chief Executive.  Yes, please continue? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well you had a meeting with him 
dealing with two subjects, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now what gave rise to this meeting 
on the 4 February? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do not recall – wait, wait, wait.  I do 
not recall in the opening statement that he makes there 
but, if I do recall, at the time we might have already 
20 
advertised for the filling of the vacancy of Group Chief 
Executive, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So were you keeping Mr Mahlangu 
apprised of developments in the light of the instruction that 
you got from the minister to, as you put it, review Mr 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 41 of 231 
 
Gama’s dismissal? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I would have. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that what you were doing? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I am not sure what he says that 
advertising was a mistake.  It was not a mistake. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, my question, Mr Mkwanazi, is 
were you …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I was in discussions with him 
regularly, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes but you were having these 
10 
discussions with him in light of the instruction that you 
received from the minister. 
MR MKWANAZI:   To review 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say to review Mr Gama’s 
dismissal, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And this is a discussion that you 
were having with the very person that suggested that you 
should appoint Mr Sbu Gule, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So let us go then please to the 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Myburgh, as I understand 
what you are saying, Mr Mkwanazi, and as I understand Mr 
Mahlangu’s email to his minister, it appears that the two of 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 42 of 231 
 
you, 
namely 
yourself 
and 
Mr 
Mahlangu 
had 
regular 
interactions about matters relating to Transnet and that 
included discussions relating to the matter of Mr Gama, is 
that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair, from the 
perspective that yes, the minister had requested a review, 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The interactions that you had with Mr 
Mahlangu, were they on the basis that he would convey to 
the minister whatever you conveyed to him in regard to 
10 
various issues at Transnet including Mr Gama’s matter? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I am not sure if he would but if also I 
recall at the time the focus of the discussions were not 
necessarily – they were related at times generally to state 
owned entities, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To state owned entities in general? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Under Public Enterprises. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  So are you saying that a lot 
of the discussions that you had with Mr Mahlangu related 
to state owned enterprises under the Department of Public 
20 
Enterprises? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Related to Transnet specific but 
occasionally other SOEs, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, generally, the discussions 
related to Transnet matters but sometimes they would also 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 43 of 231 
 
related to other SOEs, is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But when you were having 
discussions with him relating to Transnet was it on the 
basis that he was, so to speak, the conduit for him to pass 
on to the minister the updates or whatever you told him, 
you were not just telling Mr Mahlangu in his personal 
capacity, your were telling him because he was special 
adviser to the minister.   
MR MKWANAZI:   When you say in personal capacity, in a 
10 
way because he is special adviser to the minister my 
understanding was that then he would brief the minister 
because I never interacted with the minister a lot. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, ja.  So the basis for your 
engagements with Mr Mahlangu was that he would brief the 
minister on your discussions, is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, maybe you have answered 
the next question I was going to have.  Namely, with the 
Minister 
Mr 
Gigaba 
having 
instructed 
you, 
on 
your 
20 
evidence, 
to 
review 
the 
Gama 
case 
whether 
you 
subsequently ever had a meeting with him where you told 
him how far you were with the review process either before 
it was completed or when it was about to be completed? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do not recall sitting with the minister 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 44 of 231 
 
briefing him in detail on progress on the matter.  The only 
person who would have been briefed is Mr Mahlangu. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, and he would have – your 
expectation was that he would then share the briefing with 
the minister? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr 
Mkwanazi, I would like now to move to the board meeting 
on the 16 February. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I want to start off …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Can you – wait, I am not sure that the 
page is correct, ja.  What pack is it? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I will come to the minute in a 
moment but I want to start off just by finding out from you 
precisely what was before the board at this meeting on the 
16 February.  Let me start by asking you was Mr Todd’s 
opinion before the board on the 16 February? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do not think so, I do not recall that big 
20 
submission of Mr Todd serving on the board or even 
serving in one of the subcommittees, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You do not recall that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do not recall, no, because ideally if it 
had it would have been part of a bundle in terms of the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 45 of 231 
 
board pack and I do not recall how the board pack looked 
like at that time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But, Mr Mkwanazi, you had received 
Mr Todd’s opinion, as I understand it, you had read it as 
well. 
MR MKWANAZI:   My understanding, I had received it.  If I 
recall, it was done on the 2 February and given to one of 
the group legal people.  Yes, I would have received it and 
yes, I would have read it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you not think it would have been 
10 
important for it to have served before the board then on 
the 16 February?  I mean, why did you not ensure that it 
was there? 
MR MKWANAZI:   If I recall, there was a subcommittee 
before that board and again these minutes – ideally it 
would have served there and also when I say served there, 
coming say from group legal because we worked very 
closely with group legal at the time.  It would have served 
in a subcommittee, yes, but not necessarily a board, no. 
 
Now, that subcommittee, I do not know if I have got 
20 
a minute of it, but if I do recall, there was a subcommittee 
before the board meeting of the 16 t h, there was a 
subcommittee. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you would have seen the affidavit 
from the company secretary who says that the Todd opinion 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 46 of 231 
 
was part of the board pack of the 16 February.  You have 
seen that affidavit, have you not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I have not seen that affidavit, can you 
take me to it? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If we go to bundle 1, page 15. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 15, bundle 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That affidavit, Mr Mkwanazi, would have 
been one of the affidavits that were sent to you together 
with the letter that invited you to depose to your first 
affidavit. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Wait, let me go back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe find the bundle first. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I am going to do it.  Page 15.  Okay, 
dated 16 t h, a document dated that, okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So three lines down at page 12 – or 
paragraph 12. 
MR MKWANAZI:   On paragraph 12, yes? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “Therefore the said document...” 
And there she is referring to Mr Todd’s report. 
“...and the draft settlement agreement were tabled 
20 
for consideration before the board.  When the board 
authorised the finalisation of Mr Gama’s settlement 
agreement, a copy of this report is annexed marked 
MPM6.” 
Now can I just take you to MPM6.  That you find at page 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 47 of 231 
 
42. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 42. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   She has put up a board pack, it 
seems, Board of Directors Meeting 16 February 12.32.05, 
Royal Elephant Conference Centre, Centurion and then you 
will see that there was spiral binding on the left hand side 
of Mr Todd’s report, you can flick through it and go all the 
way from 43 …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   To…? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   To 68. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   To 68.  Okay.  I see it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So is it still your recollection that 
the Todd report …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I was still concerned about 
Mr Mkwanazi’s response that he did not get or see that 
affidavit of the company secretary [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, no... 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will deal with it later.  What page is – I 
missed the page numbers you were referring him to. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, the page number …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson, I was referring to 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 48 of 231 
 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The bundle 1, nè? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   To annexure MPM6, that is at page 
42. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second?  That is on bundle 1, nè? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is correct.  And then Mr Todd’s 
report, Chairperson, goes all the way up to 68. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, I have got it now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi, is it still your 
10 
recollection and of course you can only testify to what you 
remember but is it still your recollection that the Todd 
report was not before the board on the 16 t h? 
MR MKWANAZI:   When you say it was not before the 
board I see it was before the board based on this 
document, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right. 
MR MKWANAZI:   But I did not recall it anymore but I had 
seen it before, by the way before the 16 t h. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes but I want to – I think it is very 
20 
important for the Chairperson to know precisely what 
information was before the board on the 16 t h. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now I can take you to two affidavits 
by your fellow directors, Ms Gcaba and Ms Tshepe who 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 49 of 231 
 
both confirmed …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you might have seen that, who 
both confirmed that the Todd report was in fact before the 
board on the 16 February. 
MR MKWANAZI:   On the 16 t h, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you need me to take you to those 
passages or would you agree with that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, no, I do believe that it did serve on 
the board of the 16 February. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you have seen those affidavits, I 
mean you were given all of these files over the weekend, 
correct?  You have seen the affidavits of Gcaba and 
Tshepe? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes.  Gcaba? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Gaba, Gcaba. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I did get them, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So can the Chairperson 
then accept on the strength of the board pack and on the 
strength of what they say that you then accept that the 
20 
Todd report is before you on the 16 February? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, on the 16 t h, yes, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now you and other board members 
talk about legal advice that was before the board.  Now do 
I understand you correctly that what you placed before the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 50 of 231 
 
board after the memos of 14 and 15 February was what 
Mapoma sent you on the 15 February further to the input of 
Deneys Reitz and you presented that memorandum as the 
opinion of group legal.  Effectively, Mr Mapoma’s opinion, 
is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So when we look at these affidavits 
and reference is made to legal advice, that legal advice, 
and correct me if I am wrong, comprises the advice of Mr 
Todd and effectively, the advice of Mr Mapoma, is that 
10 
correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct.  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you have accepted previously 
that the advice of Mr Mapoma that you placed before the 
board …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Where you say some doubt was 
created, was entirely in conflict with the advice that he 
gave 
the 
Corporate 
Governance 
and 
Nominations 
Committee on the 3 February when he told  members of 
20 
that committee, including a number of your directors, that 
Transnet had a very, very good case, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.  You have accepted as well 
that as of the 16 February there was nothing before the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 51 of 231 
 
board from KPMG/Nkonki.  You confirm that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What we have seen from the 
affidavits of Gcaba and Tshepe is that both of them say 
that you informed the board that you had a list of 
contraventions that were comparable to Mr Gama’s case.  
Neither of them say you introduced this list, they simply 
say that you informed the board of a list of contraventions 
that were comparable to Mr Gama’s case.  Do you confirm 
that? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I do recall. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you have given evidence – and I 
think I have taken you to the relevant prior extracts where 
you seem to have talked about a list of 30, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And, if I understand your evidence 
correctly, from what you have said earlier this morning and 
previously, that really was a list of persons in relation to 
whom condonation was granted, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It could have been a list of procurement 
20 
processes and also condonations granted, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you had this list? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Now when you say you had this list, at 
the time, frankly, there was a spreadsheet which had been 
developed which indicated some of these irregularities and 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 52 of 231 
 
some of the condonations granted and in some areas not 
even 
granted, 
for 
that 
matter, 
but 
with 
notes 
that 
disciplinary action would be taken, etcetera, etcetera, yes. 
 
Now subsequent to - that list would have been 
circulating sometime in January.  Now having – I am also 
trying to find that list.  I have not seen it since. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I would like just to take you 
please to page – it is Ms Gcaba’s affidavit at page – 
bundle 1. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Bundle 1. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That would be Gcaba, hey? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Gcaba, bundle 1, 224. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For the transcribers, Gcaba will be G-c-
a-b-a.  224 you say, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   224. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If I could please direct your attention 
to paragraph 48.2? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   She is here dealing with the board 
20 
meeting of the 16 February and says: 
“The Chairman furthermore informed the board that 
there 
was 
a 
list 
of 
contraventions 
that 
were 
comparable to the case of Gama.” 
Do you see that? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 53 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you do that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You told them that you have a list of 
contraventions that are comparable to the case of Mr 
Gama. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You did not – on her version, you did 
not share this list with your fellow board members, you 
simply told them that you had this list, correct? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let us go please to page 785. 
MR MKWANAZI:   785.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This is Ms Tshepe’s affidavit, she is 
also dealing with the meeting of the 16 February and at 
paragraph 37.2 – I beg your pardon, I want to take you to 
784. 
MR MKWANAZI:   784.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   She also says at 37.2: 
“The Chairman furthermore informed the board that 
20 
there 
was 
a 
list 
of 
contraventions 
that 
were 
comparable.” 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So this is your list of 30, you say it 
was in the form of a spreadsheet. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 54 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did it show?  What did it 
reflect?  So you have 30 names. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It would have been a couple of 
transactions, whatever they were and of course it would 
have covered a number of years, if I can use the word, 
maybe from 2005 to 2010.  It would have covered the 
actual procurement, whatever that was, and the fact that it 
either exceeded the mandate or it was irregular.  There 
would have been columns with some analysis and it would 
10 
have indicated whether condonation was granted or not 
granted.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This is important, Mr Mkwanazi. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have a list of 30 people, so from 
what you can recall, 30 names …[intervenes] 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
Just 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If I can just summarise your 
evidence and then you can either agree or disagree. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have a list of 30 names 
spanning the period 2005 to 2010. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The list would indicated the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 55 of 231 
 
irregularity, as you put it, where the mandate may have 
been exceeded. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then there was an indication of 
whether condonation was granted or not, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now how were you on the face of 
that list in a position to tell your fellow board members that 
those contraventions were comparable to Mr Gama’s case? 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
They 
are 
not 
hundred 
percent 
10 
comparable because Mr Gama’s case touched on two 
procurement issues and one non-procurement issues but 
where it touches on the two procurement issues, they are 
comparable but when it touched the third matter where 
Gama now attacks the other executives, there is no similar 
case to my understanding that is on record.  Ja.  So it is 
only on the two procurement cases.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But even there you did not know 
whether they were actually comparable.  You thought 
broadly they were because they are now procurement 
20 
irregularities but you did not know the detail of the 30, 
correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I would not know the detail, no, no, 
no. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you really were not in a position, 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 56 of 231 
 
Mr Mkwanazi, even to tell them in relation to the two 
charges 
that 
the 
contraventions 
on 
your 
list 
were 
comparable, were you? 
MR MKWANAZI:   In fairness, they are comparable from a 
procurement principle that certain things were not done 
according to the procurement procedure manual of the 
time.  That is the only comparison, not the quantum and 
not a lot of other issues but the fact that they did not 
comply with the PPM at the time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So they were at best broadly 
10 
comparable. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct but the third one was not 
even something that I would have submitted to the board in 
terms of comparability, there was no similar case. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  So I suppose what you should 
have said – is you should not have said that the cases are 
comparable, you should have told them look, they are 
broadly comparable. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Because they are all involved in 
20 
some or other way, procurement irregularity. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I should have said that, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is a different picture, is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, alright. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 57 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I take it that you approached those 30 
names or so where condonation had been granted on their 
submission that the employees concerned would have 
applied for condonation, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, some of them did, that is 
correct, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Were there some who had not, as far as 
you know? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, some had not and for some 
reason although they were in the minority, those that 
10 
maybe might not have applied but nothing was done, 
etcetera, etcetera, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
As 
I 
understand 
the 
position, 
condonation was not supposed to be had for the asking.  
Was that your understanding at the time as well? 
MR MKWANAZI:   My understanding, Chairman, is that you 
could ask for condonation but when you say ask for it, you 
talk to your immediate supervisor about the issue and in 
most cases it involves Transnet internal audit and you then 
talk to your boss about whatever you have done wrong and 
20 
then your boss can then decide whether through the 
necessary counsel that had approved that transaction that 
the matter can go for condonation or you must discipline or 
whatever but it is through the approving authority, who 
would have been your supervisor. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 58 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, what I mean is that the 
position, as you also understood it, I understand the 
position to have been that just because somebody, an 
employee asks for condonation, does not mean that they 
will get it. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, no, no, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It remained dependent on the merits of 
each request and the circumstances of the – of how the 
irregularity happened, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I agree with you, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I also got the impression from some of 
the documents from Transnet that the idea was that 
condonation could be granted for non-serious irregularities 
if I understood correctly.  Maybe non-serious is not the 
correct term, I do not know whether it is non-material, I am 
not sure, but I got the impression that there was a clear 
distinction made to say the more serious the deviation or 
the irregularity, the less likely that an employee would get 
condonation.  Is my understanding the same as what your 
understanding was at the time. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman sort of but the question of 
seriousness is not an easy one to get into because how do 
you define the seriousness, is it a one billion, two billion, 
what’s the quantum because some of these issues that 
eventually had to be condoned ran into billions of rands. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 59 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but leaving out the question of 
whether it was a good idea to make a distinction between 
serious 
irregularities 
and 
maybe 
not 
so 
serious 
irregularities, or material irregularities and non-material 
irregularities, leaving aside the question of whether it was 
a good idea to make that distinction.  Is it your recollection 
that there was such a distinction in terms of the policies? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman there would have been, I am 
now trying to assume what I haven’t read the PM, the 
Policy Procedure of Manual of Transnet in a long time, but 
10 
yes there would have been there because I am not sure 
where fraud comes in here because some of these things 
could have been fraudulent, and also I am not sure where 
fruitless and wasteful expenditure comes in on these, for 
some of them would have been fruitless and wasteful, they 
were of different categories. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but would it be correct to say that 
the authority considering a request or application by an 
employee for condonation would have had to take into 
account among other factors the factor of how serious the 
20 
irregularity was, would it be correct to say that 
MR MKWANAZI:   You are correct Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay thank you.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi just 
correct me if I’m wrong, but as I understand it on this list 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 60 of 231 
 
of 30 people some of those people condonation had not 
been granted, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is my understanding at the time 
yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    And if I understand your evidence 
correctly the list might also have contained names of 
people 
who 
were 
actually 
dismissed 
for 
procurement 
irregularities?   
MR MKWANAZI:   My understanding yes it would have 
contained some people. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Importantly, and in fact if I 
understand it I think on Friday you talked about a list of 22 
and then we’ve seen when Mr Molefe was appointed, your 
affidavit says he was instructed to deal with 12, so can you 
remember how many people on this list with reference to 
those figures that I have just given you, were in fact 
granted condonation?   It wasn’t all 30. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Maybe I need to state the scenario a 
little bit because the question of condonation is a strange 
matter, let me make an example of one particular contract 
20 
where I got directly involved.   It was the VAE contract, I 
don’t know what the company name was, but the increase 
in amount, the issue was people who kept on paying a 
supplier on what was then an irregular contract, and that 
made the contract value increase from 98million to about 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 61 of 231 
 
1.8billiona and where now the question of the number of 
people, in fairness just that one contract alone, about plus 
minus eight other people were involved in making these 
adjustments where ideally some of these people should 
have called the process to a halt and say hold it we are 
busy making payments against an irregular contract. 
 
I am trying to indicate that when I say the number is 
30 that contract alone would have had about eight and 
another contract would have had a certain amount of 
people, that is how people got attached to an irregular 
10 
contract. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think really I am just looking for a 
number, because your evidence  you’ve spoken about 
thirty, you’ve spoken about 22, you’ve spoken about 12, 
are you able to help us with a number or not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Frankly that homework will have to be 
done, because these numbers that you are mentioning, I 
don’t have an exact number, frankly at some stage while I 
was there we thought the number was even over 100 but 
through 
going 
back 
into 
the 
history 
of 
the 
various 
20 
procurement irregularities the numbers in January 2011 
would have been about 30 and some of those numbers 
interestingly enough are also calculated in the KPMG final 
report of November 2011. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now Mr Mkwanazi as I understand 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 62 of 231 
 
your 
evidence 
in 
response 
to 
questions 
from 
the 
Chairperson is that on the bare information that you had on 
the spreadsheet you weren’t able to identify or determine 
the severity of each individual case, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Not at the time yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But what we do know is that by way 
of comparison you were in a very good position to 
determine the severity of Mr Gama’s misconduct, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And why is that? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Hold it, don’t forget Mr Gama’s matter is 
threefold, 
two 
are 
procurement 
and 
one 
is 
non-
procurement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes but you were in a very good 
position to assess it, I was driving that, because Mr Todd 
had done that for you over a space of 25 pages, correct?  
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright so let us go to the minute 
please of the meeting of the 16 t h of February. 
MR MKWANAZI:   What page is that? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The minutes appears in various 
places but the first time it was put up was by the company 
secretary.  Let me take you please to Bundle 1, page 34. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay, page 34, my assistant has just 
gone to – okay I am on page 34. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 63 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, Bundle 1, 34, now let us go 
to paragraph 2.1.2. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
The 
Board 
had 
extensive 
deliberations on the matter, the following issues were 
highlighted in the deliberations; one, acknowledgement 
that Mr Gama was not challenging the finding of guilt 
against him, but the sanction imposed, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Secondly Mr Gama’s sanction of 
10 
dismissal was too harsh and the Board will support a 
sanction of a final written warning valid for a period of 12 
months and from what you have told the Chairperson 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Six months Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon, six  months. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   For a period of six months, correct 
Mr Mkwanazi? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And from what you told the 
Chairperson fundamentally what led the board to that 
conclusion is that you informed the Board that you had a 
list of contraventions that were comparable to Mr Gama’s 
case, where people had not been dismissed, correct? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 64 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have admitted that you perhaps 
shouldn’t have created the impression that they were like 
for like, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, yes, yes, I agree, they were not like 
for like. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you go on to – or it goes 
on to record appreciation that Mr Gama can still add value 
in the company, there was a minority not in support of the 
reversal of Mr Gama’s sanction. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The company was mandated to 
finalise Mr Gama’s settlement agreement and then the 
condonation process is the norm within Transnet and to 
this 
effect 
the 
Chairman 
was 
requested 
to 
draft 
a 
memorandum to employees requesting that such conduct 
should cease. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What does that mean? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It means that the – in the system there 
20 
were 
too 
many 
condonations 
and 
authorities 
floating 
around requesting condonation, so what the company as 
trying to indicate is that it should cease and only one 
person would have the authority to condone and at the time 
the idea was that it would have been Brian Molefe, or the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 65 of 231 
 
Group CEO who would deal with those condonations.  And 
yes subsequently if I recall I had to deal with one 
condonation, the VAE Condonation if I can mention it ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have told the Chairperson on 
Friday that you accept that condonation and disciplinary 
action are two different concepts, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at paragraph 2.1.3 the 
Board was of the view that under the circumstances a final 
written warning would have been given. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Would have been given, how would 
that have happened? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman I am indicating that the Board 
was of the view that under normal circumstances a final 
written warning would have been given.  It is not 100% 
correct statement because the authority, or authorising 
individual would have taken a view based on its case 
whether 
a 
written 
warning 
is 
taken 
or 
whether 
a 
disciplinary – that sentence is incomplete, but ja, that’s 
20 
correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I mean what you say here is 
effective is that if Mr Gama had applied for condonation 
then this is what would have happened.    
MR MKWANAZI:   It could have been denied as well, yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 66 of 231 
 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
But 
that’s 
what 
you 
were 
forecasting. 
MR MKWANAZI:   ...[Indistinct] but it could have been 
denied. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean condonation could have been 
denied? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Denied yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, but whether granted or denied 
that would not impact on whether he should be disciplined 
or not, that would be a separate issue?  
10 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
Chairman 
there 
are 
certain 
circumstances where condonation would have been denied 
and therefore the next steps would have been disciplinary 
action needs to be taken.  The question of whether you’re 
condoned or not and therefore you are absolved never 
arose, except in situations where people do not even apply 
for condonation, which is different matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so as you said previously even if 
you are granted condonation you can still be disciplined. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I just want to understand Mr 
Mkwanazi if you don’t mind.  When it says the Board was of 
the view that under normal circumstances a final written 
warning would have been given what do you mean by that, 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 67 of 231 
 
when would it have been given?   How would it have been 
given? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman it depends on each individual 
case, because at times how these condonations were 
coming, they were coming through what you call divisional 
internal audit committee meetings, where you then review 
offences, procurement offences if I were to call them that, 
and then based on that divisional internal audit an opinion 
is 
then 
formed 
that 
these 
offences 
can 
apply 
for 
condonation and these offences need to be elevated to the 
10 
authority and some of them maybe they need disciplinary 
action, because offences are completely different, there’s 
your theft for instance.   I don’t think any condonation 
would have been given for theft, and those who assault 
and a few other things, there’s no condonation would have 
been given ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was thinking of asking something, but I 
have decided to let you carry on. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Mr 
20 
Mkwanazi what you don’t see here is any consideration or 
undertaking by the Board of a review of Mr Antrobes’ 
decision, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja.  
ADV MYBURGH SC: I mean no one says well this is what 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 68 of 231 
 
Antrobes found, we think it’s wrong for these reasons, the 
Board is just deciding this matter effectively afresh for 
itself isn’t it?   
MR MKWANAZI:  No that is correct Chair although it had 
seen the Antrobes’...[intervenes]   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that what you were told to do, 
then, and this is an important question, is that what you 
were told to do by the Minister?   Is decide the matter 
afresh for yourself? 
MR MKWANAZI:   The request was a review, and upon that 
10 
review the procurement issues there was some elements of 
unfairness on those two issues but the third matter of him 
...[indistinct] Mr Chris Wells and the Board it was oversight 
on the part of the Board not to tackle that specific issue, 
because I do not think that that Board would have taken a 
different decision to what Mr – Advocate Antrobes and may 
Mr Todd had also recommended ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But Mr Mkwanazi this minute does 
not reflect any application of the mind by the board to a 
review of Mr Antrobes’ decision.  The Board just decides 
20 
afresh what it thinks should have happened, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, no it does not refer to it yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But why not?  Unless you were hell 
bent on having Mr Gama reinstated why didn’t you 
undertake a proper objective review? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 69 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman in hindsight that should have 
been done yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And isn’t the position that actually the 
rulings of the Chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry, 
because there were two, one on guilt, the other one on 
sanction, isn’t the position that the mere instruction that 
you must review Mr Gama’s case had to start with a 
reading of those rulings and seeing whether they could be 
faulted, even before you can look at anything else.  
Wouldn’t you agree that ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree with you Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Just one last question 
on the board meeting, Mr Mkwanazi Mr Malangani he says 
in his affidavit that you said that you had received legal 
advice to the effect that the sanction of dismissal was too 
harsh.  Did you say that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I wouldn’t call it legal advice that said it 
was too harsh, all I was indicating, I might have said it, 
was that if this thing is taken on the Transnet Bargaining 
20 
Council process there were chances that the Bargaining 
Council could come with a different option of how the 
matter could have been handled. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, because I mean in truth you 
hadn’t received legal advice to the effect that the sanction 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 70 of 231 
 
of dismissal was too harsh.  At best you had received legal 
advice creating as you said many times “some doubt”, 
correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps this is an opportune time 
for me to ask you, you do now that this settlement cost the 
taxpayer, and we will come to the figures in a moment, I 
think about R17million.  Why do you settle a case just 
because there is some doubt? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Myburgh, you probably 
10 
mean the R17million in terms of financial benefits to Mr 
Gama. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes I will come to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course the settlement agreement 
went even far beyond that, there’s legal costs and other 
things.   You mean the financial benefits to Mr Gama? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes I think perhaps Mr Chairman I 
will come to that in a moment, but the – what was paid to 
Mr Gama was approximately R13million and then there was 
about R4million in legal costs, you are absolutely right, it 
20 
is the two together, but my figure of R17million includes 
the two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, no I think I understand what 
you mean, I think your statement, I understood your 
statement to be saying you wanted to confirm that he 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 71 of 231 
 
knows 
that 
the 
settlement 
agreement 
cost 
Transnet 
R17million. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I was simply saying you haven’t 
counted the legal costs that they paid to Mr Gama’s, which 
would be far more, you probably are just talking about what 
you just said ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, well Mr Mkwanazi we are going 
to come to the figures in a moment, but you know that this 
was a very extensive settlement wasn’t it? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   I am aware yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is really what I am driving at, 
why do you settle where the cost is enormous, just 
because at absolute best for you there is some doubt, 
that’s all. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct chair.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Why didn’t you just let the process 
run, you could have saved this money, potentially?  Why 
were you so hell bent ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   In hindsight Advocate yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes but Mr Mkwanazi I am going to 
press you on this, because this is a very important issue.   
You have said time and time again to the Chairperson you 
settled because there is some doubt.  Well there’s doubt in 
all litigation. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 72 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I just cannot understand even on 
your own version what is the basis for entering into this 
very expensive settlement when all there is, is some doubt.  
Why give away the money? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman yes there was that doubt and 
on the procurement issues but in  hindsight I don’t have 
any doubt that on the third matter of attacking his 
executive sir had the Board applied its mind to that third 
matter, I doubt if this – that Mr Gama would have been 
10 
reinstated, no there I would have supported the dismissal 
as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Myburgh’s question is even with 
the two procurement issues. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Other matters? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, why did you and the Board decide to 
settle the matter just because there is some doubt that was 
created by a poor legal opinion, or weak, I think that’s the 
term you used, a weak legal opinion that was not reasoned 
in any substantial way when you had about three legal 
20 
opinions saying you are on strong grounds against Mr 
Gama in regard to this arbitration.  So Mr Myburgh’s 
question is help us understand why the Board thought it 
was the right thing to settle in circumstances where this 
settlement was going to be so expensive and yet the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 73 of 231 
 
prospects of Transnet winning the case were so good, to 
your knowledge in terms of the three legal opinions. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman I have indicated that yes there 
was this review by this – which came in the form of this 
weak 
legal 
opinion, 
which 
then 
created 
doubt 
but 
unfortunately it was not part of it, because it was a general 
statement on doubt without looking at the three issues 
separately, because as I indicate just on the 3 r d matter 
alone, which not procurement related a different decision 
would have been reached by that Board, if there was more 
10 
emphasis on that matter which is not procurement related. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes Mr Mkwanazi I am not sure 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t think you have got an answer. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I don’t think I have got an answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course if Mr Mkwanazi doesn’t 
have an answer he doesn’t have one.  Feel free to deal 
with the issue the way you see it, it is an important issue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi you accept that there 
20 
is doubt and risk in all litigation.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes I do accept that. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 And 
that 
doesn’t 
drive 
the 
responding party to settle all litigation does it? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No it doesn’t ja. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 74 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am just going to ask you once more 
I mean this settlement we will go into the figures in a 
moment, cost anywhere between 10 and 20million, that’s 
how much money you doled out to Mr Gama, and you did 
that simply because there was some doubt that was not 
even articulated in the opinion.  That is surely not rational.  
MR MKWANAZI:   Advocate yes at the time that is the view 
we took as a Board and even that advice as I have 
indicated was not thorough particularly along the issue of 
the third offence and that is why had it been highlighted 
10 
this third offence, I doubt if the Board would have reached 
that decision, but on the other two matters there could 
have been some doubt, definitely yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, but you are skirting around the 
question.  I mean if there was some doubt there was also 
we know a prospect that you could win. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Advocate, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Correct but then why didn’t you 
allow an arbitration to run its course then we could have 
perhaps saved somewhere between ten and twenty  million.  
20 
I mean you knew there was a prospect of being able to do 
that, why did you not allow the process to run its course. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman as you rightfully pointed out 
advocate the issues of litigation can go either way and at 
the time if I recall the Board could have been worried 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 75 of 231 
 
about this thing taking abnormally too long and therefore 
the Board could have felt that it needs to be resolved but it 
is then wrong legal advice which is the basis of saying yes 
maybe on the first two issues there could have been some 
doubt, but on the third issue no, the Board didn’t have 
good advice and also – ja.  If basically the Board would 
have sustained the decision of the disciplinary committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What would you say if somebody said 
this decision by the Board is indefensible? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman I would tend to agree with you 
10 
because it is indefensible because the Board did not have 
the facts of the last matter in terms of that particular 
offence, it never surfaced on documentation that this third 
offence was almost a dismissible offence, under any 
circumstances Chairman I agree with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi what I now 
want to do is deal with relevant concept, condonation 
whether or not it was applicable and the like.  Can I ask 
you please to turn to Mr Todd’s further affidavit, that is in 
20 
Bundle 3 at page ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Three? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Bundle 3, and it starts at page 156. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I’ve got it in front of me. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 76 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So what Mr Todd does in this 
affidavit is if you have a look at paragraph 6, he deals with 
your reasoning and the decision to reinstate in the light of 
the issue of condonation, and then at paragraph 7 he says 
this 
explanation 
is 
in 
my 
respectful 
submission 
not 
rational, it does not ring true on its own terms.  The 
explanation cannot be correct for the following reasons, 
and then he summarises four points that he then expands 
upon.   
 
First condonation was not – sorry condonation was 
10 
a procurement process entirely distinct from decision 
making about the consequences that should flow, sorry 
follow from employee misconduct. 
 
Second, 
not 
one 
of 
the 
three 
instances 
of 
misconduct to which Mr Gama ultimately admitted and for 
which he was dismissed was capable of or suitable for 
condonation as an application of the procurement policy.  
Third, such contentions as Mr Gama sought to make during 
the 
disciplinary 
process 
concerning 
consistency 
of 
treatment were fully, carefully and fairly considered by the 
20 
disciplinary  chairperson as appears from his lengthy 
findings and then fourth, as far as I am aware there was no 
report or evidence before the Board when the decision was 
taken to reinstate Mr Gama which showed a track record of 
condonation being granted etcetera. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 77 of 231 
 
 
Now I want to now go through each of those points, 
if I can take you please to the heading “condonation and 
procurement process distinct from decisions on employee 
conduct.”  
 
Mr 
Todd 
says 
to 
the 
best 
of 
my 
knowledge 
condonation within the Transnet Procurement environment 
had nothing to do with condoning acts of misconduct by 
employees, and I understand you have accepted that. 
MR 
MKWANAZI:   Yes Advocate I agree with that 
statement. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Condonation was a procurement 
procedure under which a person or body with authority to 
incur expenditure was permitted to – and now he is quoting 
from your manual: 
“Condone non-compliance with the laid down policy 
and procedures and directives provided.  Such non-
compliance 
is 
submitted 
via 
the 
relevant 
line 
manager of the employee in a particular division.” 
You would agree with that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree with that ja. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I refer in this regard to the opening 
paragraph of the Transnet internal memorandum and we 
are going to come to that in a moment.  Paragraph 10: 
“In this way usually minor deviations ...” 
Again the language of the memo; 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 78 of 231 
 
“...from required procurement policies could be 
condoned 
after 
carefully 
consideration 
by 
the 
authorised person or body, so that if expenditure 
was approved or had been incorrect in these 
circumstances it would not constitute unauthorised 
or irregular expenditure for the purposes of the 
PFMA.” 
You agree with that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree with you Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And at 11 the distinction between 
10 
condonation as a procurement procedure and disciplinary 
processes to deal with employee misconduct is a logical 
distinction 
which 
is 
apparent 
from 
Transnet 
policy 
directives at the time including Annexure A, you have 
already accepted that, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja, I agree advocate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That memorandum deals with the 
authority of what is referred to as the divisional acquisition 
council, the procurement body within a Transnet division to 
condone 
non-compliance 
with 
prescribed 
procurement 
20 
policies and procedures, do you accept that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   As the memorandum makes clear 
condonations “are not there for the asking” correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree with you. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 79 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It will be as a general rule 
condonation 
should 
be 
given 
for 
relatively 
minor 
transgressions of procurement rules and procedures and 
that material non-compliance will usually not be condoned 
because these have “PFMA implications which could result 
in civil, criminal or disciplinary steps being taken”, you 
would agree with that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree with that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   A condonation submission was 
required to state whether disciplinary steps have been 
10 
taken because of non-compliance, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And [d] ever matters have been 
submitted for condonation where certain individuals are 
found to be guilty of transgressions disciplinary action 
should be considered, you would confirm that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I summary said Mr Todd the two 
processes, one condoning minor non-compliance with rules 
and procedures and 2 responding to employee misconduct 
20 
were at all times, both as a matter of logic and as a matter 
of policy entirely distinct, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   They are distinct yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you will see, I will come 
back to the affidavit or the body of it in a moment, but 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 80 of 231 
 
would you please go to page 168. 
MR MKWANAZI:   168. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   There is Annexure A and it is the 
PFM directive of March 2010 dealing with condonations 
and really what Mr Todd did is he analysed and quoted in 
his affidavit from this Annexure A, and you have agreed 
with his analysis, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes I do agree. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So then if you go back please to 
page 106 ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before that Mr Myburgh Mr 
Mkwanazi while on that page 168 won’t you – or no it is at 
page 168 you will see at the bottom of that page that the 
memo says DAC’s role: 
“The 
discretion 
which 
the 
DAC 
has 
to 
grant 
condonations must be carefully exercised, taking 
into account all the relevant factors.  These include 
the following: 
1. The extent and cause of the non-compliance; 
2. The seriousness of the non-compliance; 
20 
3. The reasonableness of the explanation for the 
non-compliance; 
4. The effect of the non-compliance on the fairness 
of the procurement process; 
5. Whether the matter would in all likelihood been 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 81 of 231 
 
approved 
had 
the 
proper 
processes 
been 
followed; 
6. Whether 
the 
DAC 
was 
approached 
for 
condonation as soon as possible [at the next 
DAC meeting] after business became aware of a 
non-compliance.” 
You see that ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   I see it ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Those seem to be the factors which the 
memorandum says should be taken into account when 
10 
considering whether or not to grant condonation, you 
accept that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And on the next page, page 169, you will 
see a heading that says information to be contained in a 
condonation submission, can you see that heading? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I can see that heading. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then it says: 
“At 
the 
very 
least 
a 
submission 
to 
obtain 
condonation 
should 
contain 
the 
following 
20 
information: 
1. When did the business first become aware of the 
non-compliance; 
2. The nature of the non-compliance, including the 
provision 
of 
the 
PPN 
[or 
construction 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 82 of 231 
 
procurement manual] that was not followed; 
3. A full explanation for the non-compliance, ie why 
was the process not followed; 
4. What steps will be taken to ensure that the non-
compliance will not occur again; 
5. Has 
any 
person 
been 
reprimanded 
or 
has 
disciplinary action been instituted against any 
person because of the non-compliance [including 
details thereof]. 
And if you go a little down you will see a paragraph that 
10 
says: 
“Matters 
submitted 
for 
condonation 
must 
be 
regarded in a serious light and where certain 
individuals are found to be guilty of transgressions 
disciplinary action should be considered.” 
You see that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I see that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now in relation to the thirty or whatever 
the number is of condonations that you said had been 
granted in terms of the list that was – that you had before 
20 
you in a spreadsheet you would not have had all of this 
information to see in which case in order to be able to 
compare with Mr Gama’s case, isn’t it? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I would not have had that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would not have had all of this 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 83 of 231 
 
information regarding each one of them. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I would not have it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairman I see that it is quarter 
past eleven, is this a convenient time to take the tea 
adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take the tea adjournment and we 
will resume at half past eleven. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  You may seated Mr Mkwanazi.  
Let us continue. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Indeed Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us continue.  Your microphone Mr 
Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi – Mr 
Chairman I have been asked to face… 
MR MKWANAZI:  The page. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I have to fact this way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh otherwise the TV people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  So I am sorry. 
MR MKWANAZI:  They want to see your face better. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 84 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does that mess up your plan with your 
table there? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I will sort it out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At lunchtime but I am sure I can limp 
on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Chairperson thank you.  Mr 
10 
Mkwanazi can I please then take you to the next topic that is 
dealt with by Mr Todd?  And this is at page 160 of Bundle 3.  
He says: 
“No condonation would or could have been 
applicable to Gama’s misconduct.” 
 
Paragraph 13. 
“Quite 
apart 
from 
the 
logical 
distinction 
referred to above not one of the three 
instances of misconduct to each of which the 
sanction of dismissal of imposed on Mr Gama 
20 
would have been suitable for or capable of 
condonation in the sense contemplated in 
Transnet’s procurement policy.” 
 
So [a] he deals with the Fifty Like New locomotives.  
He says: 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 85 of 231 
 
“The misconduct in relation to the Fifty Like 
New locomotives arose from Mr Gama’s 
conclusion of a major contract that had been 
authorised by the board that with Mr Gama 
failing to comply with the single important 
condition prescribed by the board which was 
that local [South African] work performed on 
refurbished locomotives should be done by 
Transnet 
itself 
and 
not 
by 
an 
external 
partner.  Mr Gama’s conduct in concluding a 
10 
contract 
that 
directly 
contradicted 
this 
condition was not a procurement irregularity 
that 
could 
be 
condoned. 
 
And 
more 
importantly it was not in fact condoned by 
the board.  On the contrary the board 
required the contract to be cancelled with 
Transnet incurring various significant costs 
as a result.  No question arose of irregular 
expenditure 
that 
could 
be 
condoned 
on 
application by Mr Gama.  Mr Gama did not in 
20 
fact apply for condonation and this would in 
any event not have mitigated or detracted 
from the serious concerns about his conduct 
which the disciplinary Chairperson found to 
have justified his dismissal.” 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 86 of 231 
 
 
So the long and the short of what Mr Todd is saying 
is that Mr Gama could never have got condonation because 
this irregularity was not condoned in fact to the contrary.  
What the board required was the cancellation of the contract 
resulting in Transnet incurring various significant costs.  You 
wish to comment on this? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I – I understand fully the argument of Mr 
Todd.  Having said that though and as he rightfully points out 
in terms of that board decision.  I am also now not sure if 
this matter is actually meaning in retrospect a condonable 
10 
matter.  I am not sure. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja well I think that is a concession 
fairly made.   
MR MKWANAZI:  I am not sure. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well let me then deal with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Todd says clearly – he clearly says 
it was not a matter that would fall under condonation that 
would attract condonation.  As I – as I understand his 
argument maybe not just based here but maybe based 
elsewhere in his affidavits as well.  This was a case where 
20 
the board had given in effect an instruction and that 
instruction was effectively defied by Mr Gama.  Condonation 
has got nothing to do with that does it? 
MR MKWANAZI:  It does not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 87 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  I agree Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then just to add to that Mr Mkwanazi 
so that deals with the misconduct side of it but on the 
condonation side of it Mr Todd says well condonation could 
never have been granted because this actually was not 
condoned.  What happened is that the contract was 
cancelled by Transnet and it incurred various significant 
costs.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Let us then go to page 161. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Paragraph 3.  We are now dealing with 
GNS.   
“The procurement irregularities in relation to the 
appointment of GNS were completely unsuitable 
for condonation for various reasons. 
1.  First 
that 
procurement 
process 
was 
so 
seriously flawed that no rational person 
could 
have 
attempted 
to 
use 
the 
20 
condonation procedure to seek to regularise 
it.  I refer to the multiple and serious 
respects in which the process was found to 
be deviated – oh sorry defective by the 
Chairperson of the disciplinary proceedings 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 88 of 231 
 
brought 
against 
Messrs 
Khanya 
and 
Senemala.  As appears from the copy of the 
findings.” 
Now I have taken – you mentioned those before. 
MR MKWANAZI: Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Those are the findings marked B the 
findings of Nazier Cassim SC you would have read them no 
doubt? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I know [00:06:05] issue yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  And you will see that that finding 
10 
tabulates an absolute litany of irregularities caused and 
affected by these two employees who were then dismissed.  
Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd goes on to say: 
“Second and perhaps more importantly of 
relevance to Mr Gama’s position Mr Gama 
himself had described it as an irregular 
process 
which 
had 
been 
materially 
misrepresented to him by the official who had 
20 
procured 
his 
signature 
on 
the 
crucial 
procurement document.  Mr Gama described 
the process as “fishy” and a scam and stated 
that he would not have approved it if he had 
known the true facts at the time.” 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 89 of 231 
 
 
You accept that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd goes on to… 
MR MKWANAZI:  I accept that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd goes on to say: 
“I attach marked C a transcript of part of the 
disciplinary proceedings that took place on 
10 February 2010. As is apparent from the 
transcript Mr Gama stated that when he had 
later seen the confinement document after an 
10 
investigation into the matter he had realised 
that there were “quite a few gaps and 
loopholes”. 
 
He 
had 
begun 
to 
smell 
“something fishy”.  Stated that if he had 
known that it was confinement he would 
probably not have approved it.  Confirmed 
that it had been improper to stop an existing 
tender process when GNS came into the 
picture.  Confirmed that what the relevant 
official had done by representing to him that 
20 
a tender process had been followed “was a 
complete fraud” and stated that “once you 
get all the documentation it becomes clearer 
what was happening.”  And stated that at the 
time when he received all the relevant 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 90 of 231 
 
documents in June “it became clearer to me 
in terms of what this scam was all about.”  It 
makes no sense says Mr Todd when this was 
Mr Gama’s own stance on the matter to 
suggest that the procurement condonation 
procedure would have been appropriate in 
these circumstances.” 
 
Would you agree with that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No I agree with that ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So we two down.  And then what Mr 
10 
Todd says in C is: 
“The third charge of misconduct as you have 
accepted for which the sanctioned dismissal 
was also imposed on Mr Gama had nothing 
to do with procurement at all.” 
 
So on this affidavit and these paragraphs 13 through 
– paragraph 13a, b and c. you accept Mr Mkwanazi I take it 
that there was simply no basis to come to the finding that the 
committee did. 
MR MKWANAZI:  The – the committee yes applied its mind 
20 
and looked at the two issues as I indicated.  And the – there 
was nothing wrong with the finding of that particular 
committee meaning the Antrobus processes.  There was 
nothing wrong with them yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Oh sorry what I meant to say is that 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 91 of 231 
 
one simply cannot justify the conclusion and decision of the 
board can you to reinstate Mr Gama on the basis of these 
paragraphs it is just impossible. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman based on Mr Todd’s submission 
which is what we have got now there could have been a 
different interpretation of whether the condonation could 
have or could not have been granted.  But Mr Todd’s 
analysis indicates that no condonation would have been 
granted under these circumstances. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  And you accept that? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Based on his submission I accept that but 
the thing was not tested.  When I say not tested at the time I 
am not sure if did Mr Gama discuss some form of 
condonation.  I am not Mr Gama’s representative.   
Because based on – on a different type of – the first 
one by the way on the Fifty Like New was a strange one. He 
basically did not follow a board process.   
But then the question then becomes did he do a 
confinement in terms of discussions with the authority that 
had approved this?  That is on the first one.   
20 
The same on the second one did he do a confinement 
on the GNS I do not know but based on what he then said as 
well that this thing was wrong etcetera, etcetera. 
But he did not test condonation on the two issues.  
The last one of misconduct I – I – the dismissal was a fair 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 92 of 231 
 
assumption. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes but let me put it this way Mr 
Mkwanazi.  Let us just take the Fifty Like New. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You fairly conceded to the Chairperson 
that – well we know that condonation would never have been 
granted – that we know.  Because the contract was not 
condoned; was not regularised; it was cancelled.  But 
leaving condonation aside you have conceded to a question 
by 
the 
Chairperson 
that 
it 
did 
not 
detract 
from 
his 
10 
misconduct.  That what had happened here is that Mr Gama 
had defied an instruction of the board.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I agree with you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And important instruction and his 
misconduct is serious, is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right so that is Fifty Like New.  Now 
GNS just so that you – you follow.  Mr Todd accepted the 
proposition that I put to him that Mr Gama’s case in relation 
to GNS is that he signed what was a confinement blind 
20 
without having any regard to anything and allowed a fraud to 
be perpetrated on Transnet.  That is his own case.  But you 
are not going to condone that are you? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No you cannot condone that either. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you would accept. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 93 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes sorry I did not want to – I do not 
mean to interrupt you. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, no please continue.  No, no continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you would accept that for a CEO 
of a major division of Transnet to conduct himself in that way 
is quite appalling is it not?  To blindly sign a document that 
allows a fraud to be perpetrated on the company.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You are not going to condone that and 
10 
you accepted that is serious misconduct.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  It is – now in hindsight the – if I was the 
authority to look at condonement and things I would – I 
would not have condoned that TNS thing as well.  Also based 
on his own admission when this matter was brought into the 
disciplinary inquiry.. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Correct.  Because we know that you 
treated him on the basis as if condonation had been granted. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja that is correct Chairman yes.  Advocate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mkwanazi you say in hindsight and 
20 
you make fair concessions here today. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But in hindsight because what Mr Todd 
is saying here is really no different to what was Mr Antrobus 
said in his findings.  The reality is that you did not come to 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 94 of 231 
 
the decision that you say you would have come to today 
simply because you did not apply your mind.   You had an 
ulterior purpose Mr Mkwanazi surely you must concede that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Not really because still at the time when 
even I looked at my own submissions to this process I did 
indicate that there was serious oversight on the type of the 
advice and the recommendation to the board that the last 
matter which I viewed almost as a serious misconduct of 
attacking his colleagues is not a procurement matter and is 
not condonable – that matter. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Hm. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That matter definitely he should have been 
dismissed.  Now at the time of writing my first affidavit I 
interpreted the first two matters as procurement matters.  
But now as we go through that process – this process I can 
see that he conceded – him; himself as well that there were 
not necessarily hard-core procurement issues.  
Which is why the Fifty Like New the board had to 
cancel that contract with the suppliers.  And also he himself 
as well admitted that on this TNS contract according to what 
20 
you are indicating that there was something fishy about the 
contract.   
But myself at the time of doing my affidavit I just 
viewed these two items as procurement – the first two items 
as procurement, irregularities or as – as issues relating to 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 95 of 231 
 
procurement and no necessarily even issues relating to 
misconduct as is indicated by the Fifty Like New in not 
following a board instruction.   
And also even the second one of him signing that 
GNS contract where from what I pick up – I am not sure if it 
was a confinement or what but there is no clear submission 
that this should have been condonable as a confinement, I 
do not know ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you do recall Mr Mkwanazi do you not 
that when you did your first affidavit. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The commission had taken trouble to make 
available to you the two rulings of the Chairperson of the 
disciplinary inquiry as well as… 
MR MKWANAZI:  They did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As well as Mr Todd’s affidavit as well as Mr 
Todd’s report that was before the board.   
MR MKWANAZI:  The board yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To make sure you could refresh your 
memory, you remember that? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then in conclusion Mr Mkwanazi what 
– what Mr Todd says at paragraph 14 of page 162 is to state 
in his circumstances that the board – and this is what you 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 96 of 231 
 
had said  
“Had to somehow deal – sorry – had to 
somehow try and deal with Mr – with the 
Gama matter on the assumption that he had 
been 
granted 
condonation 
had 
it 
been 
offered and therefore had to try to put him in 
a position that he could have been in had 
condonation been offered simply cannot be 
correct.” 
 
And I think you concede that, correct? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja I concede that yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But Mr Mkwanazi I am going to press 
you on why did you not come to that conclusion at the time?  
It seems to me you could not have read Mr Antrobus’ finding.  
It seems to me that you could not possibly have read Mr 
Todd’s report.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Or if you did read them you may have 
decided to disregard them. 
MR MKWANAZI:  It is not a question of… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Either you read them – or either you did 
20 
not read them or if you read them for whatever reason you 
may have decided to ignore them.  Okay.   
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman I – I did read Mr Todd’s 
submission of the 2 February 2010 if I do recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 97 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  But the – I did read Mr Todd’s submission 
but at the time the – that is why even my analysis of what I 
called similar procurement issues they are not identical to 
this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  The other similar procurement issues could 
be minor but again somebody must look into them compared 
to what is sitting in front of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have a clear recollection that you 
had read the two rulings of the disciplinary Chairperson – 
10 
the Chairperson of the hearing? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair I would have read these but the one I 
do recall … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is Mr Todd’s one. 
MR MKWANAZI:  A little bit more is the Mr Todd one of – 
which was submitted to the board of the 2 nd February or 
around that time I do recall that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well you see those two rulings are 
quite comprehensive. It seems to me that anyone who has 
read them will not forget that they had read them.  They are 
20 
quite comprehensive you have to put aside time to really 
read them. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Not to – I do recall Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you recall that you did read them? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman not as comprehensively as Mr 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 98 of 231 
 
Todd’s submission of the 2n d February. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you.  And then Mr Todd goes 
on at page 163 to deal with the contention that Gama’s own 
contentions on consistency were fully and fairly considered 
in the disciplinary process.  I mean did you notice that when 
you read when Mr Todd’s report that the concerns that you 
say you had about condonation and inconsistency those 
were considered by the Chairperson.  Did you see that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes they were considered. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why did you not then simply leave 
things be?  He had considered it.  He had applied his mind 
to it.  He concluded that there was no merit in it.  Why did 
you just override that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman I did need almost what you can 
call a – a separate and different view of these issues 
particularly in view of the Public Protector matter etcetera, 
etcetera which would have come much later compared to all 
these other processes that had been going on.  So in trying 
to – to – to look at the Gama matter there were some un – un 
20 
– and I view them almost as not identical.  There were some 
areas where Mr Gama or whoever would have thought that 
the processes that dealt with him were unfair but looking at 
the issues themselves the – they were not that unfair.  But 
they were some procurement processes which were not 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 99 of 231 
 
handled the same way as Mr Gama’s matter was handled. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes but Mr Mkwanazi I think you are 
missing my point.  Mr Antrobus had applied himself to that 
contention that was made by Mr Gama and he had rejected 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is a senior counsel, he is a labour 
lawyer from what I have read, he had been – he was 
acceptable to all sides to run the disciplinary hearing.  When 
you look at his rulings you can tell that he took time to deal 
with issues that had been raised very, very thoroughly.  So 
10 
Mr Myburgh’s question is, why did you and your board think 
that you could just override his decision when these very 
issues had been raised with him and he had considered them 
thoroughly? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I would not call it override except that we 
do – we did look for another opinion particularly in view of 
the Transnet Bargaining Council process and this other 
opinion looked at this issue and created some doubt that we 
could or could not sustain our case at the Transnet 
Bargaining Council. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh has at some state effectively 
said to you; you could not settle because there was some 
doubt because in litigation in arbitration there is always 
some doubt.  There is no hundred percent guarantee that 
you are going to win.  Even when you have a strong case 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 100 of 231 
 
there is always some doubt.   
Therefore when you were told – when you were given 
an opinion that in your view created some doubt that should 
have been neither here nor there until the doubt that was 
created said to you we do not have reasonable prospects of 
success.  As long as it was just some doubt that is like any 
other case.   
That should not have weighed with you at all because 
there is always doubt in arbitration.  There is always doubt in 
litigation.  So what he put you – to you is that should not 
10 
have swayed your view of what you should do.  What do you 
say? 
MR MKWANAZI:  In hindsight Chairman I would agree that 
that doubt should have been examined further to look at the 
actual risks and which might have come back and said that 
risk is – there is actually no risk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja I agree with your input Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi you see 
20 
how you fall back now on the Deneys Reitz advice but the 
Deneys 
Reitz 
advice 
does 
not 
say 
anything 
about 
condonation or inconsistency; nothing. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well then explain to … 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 101 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  I agree Advocate ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How did you do this? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Advocate I did indicate that the Deneys 
Reitz advice was frankly very weak.  Because it did not focus 
on the specifics like Mr Todd did the Deneys Reitz was a 
weak legal advice as I indicated even though there were 
these three issues the last issue of misconduct by Mr Gama 
in 
terms 
of 
attacking 
his 
executives 
is 
almost 
non-
confirmable if I can use the word.   
But because of the interpretation at the time of 
10 
thinking that these other two issues are actually procurement 
issues and therefore when the statements were made on 
unfairness either to the Public Protector or to whoever and 
things were looked at we thought that there could be a slight 
risk in those first two.  But now in hindsight looking at the 
submission by Mr Todd again those were not necessarily 
procurement 
irregularities 
they 
– 
they 
were 
almost 
misconduct of – of not following board resolutions that is the 
first one; the Fifty Like New.   
And the second one as well the GNS was a different 
20 
type of misconduct looking at it now where the individual 
concerned did not apply his mind thoroughly before signing 
whatever documents that he might have signed.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You used the words a slight risk.  Are 
we down to that now?  You settled because there was a 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 102 of 231 
 
slight risk.  That is what you said right? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I might have said that yes I agree. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So this cost the taxpayer somewhere 
between 10 and 20 million because you and your board said 
well there is a slight risk so let us just pay him that.  
Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Let us settle yes.  Paying the quantum you 
have mentioned at the time I am not fully aware of the exact 
quantum but it would have come to that based on the detail 
then that had to be entered into to quantify whatever 
10 
settlement amount was involved. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We going – we going to come to that.  
Just to end off on this topic about the fact that the 
Chairperson had dealt with this.  Can I ask you please to go 
to page 86 of Bundle 3.   
MR MKWANAZI:  Page 86 okay.  I have got page 86.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So I would like to take you to the 
middle paragraph.  This is a finding by Antrobus SC. 
“It was contended that the first and second 
charges are an entirely new formulation at 
20 
Transnet.  This is Mr Gama’s contention.  As 
it has never occurred in the history of that 
company that a CEO or Senior Executive for 
that matter has been held to have committed 
misconduct for activities and practices that 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 103 of 231 
 
are 
usually 
automatically 
condoned 
and 
accepted 
by 
various 
mechanisms 
and 
committees within Transnet.” 
 
So that is what Mr Gama and that is also what you 
found. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And the Chairperson goes on to say: 
“Apart from the fact that there is no evidence 
to this effect it seems to me that if the 
conduct in question amounts to misconduct 
10 
and then it is misconduct quite regardless of 
what mechanisms 
and 
committees 
within 
Transnet may have to say about that.” 
 
I understand you to have accepted that now. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No I do accept. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   A misconduct of different things.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then he goes on to say: 
“If the submission is an attempt to make out a case 
of inconsistency, then it is necessary to say no more 
20 
than I have already concluded in the previous 
findings that is no merit in the case of alleged 
inconsistency.” 
 
But you just came to a different conclusion, right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 104 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So let us go perhaps closer even to 
the mark, to page 164 forward in this file.   
MR MKWANAZI:   164... 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   One, six, four. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay I am there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So I want to take you to the quotation 
at the foot of the page. 
“It is further contented that I should take into 
account the fact that there were in the same 
financial year in which Mr Gama committed his acts 
10 
of 
misconduct, 
some 
42 
incidents 
and 
transgressions 
of 
corporate 
non-compliance 
or 
irregularities in respect of which nothing was done 
“presumably” by way of taking disciplinary action.” 
MR MKWANAZI:   H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Mr Gama made a list of 42.  You 
had a list of 30, right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So he made this case Mr Mkwanazi.  
You laugh.  But he made the case that you made at the 
20 
board at the disciplinary hearing. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And the chairperson says: 
“It is not clear to me to precisely what evidence 
reference was been made in this regard.  However, 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 105 of 231 
 
insofar as it refers to the report of the tender 
process audit, this is no more than a recasting of 
the alleged inconsistency issue which has already 
been rejected in the previous finding. 
In any event, even if there is other evidence to 
which reference is been made in this regard, it was 
certainly not to establish that the other incidents 
were 
of 
a 
similar 
factual 
nature 
or 
similarly 
committed by a senior executive.” 
 
And you have conceded that too that you have your list 
10 
...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   [Indistinct]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...but you could not establish like-for-
like similarity, could you? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, advocate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So here is the irony.  The very basis 
upon which the board makes its decision is rejected by the 
chairperson and you accept that it was correctly rejected 
now in your evidence, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I do. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, Mr Mkwanazi I am going to put 
to you again.  Surely, the only rational explanation for the 
manner in which you and your board conducted yourself is 
that you had an ulterior motive.  You were carrying out the 
instruction of the minister to have Mr Gama reinstated.  Is 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 106 of 231 
 
that not true? 
MR MKWANAZI:   The instruction was a review and somehow 
at the time, also based on some information which I had, this 
30 or whatever list of people which I had seen in January of 
2011.  And although, as I have indicated, they are not like-
for-like to even the first two matters, it did create some 
doubt on fairness ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
I 
am 
going 
to... 
I 
am 
going 
to 
...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   ...of the ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi, I am sorry.  I am going to 
stop you there.  Go back to Mr Myburgh’s question. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And 
just 
answer 
that 
question.  
Mr Myburgh, do you want to repeat the question? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I... essentially, what I am putting 
to you Mr Mkwanazi is the fact shows that you and your 
board 
acted 
so 
irrationally, 
that 
the 
only 
reasonable 
explanation is that you must have been carrying out an 
instruction from the minister to reinstate Mr Gama. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Not that... it was not an instruction to 
reinstate.  It was an instruction to review.  Yes, we did look 
into that but based on this latest information that one keeps 
getting.   
 
Even that review would have been fault or false review 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 107 of 231 
 
in that some of the matters that Mr Gama was charged for, 
he was dismissed and even that board, had it had that 
information, would have confirmed the dismissal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you have an issue that has... that 
had been dealt with by the chairperson of the disciplinary 
inquiry which Mr Myburgh you to at page 164.  So it is quite 
clear the chairperson dealt with this issue of inconsistency.  
He says reference was made to 42 instances, incidents or 
transactions.  So he...  
 
Mr Gama had the opportunity to present his case that he 
10 
had been treated inconsistently to present it before an 
independent forum chaired by as senior member of the bar 
paid for by Transnet.   
 
He was allowed to use his own team of lawyers.  
Lawyers of hic choice so that he could... they could present 
the best case that they could for him.   
 
He says – and then you are instructed to review his 
case.  You come back.  You review his case.  You do not say 
to the minister:   
 
But there is a forum where Mr Gama got a chance to 
20 
present his case.  We should not interfere.  We as the board 
will accept the outcome whatever it is.   
 
If the... that forum says we must reinstate him, we will 
reinstate him.  If it dismisses its claim, that will be it.  We 
should not interfere minister.  Why did you not say that? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 108 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   At the time, I did not say that to the 
minister, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you agree or do you not agree that 
that should have been your attitude?  Then that should have 
been your board’s attitude? 
MR MKWANAZI:   At the time, based on whatever review that 
could have been done, that review would have highlighted 
that the Transnet Bargaining Council could have dealt with 
this issue in a particular way and even confirmed some of 
the sanctions that were applied by... into that process. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So do you agree or do you not agree that 
at the time of the settlement, the correct approach on the 
part of your board should have been:  Minister, there is an 
independent forum, the Bargaining Council which sits with 
this matter.   
 
It has been dealt with by another independent forum.  
Chaired by an independent chairperson.  Mr Gama presented 
his case.  He failed.   
 
We did not interfere with the chairperson of that forum.  
He will go to another forum now.  It is independent.  We will 
20 
not interfere.  We will abide the decision of that outcome.  
That...  
 
Do you not agree that should have been your approach 
at least? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, that could have been the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 109 of 231 
 
approach.  I do agree with you.  But for some reason and in 
view of an element of certain allegations in the Public 
Protector’s letter, then that review made sense.   
 
But even though that the view made sense, the legal 
advice we got was extremely weak.  And also, the so-called 
procurement irregularities that were sort of alleged to have 
happened.  In Mr Gama’s case.   
 
The two key matters, the ...[indistinct].  It is not a 
procurement matter anymore rather than be a... not following 
board instruction but that is different to procurement.   
10 
 
And even the Genis(?) matter, from what I pick up here, 
he himself did agree that it is... that procurement process 
was faulty, et cetera, et cetera.   
 
Now at that time, as looking at that review, we... even 
the advice we got, did not fundamentally go to the source of 
where this alleged procurement is coming from.   
 
Because if you go to the source of where this alleged 
procurement is coming from, the complexion of the matter 
differs completely.   
 
Because yes, that should ...[indistinct] issues and then 
20 
there is an issue of fair, what I will call misconduct, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course, you will concede, will you 
not, that you should not put yourself and the board and your 
board... you should not put the matter as if you and your 
board were the victim of some poor legal advice.   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 110 of 231 
 
 
Because you did have sound and strong legal advice at 
your disposal that had been given by Mr Todd and you chose 
to follow what you call the poor legal advice.   
 
It was your choice.  It was your board’s choice.  It is not 
as if there was no choice to follow sound legal advice.  You 
agree? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree with you, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi, you 
repeatedly say that before the decision was taken there was 
10 
a review.  There was no review Mr Mkwanazi.  There was no 
review at all.   
 
To undertake a review, you first have to understand and 
appreciate what Mr Antrobus did.  And then you have got to 
understand and appreciate why... what he did was wrong.  
You did not do any of that.  There was no review.   
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So insofar and I have put to you this 
20 
already, insofar ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Advocate ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let us just get that one.  So what is the 
answer to that Mr Mkwanazi? 
MR MKWANAZI:   The advocate’s question is correct 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 111 of 231 
 
because when you do... when you ask somebody to do a 
review, be it that legal firm, whatever the case.   
 
They must go back to the actual outcomes and then do a 
proper review.  I do not think they did.  They just came with 
a very weak document indicating doubt on the process going 
forward, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he is talking about you and your 
board.  He says it is not correct that you and your board did 
a review.  Because when you do a review in a matter like 
this, you would have had to go to Mr Antrobus’ rulings and 
10 
look at them carefully which does not appear ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I concede that.  But my board did 
not a do a thorough review.  It just went for a different legal 
opinion on the fairness of the sanction, et cetera, et cetera, 
on the two offences.  And yet, in hindsight, looking at even 
those three offences now, the legal review report was 
exceptionally weak, ja.  Or opinion was exceptionally weak. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  So I think I have already put to 
you that insofar as the minister’s instruction was that you 
20 
should undertake a review, you did not do that.  Correct/ 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is not a thorough review.  I concede to 
that as we are talking to now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But insofar as the minister’s 
instruction was that you should simply reinstate the man, you 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 112 of 231 
 
certainly fulfilled that instruction.   
MR MKWANAZI:   It was not the instruction to reinstate.  It 
was an instruction to review the dismissal sanction on the 
man. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I just want to then end off this by 
referring you to, I think three parts of Mr Todd’s report again.  
Under the heading:  Dealing with Sanction.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Myburgh.  I just want to 
follow up on your last question. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi, sorry.  I am just interrupting 
Mr Myburgh.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Not a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Understanding that Mr Gigaba had, 
according to your evidence, instructed you to conduct a 
review of the Gama matter and understanding that he had 
said that, on your evidence, there was unfairness.   
 
Understanding that he had given a list, a basis for his 
thinking that there was unfairness, namely, as I understand 
your evidence, some executives were treated less... more 
20 
leniently or less harshly than black executives. 
 
And 
yet, 
he 
had 
almost 
mentioned 
the 
issue 
of 
condonation.  Are you able to say what outcome of the 
review 
would 
have 
addressed 
his 
concerns 
on 
your 
understanding? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 113 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, my understanding.  That 
outcome would have addressed a few concerns that he might 
have had.  That review would have looked at whether the 
Gama was fair and they were all aware that a process was 
very fair.  And also then, that review would have looked into 
what similar offences were committed ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Mkwanazi.  I am sorry, 
Mr Mkwanazi. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I might not have articulated my question 
10 
as clearly as I should have.  The question is not about 
features of the review process, okay? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not about that.  It is about what 
outcome of that review process would have addressed his 
concerns 
that 
there 
had 
been 
unfairness 
on 
your 
understanding? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Now, my interpretation of whatever 
outcome.  It could have indicated that yes there was 
unfairness in how the Gama matter was handled.  But that 
20 
outcome did not even go to the detail of some of the so-
called perceived unfairness around how the Gama matter 
was dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi, let me 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 114 of 231 
 
just end off by referring you to three passages.  If you go to 
page 81 of Bundle 3. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 81...  Yes, I am there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So this is where Mr Todd deals with 
how Mr Antrobus dealt with sanction and you see at the foot 
of the page, he deals with charge one. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He says: 
“The negligence on Gama’s part in signing the GNS 
Confinement document is nevertheless particularly 
10 
inexcusable.” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I see that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if you go over the page to 
page 82 at the bottom.   
“Transnet is placing the position where it can really 
not have been confident once negligence of this 
nature has occurred that Mr Gama will in future be 
sufficiently careful to ensure that he knows whether 
what he is signing is a confinement or an open 
20 
tender contract. 
Game is the CEO of the largest division in Transnet 
and in fairness, the company cannot be expected to 
continue to employ him in this role while the 
company lives with the doubt as to whether or not 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 115 of 231 
 
he will again in future make an error of this nature.” 
 
It is compelling, is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is compelling, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I mean, you cannot have a CEO who 
signs a document blind and allows a fraud to perpetrated on 
the company, can you? 
MR MKWANAZI:   You cannot, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then charge two.  If you go to 
page 84.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So now we are dealing with the Fifty-
like-New.  The second paragraph at 84: 
“One must have regard to the fact that the board 
needs to be able to be confidence that when it 
delegates authority to a Divisional CEO, subject to a 
particular condition, that he will take specific and 
reliable steps to ensure that that condition is 
complied with. 
In fairness to the Transnet Board, it would be a big 
ask for the board to be required to continue in 
20 
trusting Gama with large management projects when 
he had exhibited negligent failure of this nature and 
with these consequences.” 
 
Compelling, is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is compelling, yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 116 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then, in dealing with the 
unwarranted criticism of Transnet and its executives.  At the 
top of page 85: 
“Gama’s public statements demonstrate... 
 
And this stuff you all agree with, at least. 
“...demonstrate without doubt that there has been a 
total breakdown in trust and confidence between the 
parties.” 
 
Do you accept that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do accept that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  And then, the damning finding 
which I have already taken you to earlier in my questioning 
at page 88. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 88. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just above paragraph 60. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Halfway through that quote. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This is now dealing with charge four. 
“This charge goes to the heart of Transnet’s loss of 
faith in Gama and there can be no doubt that 
dismissal is the only appropriate penalty for Gama’s 
conduct under this fourth charge.” 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 117 of 231 
 
 
And you have accepted that on many occasions. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.  Let me then move to another 
issue and that is the terms of the settlement agreement 
itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before that Mr Myburgh.  We have the 
situation 
Mr Mkwanazi 
that 
although 
you 
make 
the 
concessions that you have made and I think they are 
properly made about the matters that Mr Myburgh has just 
raised with you with regard to the findings of the chairperson 
10 
of the disciplinary inquiry.   
 
You and your board in effect said:  We want a CEO of a 
large division of Transnet who signs documents without 
reading them and thus places Transnet in a serious financial 
risk.  That is the CEO we want.  We want him to be 
reinstated. 
 
Do you agree that that is the effect of your decision and 
your board? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I agree with you or your 
comments.  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And you said in effect by your 
decision:  Ja, we... this CEO defied an instruction of the 
previous board but we want him back.  We want him back.  
And of course, the other charge has been dealt with.   
 
A CEO who publicly criticises other executives as well 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 118 of 231 
 
as the board.  We want him back.  And we will pay him full 
back pay.  It is inexplicable, is it not?  You would accept 
that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, in hindsight as you articulate 
these, it is inexplicable particularly, as I have indicated 
earlier on, the last charge ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:   ...of fighting the CEO and your board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your board. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is totally unacceptable. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi, please 
could you turn to File 1? 
MR MKWANAZI:   File 1...  I am not sure....  Okay, let me 
put ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Bundle 1. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Bundle 1. 
MR MKWANAZI:   What page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Page 36, the settlement agreement. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 36... 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So as you know that the settlement 
agreement is found in many places in the documents but it 
first came to light ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...or was officially provided by the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 119 of 231 
 
company secretary and that you find at page 36.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  You said we must go to the 
settlement agreement at page 36? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, yes Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is the one that you signed on the 
22n d of February, correct, at page 41? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 41.  Let me go back there.  Just... 
Yes, on the 23 rd of February.  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you signed on the 22 n d of February.  
Mr Gama signed on the 23rd. 
MR MKWANAZI:   On the 22n d of February. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay, the 22 nd... I think it is the 22 nd here.  
I cannot see.  Ja, the 22 nd of February. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And Mr Gama signed it the next day it 
20 
appears. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It appears that, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am going to come to the terms of this 
in more detail but Mr Mkwanazi what I am... I have always 
been intrigued to find out from you is. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 120 of 231 
 
 
Would 
you 
accept 
that 
Mr 
Gama 
during 
these 
negotiations took you to the cleaners?  That you on behalf of 
Transnet completely capitulated during the course of the 
negotiations?  You could not have done a worse deal for 
Transnet.   
MR MKWANAZI:   In hindsight, Mr Myburgh, Advocate 
Myburgh.  Just based on that last item we have been 
discussion of misconduct to his colleagues, the CEO and the 
board.   
 
There would have been no such settlement agreement 
10 
because I would have supported the view of a dismissal.   
 
But on what I can then define as a preconceived 
interpretation of procurement irregularities on those two 
other matters which now in hindsight, some of them are not 
even procurement irregularities.   
 
If you look at the Fifty-like-New, he basically did not 
follow a board instruction.  Then on the Genis contract, there 
is an element of a procurement irregularity because he 
confined something that he had not applied his mind too.  
Yes.   
20 
 
But based on that last matter of taking his colleagues, 
this thing would have not been even negotiated and I would 
not have accepted such an agreement. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 You 
see, 
I 
think 
you 
might 
misunderstand my question.  I am dealing with a very 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 121 of 231 
 
generous terms of the settlement agreement.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Oh, yes, yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The represent ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Please continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...complete capitulation and the 
bounty of benefits for Mr Gama.  So let me start by asking 
you the question again.  Do you accept that during the 
negotiations – and I am talking about the terms and 
conditions that we agreed upon, the payments that you 
undertook to make him, the costs contribution that you 
10 
undertook to make – you completely capitulated during the 
negotiations, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   A complete capitulation is a strong word 
but yes I would accept it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Well, Mr Mkwanazi.  I am 
thinking of a stronger word.  I think Mr Myburgh is being very 
kind to you ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja.  Maybe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and your board. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   No.  Ja.  Maybe advocate, as you take me 
through some elements of this settlement agreement, I can 
explain the thinking at the time.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, Chair.  Alright.  So you accept 
that it was a complete capitulation? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 122 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Complete is a strong word but I accept 
that it looks like it was more in favour of Mr Gama than in 
favour of Transnet. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, could you do... could you have 
done a worse agreement for Transnet? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do not know.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   That would be speculation in 2020.  Where 
are we now?  2020.  This was 2011, yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi, I do not want to be 
flipper but how could you have done a worse deal for 
Transnet?   
MR MKWANAZI:   Now, when you say a worse deal.  You 
would have to think about the circumstances at the time in 
terms of whether there could have been a worse still?   
 
The answer is maybe is yes.  I do not know.  But that 
questioning might be asked and I might have to respond, 
inviting ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi, you called this is a 
settlement agreement. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it not? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 123 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You sought to settle a dispute, is it not?  
And that dispute was Mr Gama’s unfair dismissal dispute 
with Transnet, is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He had referred his dispute to the 
Transnet bargaining council to try and get relief from his 
grievance, his feeling that he had been treated unfairly, is 
it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if he got what the bargaining council 
could give him, what he would have called his first prize 
there, he would have been very happy, is it not?  If he got 
his first prize. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do not know, Chairman 
CHAIRPERSON:   He had a first prize obviously. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You go to court, you have a first prize, 
you go to arbitration, you know what you would like to get.  
If you do not get your first prize, you might have your 
20 
second prize.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If he got his first prize he would have 
been very happy.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 124 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now his first prize would have included 
reinstatement, is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And reinstatement with full back pay and 
benefits, that would have been, I guess, his first prize.  
Maybe he – well, having looked at his statement that he 
sent to the bargaining council, I did not see anything that 
says he was seeking costs from the bargaining council.  It 
may be that that may have been dealt with in some other 
document but that was not there.  But you gave him much 
10 
more than the bargaining council could have given him.  At 
least that much you know, do you not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, yes, although myself too I am 
not sure now what the bargaining council could have done 
or whether would the bargaining ruling would have covered 
coverage of costs, etcetera.  As I sit here, I do not recall 
the exact documentation after he had submitted, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the bargaining council, if it found 
that he had been – his dismissal was substantively unfair, 
it could have ordered his reinstatement which could have 
20 
meant full benefits and back pay but it could also have 
meant he would get reinstatement but no back pay because 
it might say it is not as if he was innocent, he had done 
something terribly wrong.  You are admitting …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree with you, Chair. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 125 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it might have said no back pay, you 
know?  It might have said not even reinstatement but 
maybe should be given some compensation, maybe six 
months 
compensation, 
maybe 
one 
year, 
but 
no 
reinstatement because it might say this person was a CEO 
of the largest division in Transnet, he was found guilty of 
serious acts of misconduct, he admits that he was properly 
found guilty, this person should not be taken back or it 
might have said let him go back but not with full back pay.  
I doubt that it would have ordered costs but maybe it would 
10 
but you gave him much more than that.  That you do know, 
do you not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I do know, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  And we will come to 
the detail.  But why did you treat him so generously? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, my understanding at the time, 
as we were discussing this settlement, the other route 
could have been coming out of that Transnet bargaining 
process could have led to further litigation and I am not 
20 
sure in terms of the legal route but it would have taken – it 
could have taken quite a long time in terms of settling the 
matter and yet the business at the time was not doing that 
well, too many Acting CEOs, etcetera, it had its own 
internal problems which needed to be tied down. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 126 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So do I understand you to be saying 
that you were – your desire or need to have Mr Gama was 
so strong that you simply paid him whatever he asked for?  
Is that what you say? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Not really.  I would have to go back to 
the history of the documents that were circulating and see 
what he had asked for.  I do not recall, Chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    But, Mr Mkwanazi, what you do not 
see here is any give and take, so when you settle litigation 
of this nature, especially where someone is accepting a 
10 
final written warning and they are accepting that in part 
they are to blame for their dismissal as a consequence, it 
is most unusual for the employer then to give the employee 
everything other than the kitchen sink by way of a 
settlement.  I mean, are you able to explain why you 
treated him so generously? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, yes, it might on the face of it 
looks like a generous settlement but there are some 
elements of it which are not that generous. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi, sorry, but you cannot – it 
does not just look like it is a generous, it is an extremely 
generous settlement to him.  I thought you would make that 
concession at least.  It is not that it looks like, it is an 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 127 of 231 
 
extremely generous settlement. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is, Chairman, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Why did you want to treat Mr Gama 
so generously?  Why? 
MR MKWANAZI:   The word generous ignores the fact that 
when we looked at his legal fees from the two separate 
processes, that he must be refunded 75%, he still was 
liable for the 25%.  That is maybe on the legal fees.  Now 
on the other matters that dealt with that settlement, the 
10 
assumption would have been that if you look at the 
Transnet remuneration policy or whatever at the time, I am 
not sure then what other benefits as this final written 
warning would have meant in terms of him recouping some 
of the lost income that he lost due to suspension, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But, Mr Mkwanazi, let me ask you 
this way.   Why did you capitulate in the negotiations as 
you accept you did.  Why? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I do not think it is an easy 
word to say, capitulation.  My understanding, he might 
20 
have been asking for more.  I do not have the audit trail of 
some of whatever he might have been asking for, I do not 
have it in black and white. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi, just at  - we 
understand, I mean, you were at the time and remain a 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 128 of 231 
 
very experienced business person, not so? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No doubt you have negotiated many 
deals in your time. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what we do know is you were 
the lead negotiator here, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what we also know is that when 
you negotiated with Mr Gama you did that behind closed 
10 
doors, one-on-one with him, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   There was only meeting, if any, but I 
would like him as well at some stage because this thing of 
these closed door assumptions, it is a long time ago.  I do 
not even recall really if we had that one-on-one even 
though I accept that it might have happened.  But ja, let us 
assume that it did happen but I hope at some stage he as 
well will make his own affidavit, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, the point is there is no one 
that can tell us why you capitulated other than you 
20 
because you brought no witnesses to the negotiations.   
 
So let me just refresh your memory.  The Deneys 
Reitz consultation note of the 22 January reflects that after 
the caucus you then met privately with Mr Gama, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 129 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mapoma’s evidence about – and 
that was on a Saturday, Mr Mapoma’s evidence about 
another meeting on the weekend at the Inanda Country 
Club is that he sat waiting while you and Mr Gama 
negotiated privately, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Mkwanazi, let us – I just want 
to mention something.  You said sometime, I think on 
Friday, that Mr Gama wanted – was the one who came with 
10 
the idea of having a one-on-one meeting with you.  You 
remember that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do recall and his argument then, that is 
why - this thing happened nine and half years ago, his 
argument then was he did not trust the confidentiality of 
our discussions if there were too many people in that room. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe Mr Myburgh will deal with 
that in due course but in the – I think in the consultation 
note from Deneys Reitz, either that or another letter of 
memo, it is said that you said you want a one-on-one 
20 
meeting with Mr Gama.  That does not suggest that you 
were saying Mr Gama wants a one-on-one meeting with 
you, it suggests you were the one who wanted the one-on-
one with him.  Do you remember seeing that note? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman, I do not recall saying I wanted 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 130 of 231 
 
a one-on-one but I do recall Gama requesting a one-on-
one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Mr Chairman.  So let us 
go to this settlement agreement, so as to speak.  At 
paragraph 3: 
“Mr Gama returned to Transnet with effect from 23 
February 2011 and is to resume duties as the CEO 
of TRF on 1 April.” 
Is that correct? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, I mean, a strange feature of this 
is that Mr Gama signs the agreement on 23 February and 
his duties then resume with effect from that day.  That we – 
I understand.  Then it says: 
“Any employment benefits that were due to him for 
the intervening period 30 June 2010...” 
When he was dismissed. 
“...to 23 February 2011 in terms of his employment 
contract will be deemed to be fully restored.” 
20 
Is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So there was no compromise, he did 
not give an inch and you did not require any compromise, 
is that correct? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 131 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is as if you are dealing with somebody 
that had done absolutely nothing wrong and was just 
dismissed 
by 
Transnet, 
somebody 
who 
is 
innocent, 
completely innocent.  You understand that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I understand, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Then it says: 
“The 
full 
restoration 
of 
benefits 
entails 
the 
10 
following. 
1. Payment of Mr Gama’s short term benefits which 
were due to him in the intervening period. 
2. Payment of Mr Gama’s long term benefits which 
were due to him in the intervening period. 
3. Restoration 
of 
Mr 
Gama’s 
salary 
for 
the 
intervening period.” 
And then a provision as to where the amounts must be 
paid.  So he gets all of his short term benefits, all of his 
long term benefits and his full salary, is that correct? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now if I could just ask you to turn 
forward to page 80 of bundle 1, the last page of the 
company secretary’s second affidavit. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 80. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 132 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you see at the foot of the 
previous page 79, she records: 
“:The table below as provided by human resources 
provides a detailed breakdown of what was paid.” 
So Mr Gama got by way of back pay full salary of R2.8 
million, STI benefits of R2.5 million, LTI payments of R2.9 
million, a Transnet refund saving of 24 000 and then LTI 
payments of another 4.7 million and you add all of them 
up, that comes to 13 million, a full restoration of every cent 
without any compromise on his part and without any 
10 
reduction 
having 
been 
secured 
by 
you 
during 
the 
negotiation.  Is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And just to confirm, you did all of 
this because where we landed up in your evidence is that 
you were convinced that there was a slight doubt that you 
could lose the litigation.   
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I mean, Mr Mkwanazi, that is 
astonishing.  This is – we have not gone to costs yet, but 
20 
the taxpayer forked out 13 million here because you 
concluded there was a slight doubt you could lose the 
litigation. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Does that accord with your 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 133 of 231 
 
principles and knowledge of sound corporate governance? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, the question of sound 
corporate governance, what one was trying to do here was 
to restore to the individual what he might have had had 
this process of - that led to his dismissal would have been 
found wanting or unfair but then again, based on my 
submission that this individual would not have been 
reinstated if charge 4 of attacking his colleagues had 
surfaced strongly in the legal advice that one had got then.  
So all this found not have been paid and all this type of 
10 
settlement would never have happened. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright then, Mr Mkwanazi, let me 
also then deal globally with the issue of costs and we will 
come to the detail perhaps after lunch.  Could you please 
turn to page – I want to take you to bundle 2 now and ask 
you to turn to page 164. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chair, I am being assisted here.  Page 
164.  Okay, I need to take it out, the writing is quite small.  
Chairman, I have got this document page 164. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and that a schedule in blue, 
is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It looks like a schedule in blue, yes, it 
is. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So if you look – and I will 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 134 of 231 
 
take you to the detail after lunch but it you look on the far 
right hand side, the last three lines of the last column. 
MR MKWANAZI:   The last three lines, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What you see is that there were 
three payments that were made to Mr Gama and/or 
attorneys of costs.  The first was for 1 million or so. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The second for 1.7 million and the 
third for 1.4 million.  So if you add those up, in addition to 
the 13 million that Mr Gama got by way of back pay, short 
10 
term benefits and long term benefits or incentives, he was 
also paid R4 million in costs.  Do you see that?  R4 million. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I see it as the document indicates here. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja, I see it, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I see you – I see you are a little 
stunned.  I understand …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I am, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I am because my interpretation of his so-
20 
called legal costs and that me that do not understand – ja, 
I am stunned, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But you were the negotiator.  You 
were …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Not true, Chairman.  At the time this 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 135 of 231 
 
detail was not in front of me, yes, true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, of course, if you agree on paying 
somebody 75% or whatever cost …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …you would have an idea what the total 
cost would be and what therefore 75% will be. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I did not have a full picture of it and 
funny enough, looking at this schedule from Advocate 
Myburgh, I see he was paid something on the 16 April 
2015.  I do not know what that payment was for because 
10 
whatever payment that should have been done, they should 
have been done in 2011 and no payments should have 
been done in 2015.  I truly do not know what these 
payments are for. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   We will come to the detail in the 
moment, Mr Mkwanazi, but do I understand from your 
answer to the Chairperson’s question that when you 
negotiated and you agreed on this 75% contribution, you 
did not even know how much it was going to cost Transnet? 
MR MKWANAZI:   At the time, Chairman, yes, I did not 
20 
know because I did not have the information in front of me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But that is unbelievable.  Are you 
now conceding  before this Commission that you entered 
into an agreement with Mr Gama when you did not even 
know how much it was going to cost Transnet?  That is how 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 136 of 231 
 
generous you were.  That is how anxious you were to for 
some reason settle with this man.  Mr Mkwanazi. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay, Advocate Myburgh, I am there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to comment on what Mr 
Myburgh has just put to you? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I would like to comment.  For whatever 
reason, I was under the impression that the so-called 
Gama’s costs were far lower than this and also some of 
those that were paid in 2015, it is like I do not how many.  I 
do not know what they are but even those that would have 
10 
been paid earlier on, my assumption was that the people 
processing, which would have been in Group Finance and 
Group Legal, would have looked at the validity of each 
invoice before paying, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Well, we will come to that.  
Now let us carry on with the settlement agreement back at 
page 38 please of bundle 1. 
MR MKWANAZI:   38 of bundle 1.  I think it is this one.  
Page 38, I am there, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I ask you please to have a look 
20 
at paragraph 3.3: 
“Mr Gama is deemed to have served the six months 
final written warning.   The final written warning will 
be deemed to have been effective from 29 June to 
28 December 2010.” 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 137 of 231 
 
Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Correct, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So by the time Mr Gama came back 
into the employ of Transnet with effect from 23 February 
2011 this final warning had come and gone. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that really the best you could do, 
Mr Mkwanazi? 
CHAIRPERSON:   In regard to somebody who had been 
properly 
found 
guilty 
of 
three 
very 
serious 
acts 
of 
10 
misconduct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, that was the proposals at the 
time and in retrospect it should have been different, ja.  
Should have been different, I agree. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But why were you so weak in the 
negotiations? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are Chairman of a very large state 
owned entity, Transnet. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You are Chairman of its board.  Why 
20 
were you so weak at the negotiations?  Why did you not 
say to Mr Gama, Mr Gama, you admit yourself that you 
were 
properly 
found 
guilty 
of 
three 
serious 
acts 
of 
misconduct. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, Chairman …[intervenes] 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 138 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
you must have a final written warning that will start 
operating when you written.  Why do you not say that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I could have said that but at 
the time that is the view that I took and – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not normally use strong language, 
Mr Mkwanazi, but what would you say if somebody says 
this was a nonsensical final written warning? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, at the time this was discussed 
in one of the other committees, we did discuss other types 
10 
of final written warning but eventually we agreed on doing 
it this way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but my question is, you are 
negotiating a settlement of a dispute, a dismissal dispute, 
the employee concerned is a former CEO of the largest 
division of Transnet, he has been found guilty of three 
serious acts of misconduct.  By this time he accepts that 
he was guilty of these.  Now you are saying okay, we will 
reinstate you but there must be some sanction for your 
misconduct.   
20 
I take it that you must have said – or when you 
spoke about a sanction, a final written warning with Mr 
Gama or his lawyers, you must have been talking about a 
final written warning that would be operative when he came 
back and would be operative for six months.   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 139 of 231 
 
You were not – when you started talking about it, 
you were not talking about a warning that would have 
expired by the time he came back, were you?  When you 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] the issue for the first 
time because I assume it came from your side. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, it was debated in one of the 
subcommittees and I will now put some other thinking of 
what maybe could have swayed that subcommittee to look 
at it this way.  Maybe it was to try and get Mr Gama back 
and almost operative from day one so that he does not sit 
10 
in such a key position with a final written warning on his 
back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, Mr Mkwanazi, if he deserved a final 
written warning it should be there when he comes back.  
How can you say he should not sit there with a final written 
warning?  That is what happens with every employee, why 
should he be treated differently? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, Chairman, I understand your anxiety. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually you should be stricter, should 
you not with senior people than with junior employees 
20 
because senior people cannot plead ignorance, they know 
– they know the rules, they know the policies, they are 
supposed to be exemplary to the junior employees, is it 
not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I agree with you fully. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 140 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I come back to my proposition or my 
question, what do you say if somebody says this final 
written warning that you agreed to as the chief negotiator 
for Transnet for Mr Gama, is a nonsensical final written 
warning because it is February 2011 when you are 
negotiating and you are agreeing to an arrangement in 
terms of which Mr Gama will be deemed to have carried 
this final written warning from end of June 2010 to 
December 2010 when he was not at Transnet.  What do you 
say when somebody says it was a nonsensical final written 
10 
warning? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I concede.  Even as I read it, 
it does not look right, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairman, I see that it is one 
o’clock, would this be an appropriate time to break for 
lunch? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us take the lunch adjournment, 
we will resume at two.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us proceed. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Mr 
Mkwanazi before lunch we were dealing with the final 
written warning, do you recall that? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 141 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I had directed your attention to 
page 38 of Bundle 1. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   We dealt with Clause 3.3. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If I understood your evidence 
correctly you say that you agreed on this so that effectively 
Mr Gama wouldn’t have  sword hanging over his head once 
he resumed his position as Chief Executive, correct? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But again then, when your own 
evidence demonstrates that this is yet, another incident of 
you acting in the interest of Mr Gama as opposed to the 
interest of Transnet, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja, you may put it that way. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Precisely, Mr Mkwanazi, the very 
reason that you, as an employer put an employee on a final 
written warning is to protect yourself as employer against a 
repetition of the misconduct and you were prepared, in this 
20 
case, to forego that protection, why?  Well we know Mr 
Gama didn’t like it but why did you forego the protection of 
the organisation? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, at the time, that’s sort of the 
legal advice we got on how to phrase that thing. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 142 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You haven’t given that evidence at 
all up to now, in fact…[intervenes]. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja, I might not have. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Before lunch you said, well this was 
a decision of the sub-committee. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Deliberation in that sub-committee which 
then made a recommendation to the Board ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, the way that I read the 
affidavits of your fellow Directors, Mr Mkwanazi, and you 
can correct me if I’m wrong, is that almost to the man and 
10 
woman 
they 
say 
that 
you 
were 
the 
one 
who 
was 
responsible for the negotiation of the actual terms of the 
agreement. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Well, understand, I was the lead 
negotiator that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So why did you, again, act in the 
interest 
of 
Mr 
Gama 
and 
sacrifice 
the 
interest 
and 
protection due to Transnet? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Just remember at the time that’s the 
advice I would have got from my internal legal people yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then what do we do with your 
evidence before lunch when you said, I did this because 
then at least Mr Gama didn’t have a sword hanging over 
his head when he resumed his duties as Chief Executive? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is also true, I don’t deny that yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 143 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, Mr Myburgh, has that 
supplementary affidavit arrived? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, it has. 
CHAIRPERSON:   May I have a copy while you are 
questioning. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It’s in your Bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is it in. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you just give me a second. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, don’t forget your line of questioning. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairperson, you find that at 
10 
Bundle 4A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just after his main affidavit? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   4A – Bundle 4A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, you’re correct, it has Mr 
Mkwanazi’s main affidavit.  His supplementary affidavit 
appears at page 414, just before the tab BB19. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi the point that I was 
making is, the whole point of a final written warning is so 
20 
that the employee does have a sword hanging over his 
head, that’s the whole point of it. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But you’re prepared to forego that, 
correct? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 144 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   No – yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right, let’s then deal please with 
clause 3.5.  What you will …[intervenes]. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...see Transnet will make a 
contribution equivalent to 75% of Mr Gama’s taxed legal 
costs incurred during Gama’s High Court application and in 
respect of his unfair dismissal dispute referred to the 
Transnet Bargaining Council.   Now, let’s take the High 
Court costs. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Sorry what bundle was it again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It’s Bundle 1 page 38. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s the settlement agreement. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I see that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At page 38 of Bundle 1 and he was 
reading paragraph 3.5.  
MR MKWANAZI:   Six now, but we’re at paragraph 3.5 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no he’s still at 3.5. 
MR MKWANAZI:   3.5, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, Mr Mkwanazi you were familiar 
with the High Court application, were you? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I am familiar. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, Mr Gama brought an application 
in an attempt, really, to put a stop to his disciplinary 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 145 of 231 
 
hearing 
and 
Transnet 
and 
certain 
Executives 
were 
represented by Bowman Gilfillan and a strange feature of 
the litigation is that Mr Gama then joined a whole lot of 
Directors 
in 
their 
personal 
capacity 
and 
they 
were 
represented 
by 
Eversheds. 
 
Ultimately 
Mr 
Gama’s 
application was dismissed, there was found to be no merit 
in it at all and he was ordered to pay the costs then of 
Transnet and the Executives incurred by Bowman Gilfillan 
and also of the Directors, those costs incurred vis a vis 
Eversheds, you knew all of that?  
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I’m aware. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And those costs were to include the 
costs of two counsel?  Those are very significant costs 
order in favour of Transnet, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, there was. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And in favour of its Directors? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, there was. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And that’s, importantly, just to get 
your confirmation on, the High Court found that Mr Gama 
had 
mis-joined 
or 
impermissibly 
sought 
to 
join 
the 
20 
Directors in their personal capacity and that was something 
that featured prominently in them being awarded their 
costs, did you know that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I am aware. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, effectively the High Court said 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 146 of 231 
 
you should not have brought this application against the 
Directors in their personal capacity. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What we know from this settlement 
agreement is that it was in full and final settlement of all 
claims that Transnet had against Mr Gama and vice versa.  
So, the first thing that Transnet did, is it, effectively in the 
settlement agreement, agrees to abandon this costs order, 
do you agree with that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Agree with that. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Why would you do that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, as I’d indicated at the time 
that there was this potential litigation which we never knew 
when it goes to Transnet Bargaining Council which way it 
would go, yes, which is why then, that decision was taken. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry Mr Mkwanazi, perhaps you 
misunderstand my question, of course this had nothing at 
all to do with the litigation in the Transnet Bargaining 
Council that was litigation about the fairness of Mr Gama’s 
dismissal.  This was a High Court application that was 
20 
dismissed the year before. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What caused you to abandon the 
costs order made in favour of Transnet by way of an Order 
of Court, why? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 147 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, as I indicated there was this 
view that this matter were to go – because I don’t recall 
the submission of Gama’s team on these issues, whether 
they were claiming that Transnet – I really don’t recall, 
should pay all costs of the Transnet High Court and also 
the disciplinary proceedings in the matter I would have to 
get the document in front of me to understand what that 
firm of attorneys – it could have been Langa or whoever, 
might have put on the table…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, Mr Mkwanazi you’ll have to really 
10 
explain to me and the public, properly, what your decision 
was, really here because I can tell you this, I’ve been on 
the bench for close to 24 years, I’ve never seen anything 
like this, I’ve never seen anything like this.  This, Mr 
Gama, had launched an urgent application against the 
Board, against Transnet and he cited individual members 
of the Board in order to stop or interdict the disciplinary 
proceedings that were being instituted against him, he lost 
because Transnet and the Board, at that time, which was 
not your Board, the Board that preceded your Board, 
20 
opposed that application because they must have seen 
that, this application that he brought had no foundation 
whatsoever.  There was a need for a disciplinary process 
to be instituted and he should go through that process.  If 
he was found not guilty that would be fine, if he was found 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 148 of 231 
 
guilty then there would be a sanction for that, they 
opposed that application, successfully and a High Court 
Judge concluded that, Mr Gama should pay Transnet’s 
costs as well as the costs of the individual Directors whom 
he had cited in that application.  He applied for leave to 
appeal against that decision that was refused, that was the 
end of the road for him in regard to that and in that 
application, he had argued that there was an agenda that 
underlay the disciplinary proceedings, namely to stop him 
from being appointed as Group CEO. The Judge rejected 
10 
all of that and dismissed that application, that was done.  
Now, he went through a disciplinary process, he was found 
guilty and he was dismissed, then he goes to the 
Bargaining 
Council, 
 
refers 
his 
disciplinary 
to 
the 
Bargaining Council but now he says, by the time you are 
negotiating this settlement, he says, I accept that I was 
guilty, I’m guilty of the three acts of misconduct that the 
Chairperson of the disciplinary enquiry found me guilty of, 
I accept that.  Now, you then say, in settlement of the 
dismissal dispute, not the High Court dispute, because 
20 
that’s, been sorted out, you say, you know what, Mr Gama, 
the costs that the Judge said you must pay us, pay 
Transnet, you don’t have to pay off that. That has got 
nothing to do with the dismissal dispute, the Bargaining 
Council, even if Mr Gama had won against Transnet the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 149 of 231 
 
Bargaining Council Arbitrator would never have interfered 
with that.  He would not have changed Mr Gama’s fortunes 
in regard to the High Court, Court Order. So, why did you 
interfere with a cost order made by a Judge in a separate 
litigation which Mr Gama had lost and say, you don’t have 
to pay those costs because Transnet was not at risk in 
regard to those costs, that was finalised, why did you do 
that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman as I indicate there were other 
documents or submissions from Gama’s attorney which, in 
10 
a nutshell were also trying to recover those costs and it is 
on that basis that then this type of settlement agreement 
could have arisen ja, I don’t recall the full submission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No but Mr Mkwanazi, that’s not going to 
be good enough.  Remember, before you deposed to your 
first affidavit that you had filed in the Commission, 
remember that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Remember that you filed your affidavit 
pursuant to a letter from the Commission which said that 
20 
the Chairperson would like you to explain the terms of that 
settlement, do you remember that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remember that, that letter, 
specifically drew your attention to certain features of the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 150 of 231 
 
settlement agreement, including the issue of costs, do you 
remember? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It gave you a chance to explain, among 
other things, why you and your Board decided that that the 
costs which a High Court Judge had said Mr Gama should 
pay to Transnet, why you said he should not pay those.  
Actually when you – Mr Todd, testified that he and his firm 
had gone to the extent of having those costs taxed – 
actually it was not all of the costs because he said there 
10 
were two law firms, his firm represented Transnet, another 
firm, Eversheds represented, I think, individual Directors 
but I think the cost that related to Transnet and not 
individual Directors, he said they had taxed that bill and 
that bill in terms of the taxed costs, Mr Gama was owing 
Transnet about four hundred and twenty six thousand rand 
something and he said, you, through somebody at Transnet 
instructed him to stop all processes aimed at recovering 
that money from Mr Gama, R426 000 that Mr Gama owed 
Transnet, you said they must stop trying to recover that, 
20 
why did you do that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, that is correct because at the 
time, in the – the interpretation that we were getting was 
that, 
now 
that 
this 
matter 
was 
going 
the 
Transnet 
Bargaining 
Council 
route, 
although 
that 
High 
Court 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 151 of 231 
 
decision to a certain extent, maybe is not related to this, 
but yes, at the time the view was, even that cost needed to 
be part of that settlement discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why, why because that’s a question you 
would have asked anybody who told you that, you would 
have said why? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman I did not necessarily ask the 
question, why? 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that’s an obvious question that a 
Director of a company should ask in such a situation, to 
10 
say, a High Court Judge has said Mr Gama must pay 
Transnet these costs, this matter is finalised. You are 
telling me that, now we must abandon those costs, why, 
that’s a question that a Director would ask, why didn’t you 
ask that question? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, that question at the time, was 
not dealt with the way you are putting it yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But do you not accept that it’s an 
obvious question to ask? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I agree with you because 
20 
there are two separate issues as you rightfully point out. 
The one is that application of Mr Gama where he accuses 
the company of unfair – of trying to block him from 
applying a position, that’s a separate matter and then the 
other matter then deals with the actual disciplinary process 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 152 of 231 
 
itself.  Now on that first matter, yes, at the time, the 
question was not posed as to why then link the two 
because the two, frankly are not linked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, Mr Myburgh I know you might 
be having – you and I might have the same question but 
I’m going to ask this. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No please go ahead, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not only that Mr Mkwanazi, not only do 
you then decide with your Board that Mr Gama should not 
bother to pay R426 000 that he owed Transnet and actually 
10 
it was going to be more because there was the cost 
relating to the Directors, probably it would be about a 
million maybe about R800 000.  So, you say Mr Gama, you 
don’t have to bother paying that, in effect, forget about 
what the Judge said, you don’t have to bother about that, 
you don’t have to pay that but not only that, you then say, 
you know what Mr Gama, we Transnet who won that case 
are going to undertake to pay 75% of your own legal costs 
that you incurred to unfairly take us to the High Court, 
that’s what you – in effect what you said, isn’t it? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, that is correct Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How do you explain that, how can that 
possibly be in the interest of Transnet, how possibly could 
it be said to be acting in the interest of Transnet when you 
act like that? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 153 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, yes at the time that is how 
this matter was looked because there was this other matter 
of the value that, that individual would take if brought back 
to the company yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What would he take? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, no the value add of being CEO 
etcetera, etcetera that was perceived to – would have 
happened when that individual comes back to the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The value that a CEO who signs 
documents 
without 
reading 
them 
would 
bring 
to 
the 
10 
company, is that what you’re telling me about?  The value 
of a CEO who defied a Board instruction, is that what 
you’re talking about? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I’m talking about that, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or did you think he defied that other 
Board, but he would not defy your Board? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Not exactly, I’m not sure Chairman but – 
I’m not sure if he would have defied my Board, and yes 
Chairman, I’m not sure, maybe he did but I’m not sure 
Chairman.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Were you sure that he was not going to 
sign documents without reading them? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I was not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So why you want him back because 
there is this risk.  He signed – on his version, he signed 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 154 of 231 
 
documents without reading them that had millions of rands 
of implications for Transnet.  The next time he could have 
signed a document with, even a large amount in terms of 
implications.  Weren’t you concerned about that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, in retrospect, yes the matter 
that he – the two matters that he you know quote, do 
indicate that this individual was not the best individual to 
be, sort of, brought back into the company but at the time 
we had other operational problems etcetera and we were of 
the view that this individual would still add value into that 
10 
company and yes, Chairman, you’re spot on there was this 
new risk that this individual would defy this Board as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh, I’ll leave it for you to take 
further, that issue. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi are you able to 
tell us why, not only, did you let him off on what would 
have amounted to about a million rand that he owed you 
but then you agreed to pay 75% of his costs.  You landed 
up paying him about a million rand, he should have owed 
you a million, you let him off that and then on top of that 
20 
you paid him a million.  Now, apart from the fact that, 
that’s what he wanted, why did you do that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Advocate Myburgh, you know, when you 
mention these payments, somehow they don’t make sense 
to me as well because I’m not sure how Group Treasury 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 155 of 231 
 
and Group Legal interpreted these payments, I’m a little bit 
perplexed myself on all these additional payments which, 
somehow I don’t understand. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well can you think of any rational 
reason why, you would want to do that, apart from the fact 
that, that’s what Mr Gama wanted? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I’ve tried to explain to the Chairman that 
there were certain payments that would have been made in 
terms of this settlement agreement but from what you are 
saying there were other payments that I’m not privy to 
10 
which were made under the assumption that they are part 
of this settlement agreement and I may disagree with those 
payments. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, so if you go back to 3.5, 75% 
of Mr Gama’s taxed costs incurred during the High Court 
application, we’ve dealt with that and in respect of his 
unfair dismissal dispute referred to the Bargaining Council, 
why should he get those costs? 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
Again, 
Advocate 
Myburgh, 
the 
assumption 
was 
that, 
maybe 
at 
Transnet 
Bargaining 
20 
Council he would have had a case but now based on the 
discussions that we are having truly on the last offence he 
didn’t have a case but then based on not waiting for 
litigation 
through 
the 
Transnet 
Bargaining 
Council 
processes then, yes, those payments were then looked at 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 156 of 231 
 
as something that the company could also pay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But Mr Mkwanazi, why because 
firstly, Mr Gama would have to win in the Bargaining 
Council and you said, maybe that might have happened. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But Mr Gama, it seems, we know, 
accepted that he was guilty of misconduct so the prospects 
of him winning hands down in the Bargaining Council were 
remote and also Bargaining Council and the CCMA, as you 
heard from Mr Todd, they grant costs very, very sparingly 
10 
because they don’t want to discourage litigants from 
coming to those fora. Now when you consider that, why on 
earth, in the give and take and cut and thrust of 
negotiation would you just give away these costs, apart 
from the fact that, again, that’s no doubt what Mr Gama 
wanted, why did you give in? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, there was that weak legal 
opinion which created doubt and yes, based on that weak 
legal opinion we felt that there was this litigation risk if we 
continued with this matter at Transnet Bargaining Council. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, you’ve said that many times – 
sorry carry on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that legal opinion never advised you 
to offer costs to…[intervenes]. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, it did not, one fully agrees that legal 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 157 of 231 
 
opinion – I fully agree Chairperson…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you can’t invoke that legal opinion to 
justify why you undertook to pay 75% of the cost because 
the lawyers, at least in that legal opinion, never said you 
were at risk of being ordered to pay costs. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman that legal opinion did not 
quantify the costs and the 75% it just created doubt that if 
further litigation was to happen in the Transnet Bargaining 
Council, the costs could be higher or lower, that is correct 
Chairman. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, what did you understand these 
costs to involve. It says 75% tax legal costs in respect of 
his unfair dismissal dispute referred to the Transnet 
Bargaining Council, now you negotiated this clause, what 
does it mean?  So, he gets dismissed and he refers a 
dispute to the Transnet Bargaining Council, and he does 
that by filling out a referral, so what costs are you dealing 
with here? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman I’m not sure at the time if I 
20 
knew the exact costs but the assumption is that, yes there 
would have been costs and based on that then 75% of 
those costs, if he had incurred them, would be refunded by 
the company yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That would be costs in relation to 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 158 of 231 
 
the Bargaining Council referral, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It wouldn’t include his costs of the 
disciplinary hearing? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Advocate Myburgh, yes, your questioning 
is correct, that is why then I – I do not recall the full 
submission that was dealing with the referral of the matter 
to the Transnet Bargaining Council.  I would have to go back 
I think there was a document submitted in October 2010 I 
would have to go back to that.  Your analysis is spot on.  I 
10 
do not recall that submission spoke to the high court matter 
at all.  I do not recall. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mkwanazi I am not sure that I 
understand your evidence.  Do you agree that it would not 
include the costs of his disciplinary hearing? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Hold it Advocate maybe you will recall that 
he had this matter where he – he took the matter to the high 
court. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is a separate matter. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Then the other matter is the disciplinary 
process to himself – itself.  I am addressing the disciplinary 
process costs itself and the fact that then when this matter is 
taken to the Transnet Bargaining Council there could be that 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 159 of 231 
 
probability that he could win; he could lose and therefore his 
costs to that Transnet Bargaining Council process and the 
disciplinary process were to be lumped into one and dealt 
with as something that the company would pay so in fact I 
sent off.  But the other costs relating to the high court matter 
I am indicting that I do not recall what his submission in 
October 2010 was indicating.  I would have to go back to 
that submission. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi a Bargaining Council 
arbitrator has got no power to award an employee costs of a 
10 
disciplinary hearing.  I mean surely you must have known 
that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman at the time I do not think I was 
aware of that but an impression was created that when now 
this matter goes through litigation costs could be far higher 
than what they might have been had we gone this route. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you ask any of the lawyers that were 
available to you whether Chris – Mr Todd or – of Bowman 
Gilfillan or Deneys Reitz or Webber Wentzel to say just guide 
me on the issue of costs?  What could happen and what 
20 
could not happen at the Bargaining Council?  Did you ask for 
guidance? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman I do not think I did ask Deneys 
Reitz but Chairman I am aware that Mr Todd or the other law 
firm maybe he would have touched on that in the submission 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 160 of 231 
 
of the 2n d February to the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Todd’s report or opinion made it 
clear that Transnet had reasonable prospects of success 
therefore I do not think that they would have mentioned 
anything to you about any risk that the Bargaining Council 
could award costs against Transnet even if Mr Gama were to 
be – to win. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman I do recall Mr Todd’s submission 
basically it was indicating a hundred percent confidence 
level of winning this matter. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Should it go the Transnet Bargaining 
Council. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Mkwanazi costs of a disciplinary 
hearing and costs associated with a referral of an unfair 
dismissal dispute to a Bargaining Council are two separate 
things.  Did you know that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No I did not know at the time but yes I do 
know now. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well I am surprised because what I 
want you to do please is to turn – leave page 38 open in 
Bundle 1. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Please can you turn now to Bundle 2. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 161 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  For Bundle 2 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To page 8 and if you can hold the two 
pages open together. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Page 8 Bundle 2.  Bundle 2? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Okay let me put it this side.  Yes I am now 
on Bundle 2 page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Page 8.  So this is the… 
MR MKWANAZI:  I am on page 8 yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  This is the draft settlement agreement 
10 
that Mr Gama actually signed on the 10 February.  Have a 
look at clause 3.5. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Bundle 2 page 8. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Clause 3.5 yes I can see that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So this was the preceding formulation 
of the clause.   
“Transnet will make a contribution equivalent 
to 75% of Mr Gama’s tax legal costs incurred 
during his disciplinary hearing and in respect 
20 
of his unfair dismissal.” 
 
So there they were separate.  Disciplinary hearing 
and in respect of his unfair dismissal referred to the 
Transnet Bargaining Council.  Did you see that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I see that Chairman. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 162 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then the final clause drops costs 
in respect of the disciplinary hearing.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Which one if the final clause Chairman – 
3.6? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The final clause is at Bundle 1 page 38 
Clause 3.5.  The one that you signed. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Interesting.  I – I see – I see that 
Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So what was … 
MR MKWANAZI:  I see that distinction. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  On the face of it there was a deliberate 
decision made by yourself not to pay 75% of the costs of his 
disciplinary hearing.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair can you repeat I am now looking at 
the two documents.  One is paragraph 3.5 of Bundle 2 page 
8.  And the other one is Bundle 1 page 38.  Can I take you 
through… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mkwanazi I am quite sure you 
understand the proposition.   
MR MKWANAZI:  Please can you repeat? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Initially – well… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let me try that.  You see Mr 
Mkwanazi in Bundle 2 page 8. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have a draft settlement agreement that 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 163 of 231 
 
had been signed – that was signed by Mr Gama on the 10 
February which you did not sign.  Okay? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In Clause 3.5 of that draft settlement 
agreement it was written: 
“Transnet will make a contribution equivalent 
to 75% of Mr Gama’s taxed legal costs 
incurred during Gama’s disciplinary hearing 
and in respect of his unfair dismissal referred 
to the Transnet Bargaining Council.” 
10 
 
So there… 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That draft settlement agreement was 
saying that you will pay 75% of his legal costs relating to the 
unfair 
dismissal 
dispute. 
That 
is 
the 
referral 
to 
the 
Bargaining Council. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you will pay 75% of his legal cost 
incurred in connection with his disciplinary hearing.   
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what that clause says.  Now you 
did not sign that – that draft settlement that has got that 
clause. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You signed the one that we have got at 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 164 of 231 
 
Bundle 1 at page 38.  Now paragraph – clause 3.5 of that – 
of the agreement – the settlement agreement that you signed 
says Transnet will make a contribution equivalent to 75% of 
Mr Gama’s taxed legal costs incurred during Gama’s high 
court application.  So in other words where the draft that you 
did not sign said incurred during Gama’s disciplinary hearing 
it was replaced with incurred during Gama’s high court 
application.  And Counsel’s question to you – question to you 
is this must have meant that you rejected the idea of paying 
75% - a 75% contribution towards the legal costs he incurred 
10 
during the disciplinary process.  You rejected that idea.  That 
is what Counsel is saying.  Would you not agree?  Because 
that is why it does not – it is not reflected in the final 
settlement.  But you replaced that part with the part that 
says incurred during Gama’s high court application.  So 
Counsel was saying to you, you specifically applied your 
mind to the question whether you should undertake to pay 
75% of Mr Gama’s legal costs in relation to the disciplinary 
process.  You rejected that.  So he is saying you could not 
have 
subsequently 
thought 
that 
this 
final 
settlement 
20 
agreement includes Mr Gama’s legal costs in relation to the 
disciplinary hearing.  What do you say to that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No that is what this last agreement 
indicates.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So you had rejected the idea of 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 165 of 231 
 
paying 
a 
contribution 
towards 
his 
legal 
costs 
in 
the 
disciplinary hearing? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is – that is what this agreement says.  
I agree yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi perhaps to 
fast forward on the issue of costs.  Can I please take you to 
Bundle 3. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Bundle 3. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Page 31. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Page 31.  I am there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So this is Mr Mapoma’s affidavit at 
paragraph 12. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Please at page 31.  He says: 
“And all the supporting documents we have I 
think this is probably because that you would 
agree with.  Two payments were made to 
Langa Attorneys whilst I was at Transnet.  
Firstly they were paid R1 016 000.00 odd on 
20 
28 March 2011 being 75% of the taxed costs 
incurred by Transnet with Bowman Gilfillan 
and Eversheds in the high court litigation.” 
 
So there is that – let us call it a million. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 166 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   
“75% 
of 
the 
taxed 
costs 
incurred 
with 
Bowmans and Eversheds in the high court 
litigation. Secondly they were paid R1.7 
million on 9 June being 75% of the taxed 
costs incurred by Mr Gama in the high court, 
his disciplinary inquiry and his referral to the 
Transnet Bargaining Council.” 
 
You have got those two amounts.  We know there was 
an amount of… 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  I have got that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  2015 let me not tax you about that 
because that was after your time.  What Mr Mapoma then 
does is he deals with the first payment.  Regarding the first 
payment it came about. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  As follows:   
“Following my dealings with Langa Attorneys 
who presented a ridiculously inflated bill I 
was opposed to pay Mr Gama’s fees.  This 
20 
was an unpopular decision and I came under 
pressure within the organisation to finalise 
the issue.  In this context I held a discussion 
with Mr Mkwanazi who I dealt with closely on 
the issue which culminated in him instructing 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 167 of 231 
 
me to pay 75% of Transnet’s taxed costs to 
Mr Gama on the basis that he had incurred 
liability for such costs.  Given that I was 
unhappy with this I escalated the matter to 
Mr Singh who approved of the payment.  I 
refer 
in 
this 
regard 
to 
my 
handwritten 
annotations dated 29 March 2011 on various 
tax bills attached to Mr – Ms Mahlabe’s 
affidavit on costs.  The decision is also 
recorded in the memoranda to Mr Singh and 
10 
Mr Molefe referred to in certain paragraphs 
in his second affidavit.”   
So what he is saying is – is essentially this.  Sorry in 
terms of the settlement agreement you somehow agreed to 
pay 75% of Mr Gama’s taxed costs in the high court but 
ultimately what Mr Gama was paid was 75% of Transnet’s 
costs in the high court.  And he says and you shake your 
head; it does not make any sense.  And he says. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No it does not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And he says you were the person who 
20 
instructed him to do that. 
MR MKWANAZI:  It does not make sense.  I am not sure at 
times that people who employ how they interpret these 
issues but this does not make sense. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You see what – what does not make 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 168 of 231 
 
sense is one he is let off paying your costs.  Then you agree 
to pay 75% of his costs.  Then you land up paying him 75% 
of Transnet’s costs and then over and above that we will 
come to in a moment he actually gets his high court costs as 
well.  But what is going on here Mr Mkwanazi? 
MR MKWANAZI:  There is something wrong with that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why are we dealing with this man so 
generously? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  I am also seriously confused.  I would need 
to sit with an accountant to explain why some of these 
payments are interpreted the way they are done – or with a 
legal person.  They do not sound right 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I do not think you need an accountant 
Mr Mkwanazi.  You just need common sense. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I agree Chair.  There is something wrong 
with these numbers Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is not just the numbers it is the 
principle.  Why in the first place in a labour matter when you 
20 
are settling the matter that is pending before the Bargaining 
Council for arbitration you agree to pay the opponent’s legal 
costs of 75% at all.  Somebody who accepts that he is guilty 
of three acts of misconduct.  That I think both you and I 
agree were serious acts of misconduct.  Why is it that none 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 169 of 231 
 
of the board members says hang on, hang on, hang on a 
minute.  Why must we do all of this when the man himself 
admits that he is guilty of three acts of misconduct?  Why 
must we treat him as if he is innocent?  Why must we deal 
with the matter as if he is wrong anywhere?  As if Transnet 
just unjustifiably brought these charges against him  Why is 
it that there is not a single member of that board who says 
hang on, hang on, we are – there is something I do not 
understand here.  Why must we do that?  It is just difficult to 
understand why not a single person in that board was able to 
10 
say really even with reinstate – well I should not say single 
person because there was a minority – there was a minority. 
MR MKWANAZI:  There was a minority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja there was a minority who said no, you 
know.  But it looks like it was maybe only two people.  And 
the rest – so it is not true to say there was not a single 
member of the board who – who could see that there was 
something wrong here.  There was a minority which did but 
… 
MR MKWANAZI:  There was a minority Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja the majority did not seem to think there 
was anything wrong in doing – handling this matter in this 
way.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you.  So Mr Mkwanazi did 
you or did you not instruct Mr Mapoma to pay Mr Gama 75% 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 170 of 231 
 
of Transnet’s costs in the high court?  Did you or did you not 
instruct him to do that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Do not forget the interpretation is as 
follows:  The assumption is that Gama has incurred some 
costs – there are two issues.  One it is in the high court and 
one it is – under the disciplinary process itself.  Yes at the 
time there was an instruction that based on the agreement 
that Gama must re – the company must refund Gama 75% of 
his costs incurred during the high court application.  That is 
the one matter.  Then the other matter it is respect of his 
10 
unfair dismissal dispute referred to the Transnet Bargaining 
Council.  And on that matter as well the – the directive was 
to pay 75% - to refund Gama 75% of his incurred costs on 
the matter that is now being dealt with in the Transnet 
Bargaining Council arbitrating process yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes you just recite the agreement.  Mr 
Mkwanazi please answer my question? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you or did you not instruct Mr 
Mapoma to pay Mr Gama 75% not of the costs that he 
20 
incurred but of the costs that Transnet incurred … 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, no. no I did not.  It was of the costs 
that Transnet had incurred.  Well I think Mr Mapoma 
misinterpreted what I was saying. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 171 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You think he misinterpreted what you 
said? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Mapoma says he was not 
really happy with the instruction. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja he was correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And if we go to page 104 of Bundle 1. 
MR MKWANAZI:  104 of Bundle 1.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You will see there that he addresses 
10 
a memorandum to Mr Singh. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And if you look at 105 under 
Financial Implications. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Here at 75% of the attached invoices 
have to be paid to Mr Gama’s attorneys and those are 75% 
if you go over the page of the invoices received from 
Evershed Attorneys.  Those were the attorneys for the 
directors in the high court and then under that 75% of the 
20 
taxed costs awarded to Bowman Gilfillan.  They were 
Transnet’s attorneys.  So you see here this memorandum 
recommends that Mr Gama is paid 75% not of the costs 
incurred by him but 75% of the costs incurred by Transnet 
and the executives and 75% of the costs incurred by the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 172 of 231 
 
individual directors. It is quite incredible is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Oh no it is so wrong. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I am not sure between so many 
people 
who 
– 
why 
they 
could 
not 
understand 
the 
interpretation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well Mr Mapoma says that you told 
him to do that. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that is why he sought the 
10 
approval of Mr Singh and he addresses this memorandum 
to Mr Singh. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And do you see then how it lands up 
being signed by Mr Molefe? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I see that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I mean this is strange.  Because even Mr 
Mapoma and Mr Singh should have gone back to – to that 
settlement agreement and interpreted it properly.  Now 
20 
they then elevate this matter in a completely inaccurate 
manner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But Mr Mkwanazi this was not the first 
thing that could not be explained about this agreement.  
There were a number of things that had happened which 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 173 of 231 
 
could not be explained.  We have dealt with some of them 
in the settlement agreement. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman I cannot explain this wrong 
interpretation by Anoj Singh and by Mr Mapoma. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So just to continue with this if you go 
to page 93 of Bundle 1.   
MR MKWANAZI:  93? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  You see Mr Mapoma was 
concerned about this so he was very anxious to record 
10 
what had happened.  And on a series of taxed bills in 
relation to Bowman Gilfillan and Eversheds he then made 
this annotation.  Look at the foot of 93. 
“Transnet to pay 75% of the taxed costs 
above.” 
 
Right now these were in this document the taxed 
costs of Bowman Gilfillan.  And he sets out the figures and 
then he says: 
“Payment has been approved as per the 
attached memorandum.” 
20 
 
That is the memorandum that I have taken you to 
and then he says: 
“Discussed with Anoj.” 
 
That is Mr Singh.   
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 174 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what he says Mr Mapoma is that 
you gave him the instruction – sorry Mr Mkwanazi you gave 
him the instruction.  He was concerned and he escalated it 
to Mr Singh and he says: 
“This bears out his evidence.” 
 
What do you say about that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman he was correct to be concerned 
and to elevate it but then what I find strange is that even 
Anoj at the time did not bother to go back to the settlement 
agreement.  That is not a proper interpretation even if 
10 
though maybe Mr Mapoma could have said I said.  I could 
not instruct Mr Mapoma to do something that – to me it is 
illogical what he then interpreted is what the agreement 
said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No, no sorry that was not his 
interpretation.  You instructed him to do that. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is his evidence. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well when you say it is illogical you 
20 
say it was illogical for Anoj to do that you see that Brian 
Molefe signed this memorandum.  And by the way clause 
3.5 of the settlement agreement is actually reproduced at 
the beginning of the memorandum. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I am not sure how these people – 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 175 of 231 
 
Chairman I am not sure how these people were interpreting 
that clause 3.5.  I wish somebody had come back to me – 
ja – but that was now operational. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mkwanazi before I leave this 
subject someone did come to you.   
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mapoma came to you and 
explained that as far as he was concerned Mr Gama was 
not able to actually prove the incurrence of any costs.  And 
what you then instructed him to do was to pay Mr Gama 
10 
75% of Transnet’s costs. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I deny that instruction to Mr Mapoma.  I 
would have said go back to the agreement and implement 
what is in the agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see – 
MR MKWANAZI:  Because what implemented is over and 
above what was in that agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see Mr Mkwanazi Mr Mapoma says if 
you go to the settlement agreement. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The 75% costs that it talks about are 
taxed legal costs.  Okay. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You understand the concept of taxed 
legal costs? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 176 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  So he says in accordance with 
the settlement agreement they were insisting.  He said Mr 
Langa that is Mr Gama’s attorney sent an invoice or a bill I 
am not sure for a certain amount I do not know whether it 
was R12 million or what and it was not taxed.  So he says 
he was insisting that 75% - the 75% of legal costs that 
Transnet would pay would only be of taxed legal costs that 
incurred by Mr Gama and he was insisting on that with 
regard to Mr Langa.  But he says Mr Langa did not want to 
10 
submit a taxed bill – a taxed cost and there was a delay 
because there was this issue.  Mr Mapoma was insisting 
that it should be taxed costs and Mr Langa was not 
submitting that.  Maybe he was not prepared to submit that 
and in the meantime there was a delay.  So he says with 
the delay – now I do not know whether Mr Mkwanazi can… 
MR MKWANAZI:  There is something wrong here I need a 
help. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh there is something wrong. 
MR MKWANAZI:  With the video. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  With the video.  Okay I wonder whether 
we should adjourn for somebody to deal with that or are 
they going to be able to deal with it while we are talking?  
Do you know?  I do not know whether it is to be fixed from 
this side.  Looks like we have – where are our technicians?  
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 177 of 231 
 
I just need – at – you can still hear me? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I can hear you clearly Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it is just the video.  Okay let us talk 
while … 
MR MKWANAZI:  It is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us talk while they fix the video and if 
we need to adjourn to – okay I am told that it should be 
fine now.   
MR MKWANAZI:  It looks like it is back.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Okay.  So I am – I was saying 
10 
to you Mr Mapoma says there is a context to the position 
that ultimately paid 75% of its own legal costs to Mr Gama’s 
attorneys.  And he says the context is that Mr Gama’s 
attorneys did not want to send a tax bill or was delaying or 
was reluctant to send a tax bill.   
 
And in the meantime, he was getting pressure from 
within Transnet to pay Mr Gama’s attorneys.  And he was the 
told:  Okay pay 75% of Transnet’s legal costs.  And he says 
you instructed him to do that. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, Chairman I did not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Myburgh. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I did not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So in other words, what he was saying 
is that you said:  Use the Transnet bills as a proxy for Mr 
Gama’s costs.   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 178 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Hold it.  Not really.  I think you are on the 
right track, Advocate Myburgh.  Please, continue.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that what you told him to do? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Not really.  But let me still try and explain 
what this was supposed to be even though Mr Mapoma 
interpreted it in a strange way.  The assumption would have 
been that Mr Gama would have paid certain costs at that 
high court process.   
 
Then the idea was that if he had to pay those, then Mr 
Gama needed to be refunded 75% of those costs only but 
10 
still paid the 25%.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, I think we all understand but that 
is what was supposed to have happened but it did not. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And Mr Mapoma said it did not happen 
because you instructed him. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I did not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, who did instruct ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   I am not sure who did.  I did not.  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You do not know who instructed him? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let us go then please to Bundle 1 to 
page 142. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 179 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Bundle 1.  One, four, two?  Okay let me go 
back to 142.  Yes? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So what happened is, sometime later 
...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...mister... there was an inquiry by the 
Director General of the Department of Public Enterprises 
about ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...Mr Gama’s legal fees.  
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Why he wanted to become involved in 
this one, does not know.  But what happened is that Mr 
Mapoma then addressed a memorandum to Mr Molefe about 
Mr Gama’s legal fees.  This is the memorandum.  Do you see 
it? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I see it, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you see that it was CC’d to you? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I see that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you receive this memorandum? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   I would have received it at the time, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Well, that is helpful.  So let 
us go then to paragraph 6 at page 143. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 180 of 231 
 
“Mr Gama incurred legal costs in two matters.  The 
first is his application to the high court in which 
Transnet used two sets of attorneys, Bowman 
Gilfillan Attorneys and Deneys Reitz.”   
 
I think everyone agrees that should read Eversheds(?). 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
“The second matter in which he incurred costs is the 
labour matter in which he was charged in a 
disciplinary process.  The costs in the high court 
10 
were granted in Transnet’s favour by the court.”  
 
That you accept, right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I accept that, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
“These costs were supposed to have been paid by 
Mr Gama on which ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   I accept that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “...a settlement with Mr Gama,  
Transnet sought and obtained the tax 
bills from these two firms of attorneys 
20 
and paid 75% of the total amount.”   
 
So here it is written in black and what actually happened 
is that Mr Gama was paid 75% of Transnet’s costs.   
“The tax amounts included the fees of counsel which 
are indicated as disbursements in the attorney’s bill.  
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 181 of 231 
 
The amount of R 69 603,19 were paid to Langa 
Attorneys on 28 March 2011 being 75% of the tax 
costs incurred by Transnet’s to its attorneys, Deneys 
Reitz and Bowman Gilfillan, respectively.  The total 
amount paid to Langa Attorneys on 28 March was 
therefore R 1 016 000,00.” 
 
Do you see that?   
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you shake your head.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You shake your head.  It is 
unbelievable. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I see the figure. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:   But the question is.  Did Gama paid 
Transnet in the first place? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Because that is my problem as well.  That 
is why I shake my head.  Because the idea was that... the 
assumption was.  Gama has paid the legal fees of Transnet’s 
20 
lawyers, et cetera. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Come now, Mr Mkwanazi.  Come now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You had issued an instruction to Mr 
Todd that he must stop the execution process. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 182 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So how could you have expected that Mr 
Gama would have paid Transnet’s legal costs when you had 
instructed that all steps to recover Transnet’s legal costs for 
Mr Gama should be stopped? 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
My 
interpretation... 
I 
understand, 
Chairman.  My interpretation was that, as those processes 
were going, Gama was servicing his obligation to Transnet’s 
lawyers. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   What obligation now you are talking about 
now? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Whatever legal fees had been incurred by 
Transnet’s lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In regard to what? 
MR MKWANAZI:   In regard to the high court matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you never went back to Mr Todd and 
say:  Go ahead.  You remember I stopped you from the 
process of recovering Transnet’s costs from Mr Gama.  Now I 
am saying go ahead.  You never went back to say that, did 
20 
you? 
MR MKWANAZI:   If I recall, I did not do that because I was 
communicating some of these decisions particularly to stop 
with the Transnet’s Group Legal.  But the question you are 
posing is a relevant question in that it sounds like no 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 183 of 231 
 
Transnet’s legal fees had been paid even by Gama at that 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  He had... Mr Todd gave evidence 
here and said ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...after the high court had ordered that he 
should pay costs, they were in communication with his 
lawyers and he was not paying the costs.   
 
So they had to get the costs taxed in the high court.  
There was a tax bill.  They informed him that this is how the 
10 
costs have been taxed.  Still did not pay.   
 
So they then embarked upon the execution process.  
That is the process which you instructed him to stop 
pursuing in January.  And you never went back to him to say:  
Now you can continue.   
 
Actually, the settlement agreement Mr Mkwanazi seems 
to be inconsistent with the notion that you would have 
expected Mr Gama to be paying any legal costs of Transnet.   
 
Because whereas he had been ordered by the high court 
to 
pay Transnet’s 
costs in 
regard to the 
high 
court 
20 
...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you said to him:  We are going to pay 
75% of the costs you incurred in taking us to court, 
Mr Gama.  That is inconsistent with somebody who would... 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 184 of 231 
 
to think after that settlement agreement which has got that, 
to think that Mr Gama would be paying something towards 
Transnet, is inconsistent with that position with the terms of 
the settlement agreement.   
 
Because there will be no point.  What point would there 
have been for you to say:  Mr Gama, we will pay 75% of the 
costs you have incurred in the high court application against 
us.  If you were expecting him to pay you, Transnet’s legal 
costs.  There would have been no point, is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I would not like to agree to fully 
10 
that interpretation because at the time when this issue was 
being discussed, my assumption was Gama owes various 
lawyers a certain amount of money.   
 
And my assumption was he should have paid by then 
although yes in terms of the Advocate Todd.  He might not 
have paid but the assumption was he was going to pay.   
 
Therefore, whatever he would have been refunded would 
have been based on him having incurred certain costs which 
would have been then 75% of those costs.   
 
Not the other way around where he has not even 
20 
incurred... he has not even paid and he gets paid.  That is a 
total misinterpretation of that agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
But 
Mr 
Mkwanazi, 
remember 
the 
timeframe.  It is around mid-January 2011 that you instruct 
...[intervenes]  
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 185 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   that you instruct Mr Todd to stop the 
process ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...of getting from Mr Gama the money that 
he owed Transnet in terms of the high court order. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You stop him.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the reason given is that you are 
10 
stopping him so that... so as to give the settlement 
negotiations a chance.  That is the reason that was 
advanced. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So obviously, pending the outcome 
of the settlement, that process of recovering from Mr Gama 
was at a standstill.  You accept that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It could not be ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Not so if he could not...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It could have been ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   But I will accept that, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me repeat that.  That process of 
recovering the legal costs from Mr Gama for Transnet, could 
not have been ongoing while the negotiations were ongoing, 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 186 of 231 
 
is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was at a standstill that process. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you were settling, negotiating the 
terms of the settlement, you knew that the process to 
recover Transnet’s legal costs from Mr Gama was at a 
standstill.  You could not have thought that he had been 
paying anything in the meantime.  You could not have 
thought that.   
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It was only about a month before that you 
said:  Mr Todd stop until we have finalised negotiations. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am putting to you that when you were 
negotiating and settling the matter and talking about 75% 
about Transnet undertaking to pay 75% of Mr Gama’s costs, 
it could not have been because you thought Mr Gama had 
been paying some money towards Transnet in terms of legal 
costs.  It could not have been that.   
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I am not sure what should have 
been paid by that time but what I can indicate here, there is 
a serious misinterpretation by a few people of what that 
settlement 
agreement 
meant. 
 
Those 
people 
include 
Mr Mapoma and they include even Mr Anoj Singh.  There is a 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 187 of 231 
 
serious misinterpretation.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi, one of 
the first questions that I asked you in relation to costs was, 
whether you accept that Mr Gama’s obligation to pay 
Transnet’s costs was actually compromised in the settlement 
agreement.  It was written-off.  And you said you agreed 
...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, it was compromised.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  And you remember agreeing with 
10 
that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I do remember. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja.  Then paragraph 8: 
“Mr 
Gama’s 
own 
attorneys 
in 
the 
high 
court 
application, the labour matter was Langa Attorneys.  
When Transnet received their bill being presented 
for payment, it became apparent that the bill had not 
been taxed as agreed.   
Prior to this, Transnet had been asking for a tax bill 
and offered to pay for a private taxing master in 
20 
order to facilitate the fast-track the taxation, to no 
avail.  When the bill arrived, it was pointed out that 
the bill was not taxed but merely drawn up properly.  
After a number of meetings during which it became 
clear that the parties would not reach agreement, 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 188 of 231 
 
Transnet instructed its legal advisors to instruct a 
private taxing master to tax the bill.  This was done.  
The 
total 
amount 
came 
to 
R 2 293 000,00.  
According to the taxing master, Langa Attorneys 
Consultant who drew their bill was instructed not to 
cooperate with the taxation process.” 
 
I will leave out the bracketed part. 
“Transnet net paid the sum of R 1 700 000,00 on 
9 June to Langa Attorneys being 75% of the tax 
costs.” 
10 
 
So that part you understand? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do understand.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is paragraph 7 that you do not 
understand how ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja, also by the way, if I can add on 
advocate? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Even that one point seven which say, I say 
I understand.  It would have been on the basis that Gama 
would have paid a certain amount, not just on the basis of 
20 
him being given a freebie.  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So what the one point seven 
compromised of and let me take you... well, I can take you to 
the documents if you want.  We have got the bill from Langa 
Attorneys, we have go the taxing master’s memo.   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 189 of 231 
 
 
And she taxes it down to two point nine three and he is 
paid, 75% being one point seven.  What he submitted a bill 
and what he was paid for Mr Mkwanazi was the high court, 
his disciplinary hearing and the Bargaining Council referral.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So at paragraph 7, he had been paid 
our costs in respect of the high court.  And then in paragraph 
9, do you see how he was then paid also his costs in the 
high court?  Astonishing, is it not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I agree with you. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But Mr Mkwanazi, you received this 
memorandum.  That is your evidence. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I did but at the time, my interpretation... of 
course, I am copied here.  There are these two people 
interacting now.  The Group CEO and Mr Mapoma.  And at 
the time, I was under the impression that, particularly 
Mr Mapoma, understood what the intention of that settlement 
agreement is.   
 
But this memo here was wrongly crafted.  Yes, I should 
have highlighted that even say to Molefe that this was not 
20 
what was in the agreement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you accept that Mr Gama was not 
entitled to 75% of the costs he incurred during the 
disciplinary hearing given the changes in the wording of the 
two agreements, settlement agreements?  Do you accept 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 190 of 231 
 
that?. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Let me think of it carefully.  In the 
agreement, entitled to which costs.  Can you please repeat? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you accept that he was not entitled 
to the costs incurred during the disciplinary hearing? 
MR MKWANAZI:   My understanding of the agreement.  It did 
not cover that for one or the other reason.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  Well, I think there we agree with 
one another.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes.  Yes.  That agreement did not cover 
10 
that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Well, let us then move on to 
something 
else. 
 
And 
I 
just 
got 
a 
few 
pieces 
of 
correspondence and the like that I want to refer you to.  And 
then I want to take you briefly to your supplementary 
affidavit.  Can I ask you please to turn to Bundle 2?  
Continuing with the chronology. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Bundle 2.  Okay let us check this... Aside, 
ja.  We have Bundle 2. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Will you please go to page 41, four 
20 
one? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 41.  Oaky I am on page 41.  Wait.  
Forty-one or 21? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Forty-one.  Four one. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Forty-one.  Okay.  I have go that. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 191 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So the settlement agreement 
signed on 22 and 23 February.  Page 41 is dated the 
6t h of April, a month or two later. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And on the face of it, Deneys Reitz’ 
response on behalf of Transnet to the Public Protector.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you come across this document?  
Was it shown to you? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I have seen this document.  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So let us go then to 
paragraph 10 at page 44.  Mr Gule writes to the Public 
Protector and says: 
“In addition to the findings made by Antrobus SC at 
the disciplinary inquiry and the grounds on which 
Mr Gama has referred the matter for arbitration, 
there are legal opinions that had been furnished by 
two reputable firms of attorneys relating to the 
procedural and substantive fairness of Mr Gama’s 
dismissal.   
20 
These firms are Webber Wentzel and Denys Reitz 
Incorporated.   
All 
these 
opinions 
confirmed 
that 
Mr 
Gama’s 
dismissal was substantively and procedurally fair.”   
 
This is been written on the 6 t h of April after you have 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 192 of 231 
 
reinstated the man and paid him - what is it - the better part 
of R 16 million.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Deneys Reitz say that: 
“All these opinions confirm that Mr Gama’s dismissal 
was substantively and procedurally fair.” 
 
Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then they go on to say at 
paragraph 12: 
10 
“In any event, the dismissal dispute referred to the 
Transnet Bargaining Council by Mr Gama has been 
settled amicable.  The terms of the settlement are 
confidential.   
However, we confirm that Mr Gama has been 
reinstated as CEO.  Accordingly, we submit that all 
the 
issues 
raised 
with 
regard 
to 
the 
alleged 
unfairness 
of 
Mr 
Gama’s 
dismissal 
are 
now 
academic.” 
 
So here ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   I see this. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...Mr Gule tells the Public Protector 
that there are a number of opinions including by Denys Reitz 
that confirm that Mr Gama’s dismissal was substantively and 
procedurally fair.   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 193 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This is the man you reinstated a few 
months earlier and paid R 13 million in LTI’s, STI’s and back 
pay and then the better part of R 3 million in costs.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   How do you explain this? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I find it strange that even though this thing 
is an opinion of the same entity, Deneys Reitz, that much 
earlier on, sometime in February, it created doubt on the 
possibilities of success if this matter was taken through the 
10 
Transnet Bargaining Council process and through to the fact 
that this doubt was created, then this settlement agreement 
was reached.  And of course now, there is this shame which 
then says Mr Gama’s dismissal is now academic.  I see that, 
ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But you see Mr Mkwanazi, you never 
took the trouble to iron out the contradiction in Deneys Reitz’ 
report to you. 
MR MKWANAZI:   There is a point ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...on the 22 nd of January, did you? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So when you say ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   No ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...without a doubt, that was because 
you were reading and you were seeing that you wanted to. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 194 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I concede at the time that yes 
there was this doubt but... because even as early as that as 
well, Deneys Reitz in that earlier letter, did indicate that 
Transnet did have a strong case, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, let me then deal with the next 
document.  You yourself some time later submitted a 
response to the Public Protector. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you go to page 48, you will find it 
there.  I see that you have signed it at page 55 on the 
10 
30t h of June. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Where is it?  Is it page 48? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, Bundle 2, page 48.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Bundle 2, page 48.  Yes okay.  Yes, I have 
got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now you were in a... by this time, we 
know that KPMG/Nkonki had issued their interim report, 
correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And that report was dated either 26 or 
20 
28 April.  Correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, Mr Mkwanazi this is quite a long 
time after Mr Gama’s reinstatement, some four months or so, 
after his reinstatement, right? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 195 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let us see what you write to the 
Public Protector.  Under the heading:  Substantive and 
Procedural Fairness.  There is a 2 in brackets.  You say 
...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Oh, yes I see it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say: 
“However, there are matters which the auditors 
discovered where certain employees of the company 
may have been guilty of offences similar to the 
10 
offences with which Mr Gama was charged with.” 
 
We have been through all of that. 
MR MKWANAZI:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “...and yet no disciplinary action was 
taken against him.”   
MR MKWANAZI:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “In such circumstances, there is an  
argument 
that 
Transnet 
may 
have 
acted inconsistently.” 
 
So that is the best you could do in June to say:  We may 
20 
have acted inconsistently. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Not that you did act inconsistently.  
Not that you knew that you were going to lose at the 
Bargaining 
Council. 
 
Only 
that 
you 
may 
have 
acted 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 196 of 231 
 
inconsistently.  Is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then look at, to drive home the 
point – look at 4 in brackets at the foot of the page. 
“It would therefore appear that to the extent that no 
disciplinary action was taken in these matters, 
Mr Gama 
may 
have been able to sustain the 
argument on inconsistent treatment.   
Such inconsistency may have had a bearing, not 
only the on the decision to charge Mr Gama but also 
10 
on the sanction dismissal.” 
 
Now why on earth do you reinstate the man and pay him 
R 13 million in back pay and benefits and R 3 million in costs 
when at absolute best for him he may have had a case on 
what you are telling the Public Protector?  How is that 
possible?   
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, as you can see.  Even in my 
submission to the Public Protector, there is always this may 
have, may have.  And interestingly enough, as we have 
discussed... even the few examples that maybe I made of the 
20 
V and E(?) and al. these ...[indistinct] contracts.  They are 
not identical to the offences that Mr Gama committed.  That I 
concede but... ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi, why do you settle with a 
man when he may have had a case? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 197 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I do not understand that. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, yes I understand fully.  Please 
continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, but it is not about you 
understanding fully.  And why do you then capitulate in the 
settlement negotiations?  At the best for him, here you telling 
the Public Protector, this is a carefully thought out, no doubt, 
response.  At best for him, he may have had a case.  What is 
going on here Mr Mkwanazi? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I had indicated that there was 
this doubt created that we may or may not win this thing 
when it went thought the Transnet Bargaining Council. 
MR MKHWANAZI (COUNSEL):   Chair, if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR MKHWANAZI (COUNSEL):   If I may answer that and 
say?  Chair, I am asking you to perhaps assist the process?   
Because I believe that what Advocate Myburgh is asking 
now, are issues that have been substantially dealt with up to 
this point especially on Friday, giving our session with you 
20 
Chair.   
 
I feel that we have exhausted most of the issues as it 
can be.  Advocate Myburgh is asking the same question:  
Why did you settle?  Why did you capitulate?  And so on.  So 
can you please assist us here? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 198 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MKHWANAZI (COUNSEL):   So that we can have some 
finality, so to speak.  So we can enable him to continue to 
other matters.  I am asking you to guide us here.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no.  That is fine.  I am sure that 
in part it is the answers that come from Mr Mkwanazi that 
continue to leave questions.  But it is okay.  I understand.  
Mr Myburgh, do you want to say anything? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, certainly.  Well, this line of 
questioning comes directly from Mr Mkwanazi’s own letter to 
10 
the Public Protector.  I know that not in this context I guess 
that that is something I need not pursue any further 
certainly this letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But I just wanted to confirm, by the 
time you wrote this letter to the Public Protector you no 
doubt had considered the matter very carefully and it is a 
carefully thought out response to the Public Protector, is 
that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Let us indicate that when you say 
20 
carefully considered response, a letter like this would not 
have been authored by myself, as such, but it would have 
been authored in organisation in support of what I could 
have been telling them, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But it is something no doubt that you 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 199 of 231 
 
agreed with. 
MR MKWANAZI:   At the time, yes, I agree with but based 
on these discussions that we are now having, there are 
some interesting holes on similarities which frankly are not 
there in terms of whether the Gama matter was a 
procurement matter or was a misconduct matter. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, no, I think you might have 
…[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   That difference is beginning to emerge, 
ja. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think you have conceded that fairly. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let me move to another document 
please.  If I could ask you please to go to file 3. 
MR MKWANAZI:   File 3. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And to page …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is bundle 3. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon, bundle 3. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Bundle 3. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   To page 479. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Page 479? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Are you there? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I have got that page 479, yes. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 200 of 231 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So this is a meeting of the Corporate 
Governance and Nomination Committee held on the 11 
April and you see that you were present together with four 
of your fellow board members. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This is 11 April but two and a half 
months – sorry, a month and a half after Mr Gama’s 
reinstatement. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I ask you please to go to page 
10 
482? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is that period of the settlement 
agreement, Mr Myburgh, and it is within two weeks after he 
has assumed duty.  I just make that observation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For another reason that will be – I will 
deal with later. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So this is shortly after Mr Gama 
resumes his duties and shortly after the settlement.  At 
page 482, if I can ask you to go to the middle of page. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 5.2.3.4, there the 
committee – this is the committee that you were chairing, 
Corporate Governance and Nomination.   
“Requested management to make a presentation 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 201 of 231 
 
covering, amongst others, the following: 
What is a condonation process?  Where does it 
originate from?  Where does it get approved and 
regularised?” 
It seems that on the face of it you and your fellow board 
directors knew precious little about condonation at this 
time, is that not right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, maybe not.  Let me try and 
explain at times how these things were evolving.  You still 
need to recall that yes, that board, when it was dealing 
10 
with certain issues, was a new board and it almost needed 
a re-induction because even when an induction could have 
been done it might not have been done to that detail to 
that board.  Yes, that is how I interpret 5.2.3.4. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But, Mr Mkwanazi, I think you are 
perhaps missing the point.  These are people who had 
voted to reinstate Mr Gama in the name of condonation, 
including you. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, yes, [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Who now needed an induction into 
condonation.  Is that what you are saying? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is what I am saying, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, that is precisely the problem 
pointed to by Mr Todd in his evidence. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 202 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, Mr Mkwanazi, it is the same 
people – the same people who invoked condonation, the 
condonation process at Transnet to justify reinstating Mr 
Gama.  It is the same people who on the 11 April say they 
are requesting management to make a presentation to deal 
with very basic questions.  The first question they want 
management to deal with is, what is a condonation 
process?  But they are supposed to have known that by 
then because how could they have invoked the condonation 
10 
process to reinstate Mr Gama if they do not what a 
condonation process is at Transnet?  You understand our 
difficulty? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I understand, Chairman.  Maybe let me 
try and get a little bit of – it is not background but at that 
time in almost the first two months of 2011, maybe first 
three months – again, I do not have proof, but we could 
have 
dealt 
maybe 
with 
close 
to 
20 
condonation 
applications and therefore that is why then this board was 
saying hold it, there is too much of these condonations, 
20 
can somebody come and explain in detail what are these 
condonation all about?  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, Mr Mkwanazi, that is what is – that 
is what makes it even worse.  I mean, a question like this, 
what is a condonation process, is a question you should 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 203 of 231 
 
ask before doing you first condonation case, it is not a 
question you should ask after doing 20 condonation cases.  
You understand what I mean? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I understand where you coming from. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By that time you are supposed to be 
very familiar with this, you cannot be asking that basic 
question.  If you ask it after doing 20 condonation cases, 
you know, people will be tempted to say it mean this 
person did not know what he or she was doing through 
these 20 condonation cases if he or she does not know 
10 
what 
a 
condonation 
process 
is 
at 
Transnet? 
 
You 
understand what I mean? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I understand, Chairman, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.   
MR MKHWANAZI:   Chair, if I may, if you may indulge me, 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MKHWANAZI:   Chair, I think it is a bit unfair on Mr 
Mkwanazi to assume that having an induction condonation 
20 
who drive a lack of understanding or knowledge of what 
condonation is.  Many institutions, Chair, including, you 
know, lawyers and everyone from time to time have 
inductions around topics.  They already - for example, 
Chair, most of companies have inductions every day on 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 204 of 231 
 
King IV on the Companies Act, etcetera, etcetera, it does 
not presuppose that this person does not understand what 
it is.  So I am just trying to assist, Chair, to make sure that 
we help the process rather than trying to, you know, 
create, you know, false impressions. 
 
And then my submission that I am trying to make 
now, Chair, is that an induction does not presuppose lack 
of understanding of what is going on and I would like to 
leave it at that, Chair.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, but you think that my reaction 
10 
is based on Mr Mkwanazi’s statement that there was a 
need for induction or anything to do with induction but my 
question does not stem from that.  It stems from the mere 
fact that the minutes reflect that this committee said they 
wanted to be addressed on what a condonation process is 
so that that is where it comes from, so that is what I am 
saying. 
MR MKHWANAZI:   Yes, Chair, and I agree, Chair.  When 
we do, for example, board inductions, we start there as 
well, we start by asking what is King IV.  It does not 
20 
presuppose that it means someone does not know what it 
is and most of the time, Chair, you do these inductions with 
very senior experienced board people who exactly, sit on 
various boards, but the inductions are used for different 
purposes 
including 
and 
showing 
that 
people 
have 
a 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 205 of 231 
 
common understanding …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, …[intervenes] 
MR MKHWANAZI:   Of the issues that they have because 
you 
may 
come 
from 
different 
institutions 
where 
the 
interpretation that the Transnet may have different but you 
are now making sure that that the organisation have a 
common understanding and I actually do not see anything 
wrong with that Chair, and I just wanted to clarify that.  But 
thank you for you [indistinct] 10.05 as well, Chair.  Thank 
you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, just to clarify and we will 
proceed just now.  So the idea is that somebody or the 
committee 
would 
not 
ask 
the 
question 
what 
is 
a 
condonation process if they know what a condonation 
process is.  That is the point of departure.  But okay, let us 
continue.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, just to end off, Mr 
Mkwanazi, do you have your supplementary affidavit?  It 
should have been added to bundle 4, just before the tab 
BB19. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Bundle 4.  Yes, please hold. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just before the tab BB19. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Before tab 19.  Okay.  Chairman, I have 
got it in front of me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And the page number is a difficult 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 206 of 231 
 
one, it is bundle 4, page 21.414, are you there? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I have got that in front of me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, thank you.  Now, Mr 
Mkwanazi, given the lateness in the day, I am not going to 
take you through all of this and a lot of what you say here 
are things that I think have been clarified but paragraphs 
1, 2 and 3 need no introduction of mention.  You say at 
paragraph 4 that in your initial affidavit you did not deal 
with certain things and you now address them in this 
supplementary affidavit.  Correct? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at paragraph 5 you say that 
you met with Minister Gigaba in October 2010.  That we 
have already dealt with. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At 6 you say: 
“At this Minister Gigaba also requested that the 
incoming board must also review the fairness of the 
dismissal of Mr Gama.” 
We have traversed that. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   We have dealt with it, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you say at paragraph 7 that on 
22 December you received a letter from the Public 
Protector, the board then appointed a joint venture team of 
KPMG and Nkonki.  We have dealt with that. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 207 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say: 
“The joint venture provided the board with the 
first/draft report which was used by the board in its 
deliberations on the matter of the dismissal.” 
I have dealt with this report extensively in the initial 
affidavit.  I think you accept though that there was no first 
report before the board made its decision on the 16 
February, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, yes, there was some report 
10 
but it was not extensive. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No. 
MR MKWANAZI:   There was a report around the 24 
January by KPMG.  I say it was not extensive as in terms 
of dealing with the real issues on the Gama matter.  It was 
more a planning report by KPMG. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When you say it was extensive, it 
was progress report, it did not deal with the facts. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It was progress report, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  And I do not want to re-
20 
traverse that ground.  Paragraph 9: 
“In addition to the KPMG/Nkonki report the board 
sought legal advice from Deneys Reitz Attorneys.  
Deneys Reitz advised the board that it will be in the 
best interests of Transnet to settle the matter than 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 208 of 231 
 
get involved in protracted litigation with consequent 
financial disadvantages.  The board received this 
advice in good order, took into consideration other 
reports at the time of irregular expenditure in 
making a decision to reinstate Mr Gama.” 
I have already questioned you extensively about the 
Deneys Reitz advice, I am not going to re-traverse that.  
Then you now say for the first time that: 
“The board further regarded the expertise that Mr 
Gama possessed as critical to Transnet Freight Rail 
10 
and that his departure will have a marked impact on 
the 
organisation. 
 
This 
board 
considered 
was 
invaluable.” 
Is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think as you have candidly 
answered in response to questions by the Chairperson that 
these were not the expertise that you needed at Transnet, 
a Chief Executive who blindly signed a document allowed a 
fraud to be perpetrated on the company, correct? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman has already touched on that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, exactly. 
MR MKWANAZI:   In some of his remarks, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then paragraph 11: 
“Circumstances 
prevalent 
at 
the 
time 
and 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 209 of 231 
 
foreseeable 
tumultuous 
effect 
that 
Mr 
Gama’s 
dismissal would have had on the operation of 
Transnet Freight Rail required the board put more 
focus on the stability of the group.” 
This is also a new issue it would seem to me to be dealt 
with that the board – but what are we saying here, that 
despite the fact that he was guilty of very serious 
misconduct you decided to take him back in the name of 
stability of the group. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But the main reason that you took Mr 
Gama back, you have said repeatedly, is because there 
was a slight doubt that you might not win at the bargaining 
council, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is also correct, Chair, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  And then you say: 
“The 
board, 
having 
considered 
these 
factors, 
resolved that the reinstatement was in the best 
interest of the organisation.” 
You deal with retrospectivity of reinstatement and a final 
20 
written warning. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say at paragraph 13: 
“As stated in paragraph 7 above the board was duly 
advised by Deneys Reitz Attorneys that litigation is 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 210 of 231 
 
always uncertain and there is a risk on either side.  
Further, the board was advised that it might make 
sense 
to 
settle 
the 
matter 
rather 
than 
being 
involved in a drawn out and costly legal battle.” 
Then you say at 14: 
“Having converted the sanction of dismissal to a 
final written warning the board could not have dated 
the conversion to any other date other than the 
original date of the sanction being the date of 
dismissal.” 
10 
I think we have traversed the fact that the final written 
warning had already run its course upon Mr Gama’s 
reinstatement. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say: 
“I cannot speculate on what the arbitrator would 
have likely or unlikely awarded considering the 
uncertain nature of litigation as referred to above 
as advised by Deneys Reitz.” 
Again your point, that there was [indistinct] 17.08 out but 
20 
nothing else. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then under the heading: 
“Role played by any member of cabinet.” 
You say: 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 211 of 231 
 
“I confirm that neither the settlement nor the terms 
on which the settlement was made were influenced 
by any member of cabinet at the time.  Minister 
Gigaba merely requested the board to review the 
fairness of the dismissal of Mr Gama.” 
We have traversed that already repeatedly. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then in relation to costs you say: 
“The board was at all material times supported by 
the Group General Manager Legal Services in the 
10 
finalisation of the settlement agreement.” 
That is Mr Mapoma, correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And at 19: 
“The 
board 
would 
have 
expected 
the 
General 
Manager Legal Services having been instrumental 
in the drafting of the agreement to have flagged any 
legal challenges associated with the payment of 
costs, if any.” 
And I have already questioned you about that. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And in fact put to you that Mr 
Mapoma said that he raised the very issue with you and I 
have put to you what he says was your instruction.  Is 
there anything else you would like to add then, Mr 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 212 of 231 
 
Mkwanazi? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No.  Advocate, no, nothing except that I 
did indicate that I did not instruct Mr Mapoma, in my 
interpretation to do something that is almost illegal in 
terms of what he claims, to pay Gama’s lawyers, the way 
they interpreted that agreement.  To me, that I did not 
instruct Mr Mapoma to do that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Mr Chairperson, we have 
no further questions for this witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Now, Mr Mkwanazi, were 
10 
you, as a board, concerned that if you did not settle the 
matter of Mr Gama’s unfair dismissal claim on the terms on 
which you settled it, something would happen that would 
not be in the interests of Transnet?  Is there something you 
were concerned would happen that would not be in the 
interest of Transnet? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I am not aware of something 
that could have happened.  No, I am not aware, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now if you refused to include a 
contribution of costs in the settlement agreement in 
20 
relation to the High Court matter. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What did you think was the worst thing 
that could happen to Transnet if you stood your ground and 
told Mr Gama and his lawyers we are not going to make 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 213 of 231 
 
any contribution to your costs in regard to the High Court 
application? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I do not think anything would 
have happened to Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you think Mr Gama would still have 
signed the settlement agreement or do you think he would 
have proceeded to go to the arbitration? 
MR MKWANAZI:    Chairman, I do not know if he would 
have signed at the time but – and would have proceeded to 
arbitration but based on the post events that we are 
10 
observing, had he – had Transnet refused to deal with 
certain things and then say had he gone through the 
Transnet bargaining council process, different outcomes 
could have been on the table, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But like what outcome do you think could 
have happened?  In other words, you know when litigants 
settle a matter that is standing in court or in arbitration, 
each party weighs up its risks and its prospects.  If I am 
the employer and I do not want the employee to be 
reinstated, I look at the prospects that I could lose and the 
20 
employee could be reinstated.  Okay? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I say well, we will give you an ex 
gratia payment or compensation or 12 months, equivalent 
to 12 months salary.  If you take that we call it quits.  
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 214 of 231 
 
Then, from the employer ’s side, I know that what I am 
getting is that the employee is not coming back because I 
think it is a bad thing for my company for the employee to 
be brought back, okay? 
 
Now if you are an employee, you want your job 
back, you push for that but if the employer resists you 
might end up saying okay, I can take money because you 
say you think if I insist and the employer refuses and we 
end up in the arbitration, I might get nothing.   Okay? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what is it, if there was anything, that 
the board of Eskom – you and the board of Transnet were 
fearing could possibly happen if you did not agree to 
contribute to Mr Gama’s High Court legal costs? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, maybe let me put the issues a 
little bit differently.  While Mr Gama was on suspension, 
etcetera, Mr Tau Morwe was Acting CEO and while Mr Tau 
Morwe was acting CEO, that business frankly was not 
doing very well either in terms of operations, etcetera.  If I 
recall at the time we almost had derailments every week at 
20 
the time.   
So then we somehow knew that we still want this 
executive back to come and fix some of the things that 
were not going well in that particular business unit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you feared that if you did not reach 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 215 of 231 
 
agreement with him you will not have him back and 
therefore would not have somebody to fix those problems 
at TFR? 
 MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, there would have been 
somebody else, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is how badly you wanted him 
back? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, the situation was not looking 
good in terms of operations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And so is that why then you were 
10 
prepared to contribute 75% of his legal costs in regard to 
the High Court?  Is that the reason?  Because it is an 
extraordinary thing to do that, what you and your board 
did. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, yes, it is extraordinary but the 
interpretation I am seeing now is not what was intended.  
So there is something not right with that implementation, 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what were these – what was this 
special expertise or something that you and your board 
20 
thought Mr Gama had which you thought that would add 
value to Transnet despite what we have been talking about 
in terms of what he had done and the type of CEO he 
seems to have been in terms of what he was found guilty 
of?   
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 216 of 231 
 
What is it that seemed so special that you did not 
think you could get if you advertised his position, if you did 
not take him back, you advertise his position and asked the 
public, people who qualify, to apply for his position? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, we could have gone that route 
of getting somebody new but here was this experienced 
individual particularly …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
You 
could 
not 
somebody 
more 
experienced? 
MR MKWANAZI:   ...many years in Transnet and he should 
10 
have got in running to try and fix the problems that we 
were observing as that new board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you could get somebody with even 
better skills, somebody who would make sure that they 
read documents before they signed them and did not put 
Transnet at great risk by sighing documents without 
reading them. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I agree with you there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now after you had reinstated Mr Gama, I 
understood you or the documents to suggest that the board 
20 
instructed Mr Brian Molefe, who was CEO then, Group 
CEO, to discipline various members, management members 
and staff who may have done something similar to what – 
well, let me not something similar and say who had 
deviated from procurement processes, is that correct? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 217 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there were many of these, is that 
correct?  [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR MKWANAZI:   There were many, Chairman, but do not 
forget as a board we could only focus on what you would 
call the Exco then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Not all the people involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but in terms of Exco there were 
some Exco members. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   There were two, if I recall, Chairman, 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One of them was it Mr Maharaj or not 
really? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes and the other one was Ms Moira 
Moses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Moses, Ms Moses? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ms Moira Moses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  That Mr Maharaj, is that the 
same one who had been asked by Mr Wells to make a 
20 
decision whether to charge Mr Gama or not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, yes, it is the same gentleman, 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now their – the irregularities or 
deviations for which they were to be charged, did they 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 218 of 231 
 
occur prior to the board’s decision to reinstate Mr Gama, 
condone his transgression, bring him back or did they 
happens after the board had reinstated Mr Gama? 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
Chairman, 
their 
transgressions 
happened between 2005 and 2010.  That was before the 
board reinstated Mr Gama.  They are old transgressions, 
Chairman, very, very old transgressions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And so in regard to other staff members 
who were not in Exco, the same was going to apply, those 
who had transgressions that had happened a number of 
10 
years before would also be judged. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman that is correct but my 
recollection is that one particular individual the CEO did 
deal with, I don’t know in what form, but his name is Mr 
Gary Peter and there were others that then the Board had 
expected Mr Brian Molefe to continue dealing with in terms 
of disciplinary processes.  I do not have feedback on the 
rest  Chairman, I would have to go back to some other 
notes to find out who the rest were and also I would have 
to go back and ask the organisation as to what did Molefe 
20 
do about this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, did he not report back at some stage 
while your board was there, while you were there, because 
you only left at the end of 2014, so this was 2011, so he 
must have reported back to you. 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 219 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman he did report to the Board on 
what I can call the two Exco members, then the Board then 
left it to him to deal with the rest, and now I don’t think as 
a Board we got a summary of what he had done with the 
rest, whatever the number might have been. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understand from what I have read that 
with regard to Mr Maharaj he resigned when this happened, 
is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct but then I don’t know the 
detail because Mr Maharaj was interacting with Mr Brian 
10 
Molefe.  I don’t know the dynamics. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Ms Moses do you know what she 
did, I think she also resigned, or did she not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   She also resigned but again I don’t have 
the detail of the dynamics between Mr Moira Moses and Mr 
Molefe at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now this is quite strange to me 
what you and your Board did, as I understand it insofar as 
you and your Board were concerned, or  may have been 
concerned that for a number of years there may have been 
20 
a lot of transgressions in terms of deviations by Exco 
members and other senior managers, and that you wanted 
to – and no action had been taken.  I would have expected 
that if you were feeling sympathy for Mr Gama you would 
then effectively grant condonation, or maybe I shouldn’t 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 220 of 231 
 
use the word condonation, so to speak or give everybody 
who had done that or that period and say we don’t know, it 
looks like there has been confusion, we don’t know what 
has been going on, but from now on, from a certain date 
here is a directive, from now on nobody can tell us they 
don’t know what the position.  
 
From now on if you deviate this will be the 
consequences and then you from then on anyone who 
commits these deviations can be dealt with, but it appears 
like with regard to Mr Gama you said there were deviations 
10 
nothing had been done, so he must come back, and then 
you gave him an ineffective warning and then you said 
others who had done deviations also during the same 
period you said Mr Molefe charged them. 
 
That seems a – it is like this was a dispensation for 
Mr Gama only, the rest they must face the wrath of the 
Board.     
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman I wouldn’t say the rest must 
face the wrath of the Board because we did issue a 
memorandum for the organisation at the time I could  have 
20 
signed it, talking about these condonations and irregular 
modifications of contracts and I did issue a memorandum 
putting a 
stop to that, and 
also I suspect in that 
memorandum I did indicate that any future condonations 
had to be approved by one individual, who is Brian Molefe, 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 221 of 231 
 
because there was confusion of too many people thinking 
that they had authority to condone.  Naturally I think the 
PPM, the Procurement Procedures Manual, might have 
allowed that and as well then Chairman that Board did deal 
with sort of condonations of big ticket items which would 
have been approved by  that Board before in terms of the 
authority that approved the initial contract.  I did mention 
earlier the VAE Contract, I did mention a few others, other 
appointments and yes I did mention a few, which then 
came back to the Board and the Board did condone those. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see when you and  your Board talk 
about 
how 
you 
reinstated 
Mr 
Gama 
you 
create 
the 
impression that you sought to uphold the principle of 
consistency in discipline, you say there were so many 
people how had done the same thing and had not been 
disciplined and Mr Gama was disciplined, it looks like he 
was singled out.  You then condone his transgressions but 
then instead of condoning the transgressions of others you 
say to Mr Brian Molefe go for them and one of those is Mr 
Maharaj who had brought charges against Mr Gama, that 
20 
seems very, very, very, strange, and he resigns.  Where is 
the consistency, you just said Mr Gama must get an 
ineffective final warning, why don’t you say to the others, 
to Mr Brian Molefe okay give a final written warning to 
everybody who in the past did the same thing.  Why don’t 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 222 of 231 
 
you say that, in that way then you treat them like Mr 
Gama? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman in a different way we are 
actually saying that to Mr Molefe, we were saying let all 
these condonements come to your office and you then 
decide on what steps to take post them being submitted to 
you and there was a lot that came in and I am not sure now 
of those, I think one of those would have been a repeater 
for instance where I know that  he might have got a letter 
of warning please don’t do this again.   
10 
 
Now it was up to Mr Molefe then to decide on the 
rest including Mr Maharaj, including Ms Moira Moses but 
yes we did elevate others to then say there must be 
consequences for people, they must not do it again 
etcetera, etcetera, but I do not recall actually instructing 
that people then should be fired.   I would always indicate 
let them submit all the condonations and take a view 
whether you want to condone, want to give a written 
warning, final written warning and that was the discretion 
that was Mr Molefe was given. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but if he fired anybody in that 
process that would not have been inconsistent with what 
you asked him to do, he could give a warning, he could 
fire, because you didn’t say to him discipline them but 
don’t fire them because we haven’t – we have reversed Mr 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 223 of 231 
 
Gama’s dismissal.  You left it to him what sanction he 
would give. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in regard to Mr Gama you have 
chosen that dismissal was not the right sanction. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman your observation is correct 
because the guidance that he got from the Board was not 
that specific but there was a board resolution which was 
done on how he should deal with the rest of these irregular 
procurements that were emerging. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you would consider I would assume 
that the perception among the management and staff of 
what they were hearing, the perception they got arising 
from the decision of the Board must have been terrible 
because particularly for Mr Maharaj who was charging Mr 
Gama.   Mr Gama the Board is saying Mr Gama you must 
come back, get full back pay, get all your benefits, this 
sanction recommended by the independent chairperson of 
the inquiry is no good, you deserve a final written warning 
but that final written warning mustn’t even start – mustn’t 
20 
be there when you return to work, it must have lapsed so 
he as all of this and then the next he hears that the same 
board has said to the Group CEO charge the others.   
 
It must have felt like look we must go, obviously Mr 
Gama is very influential with this Board, Mr Gama is the 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 224 of 231 
 
one who was criticising us publically for putting in charges 
against him, although he has conceded now that he was 
guilty and we were justified in bringing charges but we 
must be charged now, so he resigns and Ms Moses resigns. 
 
You 
would 
understand 
that 
perception 
if 
it 
happened? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I fully understand Chairman but there is 
this example of Mr Gary Peter who – I don’t recall now the 
detail but he also was party to some irregular contract but 
he was not dismissed, between I am not sure how they 
10 
handled it, but between Anoj Singh and Mr Brian Molefe 
they dealt with this through Gary Peter, but I am aware that 
he was not dismissed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay now the Board, you and your Board 
should not have reinstated Mr Gama, isn’t it?   No you 
have had the benefit of looking at the whole thing properly, 
do you not come to that conclusion. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman in hindsight I come to that 
conclusion because the three key matters that the process 
of Advocate Antrobus looked into and came to decisions 
20 
on.  The last one which was charge 4 it is serious 
misconduct, if that matter had been elevated properly to 
that Board I would have also indicated that a sanction of a 
dismissal must stay and again in hindsight even on the 
other 
two 
matters 
which 
at 
the 
time 
looked 
like 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 225 of 231 
 
procurement related they were not, they were actually 
misconduct and if that part of it had been discussed 
thoroughly by the Board I think that Board would have 
arrived at different decisions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Even if for some reason he was 
reinstated what would you say to the proposition that he 
should not have got, he should not have been given full 
back pay, he should be – if he was to be reinstated at all, 
he should not have been given full back pay as if  he was 
not guilty of anything, as if he was innocent, would you not 
10 
say that? 
MR MKWANAZI:    I concede Chairman yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, would you also not concede that 
you and your Board should never have undertaken to pay 
any of his high court legal costs, because litigation was 
done and he had lost, he should not have brought that 
application against the ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   I concede that too Chairman yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well would you also not concede 
that even with regard to his labour matter, the unfair 
20 
dismissal 
matter, 
you 
should 
not 
have 
offered 
or 
undertaken to pay any of his costs because he himself 
accepted he was to blame also, he shared a certain amount 
of blame, he accepted that he was guilty of three acts of 
misconduct, would you not consider that? 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 226 of 231 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   I would consider that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   Now would you not concede also 
that at some stage you should have gone back to Mr Todd 
and said proceed with the steps to recover Transnet Legal 
costs from Mr Gama? 
MR MKWANAZI:   ...[Indistinct – record distorted] yes we 
should have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You should have gone back to him. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja, because he had made a convincing 
submission. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now of course what this means is a 
lot of taxpayers’ money went to Mr Gama 
and 
his 
attorneys, firstly in terms of the back pay for nine months, 
secondly in terms of the legal costs for the high court and 
the legal costs for the unfair dismissal matter, which at 
least now you are able to say should not have been 
offered.   Now would there be anything unfair I know that 
there are other members of the Board who might still come 
and testify and make representations but you are – you 
have given your evidence and you have dealt with issues 
20 
and where you have dealt with it you have a certain 
realisation in regard to certain issues that you might not 
have heard before, wouldn’t you – would you say there 
would be anything unfair if at the end the Commission were 
to recommend to the President that steps should be taken 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 227 of 231 
 
to recover from members of the Board who supported the 
settlement this money that  where you and I agree should 
not have been offered to Mr Gama by the Board. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman I would not be opposed to that 
and because there are certain levels of recover and also of 
certain ...[indistinct – distorted] direct involvement on 
some of these issues because it goes even further 
Chairman to the point of saying what about all these 
monies which was paid to Langa’s Attorneys in some funny 
way but ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, because – and of course there 
is the question of I mean Mr Myburgh said that in terms of 
back pay for Mr Gama and legal costs I think he said we 
are looking at about R17million Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is correct yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, does that include Eversheds part of 
the legal costs? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So back pay and legal costs we talk 
about R17million but of course there is the R426 000 which 
20 
was not included there which Mr Todd was trying to recover 
from Mr Gama so you know all of those amounts you know 
taxpayers say you know that money could be help in 
somewhere, it should not have gone to Mr Gama in the 
light of all of this evidence, but I think you have made your 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 228 of 231 
 
point that you understand the situation.  Is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay anything arising Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No Mr Chairperson, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you very much Mr 
Mkwanazi for making yourself ...[intervenes] yes? 
MR MKHWANAZI:   Is it possible that you could perhaps 
indulge me just to capture the main points, I think Mr 
Mkwanazi was presenting to the Commission for the past 
two days. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would like an opportunity to say 
something? 
MR MKHWANAZI:    Yes Chair I would really like that, if I 
may Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright, okay do that  yes. 
MR MKHWANAZI:   Alright Chair it is really true today I 
have learnt that it is very true that there is a lot of clarity 
in hindsight as we have seen based on the evidence that 
Mkwanazi has given and sometimes you run the risk of 
having 
that 
hindsight 
to 
you 
know 
make 
you 
know 
20 
determinations that will give an impression that you know 
things were normal at the time of ...[indistinct – recording 
distorted] but I would just like to touch on a few things 
Chair that the role of the Board in terms of King 4 is to 
provide a direction to the organisation and what happened 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 229 of 231 
 
here is that in 2010 the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Mkhwanazi to the extent that 
what you may be wishing to say might fall under argument, 
we would make arrangements for arguments at the right 
stage, so if that is what you had in mind we can leave it for 
when you present argument. 
MR MKHWANAZI:  Okay Chair, that’s fine, I can deal with 
that, thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright fine.  Thank you very much 
to you and Mr Mkwanazi the witness and to you Mr 
10 
Mkhwanazi the lawyer and for all the cooperation and thank 
you Mr Mkwanazi for availing yourself to come and testify 
before the Commission and provide explanations to the 
best of your ability on some of the decisions taken by your 
Board, we appreciate it and if a need arises, I think there 
probably will be another occasion when you need to come 
back on other aspects but thank you very much we 
appreciate the fact that you have made yourself available. 
Thank you very much. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are going to adjourn, it is nearly 
twenty five past four, we will adjourn and then tomorrow we 
will continue with evidence relating to Transnet, who is our 
witness tomorrow Mr Myburgh? 
MR MYBURGH:  Well Mr Chairperson on the assumption 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 230 of 231 
 
that we cannot reach an agreement on the 33’s in relation 
to Mr Mhlanka then we will start our evidence in respect of 
the Manganese Expansion Project with the first witness 
being Mr Henk Bester. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. That’s fine but if you reach 
agreement then it would be Mr Mhlanka. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes we will fit him in, we will juggle 
around but it will be one or the other. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that’s fine.  We will then 
adjourn now and tomorrow we start at ten as usual. 
10 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 20 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
19 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 286 
 
Page 231 of 231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
