 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 269 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 186 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 3 of 186 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 22 SEPTEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius, good 
morning everybody.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In 30 seconds Chair I will be ready 
if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Mokhesi the oath you took 
yesterday continues to apply today okay?  Alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Good morning Mr Mokhesi. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Morning Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We were at Bundle FS14 at page 
129 and we were about to deal with the conclusion of the 
so called cession agreements; material supply cession 
agreements.  But I wanted to deal with something before 
that; that is not dealt with to any extent at least in your 
affidavit. 
 
In paragraph 92.1  
CHAIRPERSON:  In paragraph 19? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  92.1 at page 127 of FS14.  You 
20 
describe 
there 
the 
difference 
between 
the 
building 
contracts and the material supply agreements and you 
explained how the material supply agreements amended or 
altered the building contract agreements and the regime 
that was set up in terms of those agreements.  Do you 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 4 of 186 
 
recall that evidence? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was the answer Mr Mokhesi? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes it was yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  And then if one goes – in 
describing those agreements your affidavit does say that it 
is not clear how the parties who entered into the material 
supply agreements were identified.  In other words, who 
selected the suppliers?  Do you recall that evidence? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Was any investigation done under 
your watch at least to find out how the individual suppliers 
were appointed? 
MR MOKHESI:  No.  It – you know the – no, no it was not – 
it was not done to that extent but it was very clear that 
they were selected arbitrarily because some of – some of 
the material suppliers are [00:04:01] suppliers like your 
Corobrik and so on. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  That I know but others [00:04:15] there is 
one that I can – I think I can recall that is also in the 
affidavit where we made an example who was a supplier for 
material, I think it is Care Construction if I am not 
mistaken.  He was a supplier of material.  He was also the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 5 of 186 
 
contractor and also sub-contracted in certain instances.  
So there were those type of – and obviously that type of 
arrangement 
will 
ordinarily 
become 
very 
expensive 
particularly to contractor – to the contractors that are 
linked to it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes because the contractor had to 
produce the building ultimately or the buildings at a set 
price. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes the contractor had to – the price was 
fixed indeed yes correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And we know that subject to 
individual investigations and we know that there are some 
examples produced by those investigations that show that 
there were suppliers who did not act properly or honestly 
and suppliers who should not have been appointed in the 
first place. Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Correct.  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now one would have thought that in 
those circumstances one would have asked the question, 
who appointed the suppliers and why were these particular 
20 
suppliers appointed?  I am not talking about the genuine 
suppliers like Corobrik and others. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja.  Look it – it – you know we – let me say 
for my side I never got a clear answer as to who supplied, 
who selected in the first instance and what was the criteria 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 6 of 186 
 
that was used?  Hence the – the investigation and 
ultimately the disciplinary process that went on.  Because 
the people involved did not come out very clear as to how 
– how these – how the contractors were appointed; who 
selected; how they were selected and so on?  So that 
information never came up. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So that problem arose both in 
respect of the contractors and in respect of the suppliers. 
MR MOKHESI:  The suppliers. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say that full information 
10 
could not be obtained in regard to the manner in which 
they were selected. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I would like to put to you some 
passages in that regard from the disciplinary inquiry.  If 
you would just reach behind you please and get Bundle 
FS12.  That is the statement bundle.  This is the affidavit 
of Mr Mokoena.  Remind us please Mr Mokoena was who? 
MR MOKHESI:  Mr Mokoena was a HOD – Head of a 
Department. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At the – during 2010/2011? 
MR MOKHESI:  That is correct.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct.  If you would go to page 
344 please of that bundle.   
MR MOKHESI:  344? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 7 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.   
MR MOKHESI:  Yes I am on 344. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In his affidavit which we will deal 
with hopefully later today Mr Mokoena is dealing with the 
implementation of the prepayment plan at page 344.  You 
have that at the top of page 344. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  Yes I have that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He says: 
“It should be born in mind that at that stage 
we were reaching the end of the year and 
10 
the contractors were due to close on 15 
December for the annual builder ’s holiday.” 
 
He then says in paragraph 20 that is Mr Mokoena. 
“Shortly after my meeting with the MEC”   
The MEC at that stage you have told us was Mr 
Zwane, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 20 Mr Mokoena says: 
“Shortly after the - my meeting with the 
MEC he approached me with a list of about 
20 
106 contractors and instructed me to use – 
appoint these contractors.” 
 
Did 
you 
establish 
that 
fact 
in 
your 
own 
investigations? 
MR MOKHESI:  Well No I did not because as you can see 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 8 of 186 
 
this was a meeting between two people if it happened and 
that information if indeed it was so I would have got it from 
the officials at that time but they were not forthcoming in 
terms of [intervention] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  You say they were not 
forthcoming? 
MR MOKHESI:  They were not forthcoming in terms of how 
– how one – how the contractors were – we know that it 
was cancelled – the bid was cancelled but the criteria that 
was used in terms of appointing those contractors that 
10 
were there they were not forthcoming. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mokhesi you say the officials were not 
forthcoming.  But you knew who was the HOD at the time 
did you not ask the HOD even if he was out of the 
department? 
MR MOKHESI:  Well he never told me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No he never – he would not tell you if 
you did not ask him.  Did you ask him? 
MR MOKHESI:  No I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why not?  He was the HOD.  He was in 
20 
charge of the department.  You wanted to know how these 
contractors got appointed.  Why did you not ask him?  He 
was the most obvious person to ask.  Why did you not write 
to him?  Why did you not phone him and say; Mr Mokoena 
you were the HOD when this mess happened who selected 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 9 of 186 
 
these people?  Why did you ask – limit your enquiries to 
junior officials when you knew who was the HOD at the 
time? 
MR MOKHESI:  I – I – my questions was – my question 
were to the people who were at that time involved who 
were the officials; the senior officials in the department 
were part of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you mean you took a conscious 
decision not to ask the person who was HOD. 
MR MOKHESI:  No I did not say – I could not say I took a 
10 
conscious decision – I did not ask. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKHESI:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  I did not take a conscious decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but why did you not ask the most 
obvious person namely the HOD at the time?  Because the 
fact that he might not have been in the department did not 
mean you could not ask him.  It did not mean you could not 
phone him.  It did not mean you could not direct a letter to 
20 
him to say I want to know who made this decision because 
you were the HOD at what was the basis for the decision. 
MR MOKHESI:  Chairperson the fact is I did not ask. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but I want to know why you did not 
ask because it seems so obvious to me that a new HOD 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 10 of 186 
 
who finds this kind of mess would ask the previous HOD.   
MR MOKHESI:  I did not ask Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:    And you do not why you did not ask? 
MR MOKHESI:  It did not come to my mind at that 
particular time to ask because I simply took the – their 
reports – in other words that was there that says this is 
what has happened.  We have appointed these contractors 
and so on.  So that is basically where he ended and then I 
started to say okay let me – maybe let us institute an 
investigation to find out exactly what happened. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we will see when all the evidence is 
in Mr Mokhesi but I am just surprised.  One gets the 
impression that whatever investigation was being done 
within the department was not done with the vigour that 
one would have expected when so much of taxpayers’ 
money seems to have been lost.   
MR MOKHESI:  I was – I was not the only person who was 
doing the investigations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
MR MOKHESI:  I was also – I was not the only person who 
20 
was doing the investigation at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  At that time – at that time as well an 
investigation had already been proclaimed.  When I went 
into the department the investigation – the President has 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 11 of 186 
 
already proclaimed on that.  The investigation was on-
going anyway.  Now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you could ask Mr Mokhesi if you 
could ask the junior officials why could you not ask the 
HOD of the time?  The fact that there was an on-going 
investigation did not prevent you from asking the junior 
officials why did it prevent you from asking the HOD. 
MR MOKHESI:  You see Chairperson when I – when I 
arrived there was already an issue or a complaint – a letter 
directed to me.  On the first day when I reported for work 
10 
the SIU had – there was already a letter on my table that 
says officials are not cooperating including the Head of the 
Department.  Earlier there had been a letter that was 
written to the HOD then to say please this information and 
it was followed up by myself.  So if there is a point where 
they say the SIU themselves who had already started that 
there was no cooperation.  They have written to the HOD 
already and they were not getting joy.  Surely that was 
sufficient reason for me enough to be able to say alright let 
me just try and source that information.  Whatever 
20 
information that SIU has requested that – at that particular 
time.  And this is exactly what I did.  Because already 
before the SIU has indicated that they had written to the 
HOD and around requests of this type of information and 
so on.  It was not forthcoming 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 12 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it only the previous HOD that the 
SIU said was not cooperating or did it also say the same 
thing about some of the officials? 
MR MOKHESI:  They say – they indicated that they had 
written to the HOD and the officials concerned.  So that 
letter is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you know – you see you are saying to 
me that letter from the SIU gave you justification for not 
asked the previous HOD.  But from what you are saying the 
SIU letter also said the officials were also not cooperating.  
10 
But you did ask the officials but you did not ask the HOD.  
Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Apologies Chair.  We will deal with 
further allegations in this regard in the affidavits and in the 
disciplinary inquiry in due course.  But what is striking Mr 
Mokhesi that there was a disciplinary inquiry conducted 
against certain officials – the more junior officials.  The 
transcript of that inquiry runs into almost 3000 pages of 
finely packed detail.  There was a thorough investigation in 
regard to certain people but it seems in regard to others 
20 
there was no investigation at all.  And the inference that is 
drawn is that certain people were being protected. 
MR MOKHESI:  Mr Pretorius I do not know about that.  I do 
not know whether there are certain people who have been 
– who were protected.  I simply – because you know the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 13 of 186 
 
result of investigation and so on and – you know the 
disciplinary hearing was as – was the outcome of the 
investigation to say the specific person and then that is 
what they pointed out and that is why there were those 
people who were – who were charged because I cannot at 
where I am say that there were certain people who were 
protected 
because 
mostly 
I 
was 
never 
– 
you 
know 
deliberately 
so 
to 
– 
just 
to 
keep 
away 
from 
the 
investigation as it was done both by – by the SIU as well 
as the one that we – was instituted against officials.  
10 
Because some of the four officials were only got away with 
a warning.  Not everybody was dismissed in process.  
There are officials who were also charged but they 
received a warning.  There were others who had – who 
were dismissed on the recommendations.  So to say that 
there were – there were others who were protected 
honestly I am not in a position. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well we will come to that in more 
details in due course.  Perhaps not in your evidence but in 
the evidence of other witnesses as well.  But does it not 
20 
strike you as strange that we have a disciplinary record of 
nearly 3000 pages of questions arising out of a very 
thorough and very detailed investigation on the one hand 
and then in respect of certain persons questions simply 
just are not asked.  Is that not a strange situation? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 14 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Which persons? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well we know that no questions 
were asked about how the 106 contractors were appointed 
by you certainly.  You see the point I am making is that 
certain people were picked for discipline that is another 
question how those names were arrived at but I am not 
going there for the moment.  Certain people were charged 
pursuant and an inquiry was held pursuant to a hugely 
detailed set of investigations.  Investigations that took 
3000 pages to lay out and traverse in the disciplinary 
10 
inquiry and there were disciplinary inquiries findings.  And 
I will deal with those findings in due course because one of 
the defences raised by those persons was we were 
following orders and implementing decisions by others.  
Notwithstanding that defence they were still found guilty 
and they lost their jobs and some still are unemployed.  
That is on the one hand.  On the other hand, in relation to 
who made the decision and how the decision was made to 
select the contractors once the procurement processes had 
been abandoned it appears that no investigation has been 
20 
done at least that you know of.   
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I want to add this Mr Mokhesi.  I go 
back to an issue I raised with you yesterday.  Well at some 
stage I was saying I got the impression you were – or you 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 15 of 186 
 
did not want to be categorical on certain issues but you 
were not in a position to tell me yesterday as to how many 
houses or – had been built by the end of the financial 
year?  How many houses had been built by the time – by 
October 2010?  And yet we are in 2020.  If you were really 
interested to establish certain important facts about this, I 
do not understand why knowing that you were going to 
come and give evidence about this you would not know 
that.  To say the department paid so much money but there 
were only 100 houses that had built to completion; ex 
10 
number of houses were only built up to the wall; so many it 
was only foundation and when you look at all of that it 
could not have cost more than this.  Therefore, so much 
money was just wasted.  I could not understand why you 
could not have that information at hand. 
MR MOKHESI:  Chair with due respect this thing happened 
and when I come here I do not know the questions that I 
am going to – you prepare for some but others you do not.  
But I think yesterday what you have instructed me to do – 
requested me was to – to get that information which I said 
20 
we would – it should be in the – we should be in the 
position to get it by going back into the system.  That I 
said we will do.  Now I am under oath here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   You know I cannot – I cannot – the most 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 16 of 186 
 
dangerous thing is for me to speculate and find out that it 
is not actually correct.  I am under oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no I accept that you should not 
say anything you are not sure about and you still should 
not say you are sure.  But what I am saying is when you 
come give to evidence here as Head of the Department 
about this project it seems to me that you do not need to 
be told what questions you are going to be asked to know 
that you should be able to say: You know Chairperson this 
whole project this is how many housing units they – had 
10 
been built by end of the financial year.  This is how far 
they had gone by that time.  Maybe the one about October 
might be shaky for me to expect you to know that but at 
least by the end of the financial year you – I would expect 
you to be able to say – to check that at least you know.  
But you undertook to give us that information. 
MR MOKHESI:  I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR MOKHESI:  I did to say I will try and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  And get that information.  It is probably 
also available on the annual reports and so on and so on 
you know the number of annual reports that are – that are 
there.  As well as the [00:25:16] plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 17 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Because I think what I would also indicate 
is that because of that – because of that particular issue it 
became very difficult to catch up in terms of the targets or 
the fiscal targets that had been set for five years.  
Because there was no new money so this issue of non-
achievement in that particular year obviously will affect 
that.  So I had said you know with those particular – 
because it is about numbers; how many and so on and so 
on and I said I will – I undertook that I will provide that 
information. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay alright.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Mr Mokhesi for that.  You 
will understand that part of the submissions that the legal 
team will make at the conclusion of this evidence will deal 
with the issue of accountability.  In other words, who was 
called to account for what happened not under your watch 
but before you came to the Department.  And so it is only 
fair that these questions be put to you even though you 
were not there at the time you were there at the time that 
accountability or non-accountability occurred.  I am sorry. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  You know I said I have – you know earlier 
yesterday 
I 
said 
you 
account 
for 
those 
things 
that 
happened even before your time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  And so that I appreciate [00:26:49]. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 18 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you did say that Mr Mokhesi to be 
fair to you and it is in accordance with my expectation that 
a new Accounting Officer would not just look at what 
happened when he or she came in but would look at – at 
what had happened before because the duty to rectify 
whatever mess happened before would be on him or her.  
So when you say you account even for that it is in line with 
what I would expect namely you come in; you want to see 
what is the state of the department.  You see what has 
happened; you see what has gone wrong; you devise a way 
10 
of rectifying those things even though they happened 
before your time.  So I am just saying to be fair to you; you 
made that point yesterday and it is in line with my 
expectation of what a new Accounting Officer would do.  
Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you know for example from your 
own 
investigations 
Mr 
Mokhesi 
who 
devised 
the 
prepayment plan?  Whose idea was it in the first place? 
MR MOKHESI:  Well when I look at the – at the memos or 
you know documents that were there – there was a memo 
20 
from you know particularly one that was signed by three 
officials Mr Tsoametsi I think. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry by? 
MR MOKHESI:  Mr Tsoametsi the one that we discussed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Tsoametsi yes. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 19 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes because it looks like it originated from 
that particular … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  From Mr Tsoametsi. 
MR MOKHESI:  From Mr – from – ja it – from that memo 
which was signed and approved. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes but he wrote that memo on 
instructions.  You know that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Well I do not know on whose instructions. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Because that is question 
do you know where the plan originated?  Who was 
10 
responsible for the devising of the plan?  Do you know 
that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Well I think – I think the commission has 
called all the people to come and account here. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, no I am… 
MR MOKHESI:  To say on whose instructions – what I know 
is that it originated from that memo and if Mr Tsoametsi 
says it was – he was instructed then he must say by who 
because… [speaking over one another]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, no all I am asking you – I am 
20 
sorry I interrupted you. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did you finish? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  All I am asking Mr Mokhesi is do 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 20 of 186 
 
you know from your own investigations who devised the 
plan.  That is all I am asking. 
MR MOKHESI:  You say Mr Pretorius it was devised – it 
was – Mr Tsoametsi got instructions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mokhesi the question is a simple one.  
Do you have knowledge as to who ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   I do not have knowledge of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not have knowledge. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not have any knowledge of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Well, let us go back to page 
344 of FS12 at paragraph 20.   
MR MOKHESI:   Is it the same? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is Mr Mokoena’s file. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Affidavit.  And towards the end of 
2010, is the period we are dealing with here, he talks of the 
meeting with the MEC and he says that: 
20 
“The MEC approached with a list of about 106 
contractors and instructed me to use/appoint these 
contractors.” 
 
He continues: 
“Although I cannot recall all the names on the list, I 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 21 of 186 
 
remember noticing that the first six contractors on 
the list were not contractors ever used by HS 
(Human Settlements) before.   
I also remember asking the MEC why we were 
allocating so many units/houses to contractors we 
do not even know.  The MEC was however adamant 
that these were the contractors we should use.” 
 
He continues: 
“In relation to the six contractors above, I recall the 
names of three contractors, Aleatory(?), Quinoa(?) 
10 
Cockatoo(?) Developers and Relato(?) Properties.  
It should be noted that these contractors were very 
close to Mr Zwane.  I say this as Mr Zwane 
personally called me to expedite the processing of 
their payments.” 
 
Was any investigation done under your watch in relation 
to allegations such as those? 
MR MOKHESI:   Chairperson... oh, sorry.  Ja, Chairperson, 
you know if you... if somebody asks you to do something that 
is irregular or unlawful or whatever the case might be and... 
20 
because this is the discussion, this is what an allegation 
between the accounting officer then to say this is how I was 
instructed and so on.  The first thing that you do is you write 
that down.  Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The first thing that you do? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 22 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   You write.  You write.  You write to the 
authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   To say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Who is giving instruction. 
MR MOKHESI:   To say, who gave the instruction?  If you 
indeed would believe that this instruction is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Unlawful. 
MR MOKHESI:   Is unlawful.  The first thing that you do, you 
write to the authority.  To that authority that instructed you to 
10 
say, this and that, because of the following reason and X Y.  
You either do that under objection or whatever the case 
might be or you simply do not read.   
 
Now I cannot answer for Mr Mokoena on the allegations 
and also around the investigation.  What am I going to 
achieve?  Because there is... you know, it is a discussion 
between two people who says, he said that and so on.   
 
The fact of the matter is, you know, this is what he says.  
What did he do?  And I am informed that he is going to come 
and testify here around that.  Then he will have to answer 
20 
that.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, and he will be asked these 
questions. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You can rest assured Mr Mokhesi. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 23 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the question I am asking is also 
not a difficult one.  Did you under your watch conduct any 
investigations into allegations of this nature? 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not know what that... this actually 
happened.  Remember, you are placing this affidavit now in 
front of me.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Mokhesi, I did not hear that. 
MR MOKHESI:   I am saying, I do not know whether this 
10 
happened.  This affidavit is being placed in front of me now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have never seen it before? 
MR MOKHESI:   I have never seen it before. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MOKHESI:   It has not been given to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now the point I am putting to you is 
there is evidence that we know of and that the investigators 
have unearthed in relation to the question as to who devised 
the plan and who selected the contractors that became part 
20 
of the plan. 
 
Now all I am asking you, were those investigations or a 
similar investigation ever conducted by yourself or by other 
people under your construction when you were Head HOD?  
That is all I am asking.   
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 24 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   About this? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   About two questions.  Who selected 
the contractors that were to get contracts from the panel of 
contractors or the database of contractors?  And how was 
the plan devised and by whom was the prepayment plan 
devised?  Those two questions. 
MR MOKHESI:   The source of the prepaid plan comes from 
the name mos.  The name that was written by ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you ever ask ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry.  I am sorry.  Mr 
10 
Mokhesi, just take it easy.  Listen to the questions carefully 
and answer them to the best of your ability.   
 
The question is simply whether you or somebody else 
under your instructions ever conducted investigations into 
those two questions?   
 
So it is either you say:  Yes, I did conduct an 
investigation.  Or:  Yes, but I did not conduct it myself.  I 
instructed somebody to conduct it into those questions.   
 
Or:  No, there were no such investigations that I 
conducted or I instructed anybody to conduct.  That is what 
20 
he is, Mr Pretorius is asking. 
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Were there... let us break the question 
into two.  Did you yourself conduct any investigations into 
the two questions he has raised? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 25 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Personally, no.  I asked... asked... if I 
asked... I asked that the whole thing must be investigated.  I 
was not specific to say investigate that and investigate that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So you asked ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   I asked that the entire ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Investigation. 
MR MOKHESI:   ...prepayments or material ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Be investigated. 
MR MOKHESI:   ...be investigated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, I was not specific ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Not specific ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   The terms of reference were there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And you know and to say, investigate this 
and come up with actually what happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, that might assist us Mr 
Mokhesi.  Is there a document which contains those terms of 
reference for the investigation under your watch? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I will try and get that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  That will help us. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In any event, if we go back to page 
344 of FS12 at the bottom of the page, the last paragraph if I 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 26 of 186 
 
can just place it on record again and then go over the page. 
“In relation to the six contractors mentioned above 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Last paragraph, yes? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I am sorry to do this.  It is 
important that it be placed in context because I want to put a 
long passage to you.  Mr Mokoena says in paragraph 20 on 
page 344 of FS12: 
Although I cannot recall all the names on the list, I 
remember noticing that the first six contractors on 
10 
the list were not contractors ever used by HS 
before.  I also remember asking the MEC why we 
were allocating so many units/houses to contractors 
we do not even know.  The MEC was however 
adamant that these were the contractors we should 
use.  
In relation to the six contractors mentioned above, it 
should be noted that these contractors were very 
close to Mr Zwane.  I say this as Mr Zwane 
personally called me to expedite the processing of 
20 
their payments.” 
 
Now we will ask Mr Mokoena about how he came to that 
conclusion.  You can rest assured that we will do that.  But 
he goes on and he says: 
“I found this to be highly irregular as an MEC in the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 27 of 186 
 
normal course of business does not have any 
involvement in payments to contractors.” 
 
And I suppose the same would apply to the appointment 
of contractors.  Would you agree with that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Paragraph 21 on page 345 
reads: 
“As a result of the instructions given by the MEC, we 
as the department also did not go out on tender in 
order to appoint the contractors.  The contractors 
10 
were appointed as per the instruction of the MEC.” 
 
So it seems Mr Mokhesi that the HOD at the time was of 
the view that the contractors were appointed on the 
instruction of the MEC.  It seems now that that was known to 
the HOD at the time.  Do you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, paragraph 21? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay.  Yes, I see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He then goes on to say that 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    
“Within Human Settlements, he used to work on a 
system whereby we graded our contractors in terms 
of competencies/performance.  Therefore, we made 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 28 of 186 
 
sure that those contractors who always delivered on 
their contracts were the ones that received the big 
allocations for the construction of houses.   
This did not happen in relation to the appointment of 
these unknown contractors.   
To provide some context, it just does not make 
sense to award a contract to a contractor to 
construct 600 RDP houses if that contractor has 
never constructed an RDP house in his life.   
The latter is however exactly what we ended up 
10 
doing based on the instruction of the MEC.  We, for 
instance, 
allocated 
between 
500 
and 
600 
units/houses 
to 
the 
first 
six 
contractors 
that 
appeared on the MEC’s list.   
At 
that 
stage, 
the 
units/RDP 
houses 
were 
constructed 
for 
an 
amount 
of 
about 
R 55 000,00...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius, I think there is something 
wrong maybe with the... well, the aircon is not making any 
noise but you cannot hear me sometimes when I call you.  
20 
So maybe I will have to speak louder. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I heard that... 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  But... no, I wanted to say, you 
were saying that Mr Mokoena was of the view that the MEC 
had instructed.  But I wanted to say, it does not say that he 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 29 of 186 
 
was of the view.  He clearly says he was... they were 
instructed by the MEC. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I just wanted to correct that.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That Mr Mokoena ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is correct.  Perhaps I was not 
clear ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ....what I mean.  He is saying now 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...in the course of the investigations 
that that happened in the past. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So his... that is his current 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...view of what happened in the past.  
Thank you, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi, the simple point I want 
to make is, this is precisely the sort of issue that one would 
have expected to be the subject of thorough investigation 
after the event.  Would you agree with that? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 30 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja.  Remember Chair, I think in the 
disciplinary hearing Mr Mokoena was called and I do not 
know if he was called also to come and explain.   
 
Now if... you know, you... I can only discipline people 
who are reporting to  me.  I cannot discipline people who I... 
you know, I cannot discipline my boss so to speak. 
 
Now if people are saying I was instructed to do X, Y, Z 
and there is no written communication that will also even 
suggest that indeed that did happen, it becomes very 
difficult. 
10 
 
Because you are talking about the meeting of two people 
somewhere.  He says that and I said that and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you at least... should you not at least 
take steps to establish whether... what version you are told 
by the person who is alleged to have given the instructions 
and then see whether in your mind you have any doubt which 
version is true?  Should you not at least take that step?   
 
Because if both version and you happen to think that you 
believe the version of the one says he was instructed, you 
may want to take certain steps to enforce accountability in 
20 
ways that do not involve disciplinary action but there may be 
other ways. 
MR MOKHESI:   But is there no duty on him as well to do the 
same?  What I am trying to say Chair is, in this particular 
instances because there are documents, signatories, memos 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 31 of 186 
 
and so on, then you are able to take a particular action or 
what is...  
 
You know, there are investigations that are conducted.  
There are memos, there are minutes and that.  Then on a 
balance of probabilities and then you say:  Yes, indeed this 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you do know Mr Mokhesi that it is 
going to be very rare for you... for somebody to reduce to 
writing and unlawful instruction that he knows to be unlawful.  
So you will find a document.  But does that mean that 
10 
nothing will ever be done because that person...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, let me talk about me personally. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  Let us not talk at the same 
time. 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will give you a chance.  So does that 
mean that as long as the instructions are verbal, nothing 
ever will be done because there is nothing in writing?  
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
But 
you 
must 
also 
live 
with 
the 
consequences. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR MOKHESI:   You must also live with the consequences if 
you do not write. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who are you looking at now when you say 
he must live with the consequences? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 32 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I am saying if something is wrong and 
somebody instructing to do something wrong, the duty is 
upon you to say:  I am not going to do it.  Or you raise 
issues and you advise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, no.  That is... I think that is 
understood. 
MR MOKHESI:   If he goes... if he continues and you know 
there is an insistence as it is alleged here, then you have a 
record ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But are you saying, as long as you do not 
10 
have a record then nothing ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   It becomes extremely difficult as well.  By 
the same way as... it becomes very extremely difficult as 
well.  You know Chairperson, also with those that report to 
me as well.  I have instances where they also will write to 
me because I encourage them because I also want to know 
why certain...  
 
If somebody along the line disagrees with a particular 
issue, you do not simply say:  I do not recommend.  Tell me 
why so that I can also have the reason to approve or not to 
20 
approve.   
 
Or instances, I can overrule that because I do not 
believe that they were correct but it will be on record.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The point that is 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 33 of 186 
 
at issue at the moment Mr Mokhesi is a broader point than 
simply your own knowledge and your investigation.   
 
Although 
your 
own 
knowledge 
and 
your 
own 
investigation is part of the point that I am attempting to deal 
with you.   
 
At paragraph 93 of your own affidavit at page 127 of 
FS14 ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Where?  Page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   FS14, paragraph 127.  That is your... 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, this one? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is on the left-hand side.  This is 
your affidavit. 
MR MOKHESI:   You said paragraph, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   93 on page 127. 
MR MOKHESI:   127.  Oh, 93.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You said second colon: 
“The 
department 
did 
not 
follow 
any 
proper 
procurement process before concluding the material 
supply 
agreement. 
 
It 
simply 
concluded 
the 
agreement.  It is unclear how it identified the 
20 
material supplied with whom it contracted.” 
 
So you yourself in your affidavit at the time of this 
review 
identified 
the 
need 
to 
establish 
the 
really 
straightforward fact.  It may not have a straightforward 
answer and indeed it does not.  That you had a procurement 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 34 of 186 
 
process that was abandoned.   
 
You had a second supplier agreement process here 
there was no procurement process at all and out of nowhere 
or out of the database, people are just appointed in the 
discretion of obviously those persons who appointed it.   
 
So it would be important to know how those material 
suppliers were identified.  You agree with that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja but let us look at when this affidavit was 
made.  This was made on 26t h and the people are no longer 
there.  So in the process of... because where we started, 
10 
advocate.  We started with how... ja, we started with... is it 
action proceedings?  To try and get documents because that 
was the key.   
 
Remember this, there were investigations.  SIU was 
doing something.  Was also busy investigating.  But key to 
us in terms of priority was that let us follow, let us follow 
where the money is.   
 
We started with that action proceeding and indeed got a 
judgment before we went... because this was guys by a 
different advocate to say:  No, no.  I do not think this is the 
20 
way that we should do because let us get... let us do 
something.  Let us do this review application so that the 
onus falls on the other side.   
 
In other words, those who receive money must tell us 
this is what we did with the money.  If you do not... if you 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 35 of 186 
 
cannot account for what you have done with it, then it must 
come back.  So this was actually the second part to say let 
us review that particular decision. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I understand the point you make Mr 
Mokhesi about lapse of time but our investigators have 
managed to obtain at least some information in 2019 and 
2020.  Not as if the information has just disappeared.  The 
people are there.  They can be asked questions.   
MR MOKHESI:   No, but the people who were part or who 
were on this particular, are not there.  I mean, this.... I am 
10 
not... I do not know whether you say they are there in terms 
of the department or elsewhere. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see Mr Mokhesi, for me the later 
it is when you deposed to this affidavit, the more time it 
means you have had to get to the bottom of everything and 
to get all the answers you wanted.  If this thing happened in 
2011 by, and you wanted answers maybe of the financial 
year at the end of March 2011. 
MR MOKHESI:   2011, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you wanted answers by end of April, 
somebody could say this time is just too short for us to do a 
proper investigations.   
 
So by end of April, you are not going to have answers to 
all the questions because more time is needed in order to 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 36 of 186 
 
give you answers to all the questions.  It will give you 
answers to some of the questions but not all the questions.   
 
But when you are talking nine years later, seven years 
later, if you had used the time available, you wanted to use 
the time to get answers.  You have had all the time in the 
world.   
 
You do not have to investigate in 2016 when you are 
deposing to this affidavit.  You should have investigated a 
number of years earlier and got all the answers to the 
questions that naturally arose in this matter.  You understand 
10 
my thinking? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I do not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not understand that? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I do not understand what it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let me try and explain it again.  If 
something happens today and you want to investigate it and 
you say you want answers by the end of today, that time 
might be too limited to allow a thorough investigation.   
20 
 
If something happens today and you say you want 
answers by the end of the week, it may be that that time is 
too short for you to get all the answers because the 
investigators would need more time, okay?   
 
But if you say, this thing that happened today must be 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 37 of 186 
 
investigated and you want answers in seven months’ time or 
at the end of the year, I am saying, the investigators would 
have had more time to investigate.   
 
And therefore, chances that they will give you more 
answers to your questions or even all the answers to your 
questions are greater than when the time is shorter.   
MR MOKHESI:   Chair, I think what is not appreciated here in 
this...  One could have simple said:  Okay, the SIU is doing 
the investigation.  There is a proclamation by the president.   
 
And you know and leave everything to the SIU to do the 
10 
investigation.  But we... it seems that, you know, that even 
that which we have done is not being appreciated.   
 
You know, you, obviously, you are parting(?) holes in 
terms of what we have done whereas I think, in my view, we 
have done sufficient.  We have seen our means.   
 
We might not have done certain things perhaps to say 
this is what we should have done, this is so and so on.  I 
think earlier on, Advocate Pretorius, you know, when he 
started this thing, he said there was an overdose of the 
investigation which is an indication of the number of 
20 
investigations that were done, right.   
 
And to the best of my ability, I think I have done my part 
in terms of where we are right now with two decisions in our 
favour.   
 
And we are now in the position also to try and save the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 38 of 186 
 
money and get people to account.  Now the SIU also had 
played 
a 
specific 
role 
and 
indeed 
we 
were 
sharing 
information in the process, you know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  You ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   The only thing that I perhaps had sight of is 
actually the report.  I saw the report now.  It is... it was 
attached.  But as I have indicated, the report is not my 
report.  It is the president’s report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no.  It is important that you put 
your side as to what you did and if you believe you did it to 
10 
the best of your ability.  That is important.  This is an inquiry.  
We are probing certain things.   
 
And the fact that you might not be able to answer a 
certain thing, it is one thing.  But we are probing to say, was 
this done?  If it was not done, why was it not done?   
 
So you just answer to the best of your ability and where 
you believe that you were not required to do more than what 
you did, then feel free to say so.   
 
But we are probing to see what was done, what was 
done, why was it not done.  And you just answer.  If you 
20 
know why it was not done, you say this is the reason why it 
was not done.   
 
And if it was done, you say it was done.  If it was done 
by somebody else and not you, you believe somebody else 
did it, then this is who did it. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 39 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja but it seems as if I am being taking on, 
on things that perhaps did not come from my mind on that 
particular time, whereas you know, we are here and we are 
able to discuss this affidavit.  You see the affidavit that was 
done at that particular time.  We are here and able to 
discuss that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, Mr Mokhesi.  You are the current 
head of the department or you followed after Mr Mokoena.  Is 
that right? 
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  You followed after Mr Mokoena.  By 
reason of that, one would expect certain things.  One would 
expect you to do certain things when you are arrived at the 
department and found what you found, okay.  And that has 
got to be looked into.   
 
Yours is to just answer to the best of your ability.  There 
is no... it is not like as if you say something and we are not 
happy with it, we are just going to accept it.  That is not 
going to happen.   
 
It will be probed and it is the right way that it should be 
20 
probed.  But from your side, feel free at all times to put your 
side of the story so that when I look at all the facts, I will 
have your side of the story. 
MR MOKHESI:   Noted Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Pretorius. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 40 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And although some of the questions 
Mr Mokhesi might seem probing and might seem to call you 
personally to account in your official capacity, really what 
the Commission is looking for is your assistance to help the 
Commission answer certain questions that it has.   
 
And the question that we are probing at the moment 
is the question to accountability.  We know what happened to 
a degree, not in all the detail that we would wish but to a 
degree we know what happened.  And we are now exploring 
if he was called to account for it.  We know that a number 
10 
of employees who participated in the execution of the 
scheme were dismissed despite the fact that they said they 
were following orders, right?  And I will deal with that in 
due course. 
 
There are two questions that do not seem to have 
been answered let alone resulted in any accountability of 
note to date.  If we are wrong about that then that is where 
we would like your assistance. 
 
The first question is we know that there was no 
procurement process either in respect of the contractors 
20 
who built houses and in respect of the parties who supplied 
materials but we know they were selected nevertheless and 
the question is, who selected them and on what basis and 
we would like your assistance in that regard.  If there was 
no investigation done into that question, we would also like 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 41 of 186 
 
to know that and perhaps even ask why not. 
 
The second question is, this recovery plan or this 
prepayment plan, and in some context, they are treated as 
different plans, who devised that plan?  Who is ultimately 
responsible and should be accountable for devising the 
plan and deciding on the plan in the first place, the very 
plan which employees then participated in to implement 
and got dismissed for?  What has happened to that?  Was 
that question investigated? 
 
So those are the sorts of things we are looking at 
10 
now and if I could take you to the findings of the 
disciplinary enquiry because you refer to the disciplinary 
enquiry at bundle FS19, page 655. 
MR MOKHESI:   Page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 655 of FS19.  This is an 
extract …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   I am not there.  655 you say? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes are you in FS19? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, FS19, 655. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, this document is the reasons 
20 
or the findings of the disciplinary enquiry into several 
employees who were charged and dismissed as a result.  
You know of those circumstances, is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you know who decided who 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 42 of 186 
 
should be charged? 
MR MOKHESI:   Normally what happens is that there will 
be first a preliminary investigation, which was done, you 
know, I will call it high level investigation, which was done 
by open notice so say actually can you look at this?  What 
happened here? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry, just repeat your 
answer? 
MR MOKHESI:   I am saying normally what will happen is 
that you will look at - you know, there will be an 
10 
investigation, I will call it a preliminary to say we have 
particular – and what actually happened here in this.  
Based on that particular recommendation and then you will 
say – obviously you write to those people and tell us why 
you should not be - you know, the normal part of the 
leading to suspension because then you have to look into 
their areas as well, them being the senior managers and in 
charge of that and then once these people have been 
removed or suspended then the investigation will continue 
in those particular areas and ultimately their role will then 
20 
be determined.  Their role in terms of all these particular 
irregular expenditure as well will then be determined as to 
whether they should be charged or there is no – or simply 
warned, be a warning and so on.  And that process was 
done. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 43 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the general – that is – your 
answer relates to the general but Mr Pretorius’ question is 
specific. 
MR MOKHESI:   I am responding to what happened in this.  
It 
was 
through 
a 
recommendation 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
preliminary investigations as to who are the people who 
will have been involved in this particular advance payments 
or material supply, etcetera.  So there would have been 
specific people who are in charge in those particular areas 
and those are the people that we will look at. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if you answer that you do not know in 
terms of names or who made the decision as to who should 
be charged but there is a way of identifying who would 
have made a decision, who would have made that decision. 
MR MOKHESI:   No, no, I do not say …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because the question was who made the 
decision as to who [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR MOKHESI:   I made the decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Based on the preliminary investigation 
20 
about possible people who were being involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  So the answer, Mr 
Pretorius is he made the decision. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, do you recall your answer 
earlier when I asked you, Mr Mokhesi, about who devised 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 44 of 186 
 
the plan, right?  We know that employees were disciplined 
and dismissed for participating in the execution of the 
plan.  You know that, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in fact – I will give you the 
detail in a moment from the finding, it is in the reference 
that we have just called up there, but I want to deal with 
one issue.  When I asked you who devised the plan you 
said as far as you knew it was Mr Tsoametsi who devised 
the plan and he did so in a memorandum and we have got 
10 
the memorandum and we can show that to you in due 
course but what is interesting is that persons were 
dismissed for participating in the execution of the plan but 
to your knowledge, Mr Tsoametsi devised the plan and he 
was not even charged.  Can you explain that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Mr Tsoametsi was not in the department 
any longer.  He was a witness, he was a witness of – in a 
disciplinary hearing.  So yes, he was not charged. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But surely it should have been a 
matter of course that if he moves to another department he 
20 
is charged nevertheless.  You cannot just escape liability 
for misconduct just by moving from one department to 
another, surely? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, he was not charged, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, I am just asking why?  Why 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 45 of 186 
 
not? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I do not have the reason except that 
it was per recommendations.   You know, people were 
subjected to that, to say who must be charged and so on 
and based on that recommendation from the investigations, 
the preliminary investigation and that is the action that we 
took or that is the action that they took. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, would you accept at least the 
following proposition?  Those persons responsible for 
devising and ordering the implementation of a fraudulent 
10 
plan with all the characteristics that we have canvassed in 
evidence should have been held to account. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying that at the time that you 
made the decision to go along with the recommendation to 
have certain people charged, at the time you made that 
decision, Mr – is it Tsoametsi, was no longer in the 
department? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, he was no longer in the department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was he in another department within the 
20 
same provincial government? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, he was in Agriculture, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR MOKHESI:   Was in Agriculture. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was in Agriculture? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 46 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ever bring to the attention of the 
HOD in Agriculture or the MEC, did you ever bring to their 
attention the fact that here was somebody who had devised 
a plan that had caused the department to lose a lot of 
money that they may need to look into because you could 
not discipline him anymore?  Did you bring that to the 
attention of his superiors in Agriculture to say the man that 
you have there used to be here where we – I would have 
charged him, I would have caused him to be charged with 
10 
misconduct because we are charging people who were 
under him, junior ones, but he has gone, he is with you but 
I want you to be aware of this so that he can be held to 
account? 
MR MOKHESI:   Chair, some of these things as to who do 
you 
charge 
and 
so 
on 
would 
ordinarily 
be 
on 
recommendation.  You know, I just want to say that 
particular individual.  Also taking into consideration that Mr 
Tsoametsi was a witness in this – in the disciplinary 
enquiry. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, when you made the decision, he 
was not a witness yet, is it not?  He became a witness 
when the hearing started when you made the decision 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   The recommendations and – ja, the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 47 of 186 
 
recommendations from the investigations was that these 
people are going to be the witnesses and here are the 
participants and so on and this is how it went about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But when any recommendation is made 
to you, including the recommendations that you are talking 
about, you are not meant to just rubber stamp, take them 
as they are and make your decision on the basis of them, 
you are supposed to satisfy yourself that they are sound, is 
it not? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, which is what I did. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now the information placed before 
you it seems should have indicated that he was the person 
who devised the plan.  Surely if that is what the 
information before you showed, surely you should have 
been concerned to say how are we going to charge only 
the people who carried out the instruction and not charge 
the person behind the whole plan?  Did you ask yourself 
that question?  In other words, it might be a wrong term 
but the kingpin.  How do we charge these – the real person 
who came up with this plan is the person who should be 
20 
charged.  How do we not charge him but charge the others 
who carried out his plan?  Did you ask yourself that 
question? 
MR MOKHESI:   Chair, maybe on hindsight that should 
have been but he was in the department any longer but I 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 48 of 186 
 
accept that perhaps maybe on hindsight, I - you know, one 
should have taken it further than what was placed before 
me because you will hope at sometimes when – because 
this disciplinary process took a very long time, I think it 
took about two, three years to conclude it to say as and 
when things are going that some of the other things will 
come up, you know?  That is what we were hoping because 
this was a very complex matter, it was not a very easy 
matter to deal with and it still is a very complex matter, in 
my view. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So would you accept that you ought to 
have brought his role in the scheme or in this plan to the 
attention of his then superiors namely in the Department of 
Agriculture because it seems to me that a concern that you 
ought to have had would be if this person could do this in 
my department, he could do that in another government 
department.  They should at least know and see if they 
want to continue to employ a person who has played this 
role 
in 
this 
department 
which 
belongs 
to 
the 
same 
provincial 
government, 
it 
is 
not 
another 
provincial 
20 
government, it is the same provincial government. 
MR MOKHESI:   I accept that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that.  Okay, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would this be a convenient time? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us take the tea adjournment, we 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 49 of 186 
 
will resume at half past eleven.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mokhesi, 
just for the record our information is that Mr Tsoametsi and 
Ms Dlamini the CFO of Human Settlements moved to 
Agriculture and had moved by the time the disciplinary 
enquiry took place, is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And of course, we know that the 
MEC, Mr Zwane, also moved from Human Settlements to 
Agriculture at the same time. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And the activities that took 
place in the Department of Agriculture have also been the 
subject of this Commission’s investigations and evidence 
but we do not expect you to comment on that.  Mr 
Tsoametsi 
evidence, 
however, 
before 
the 
disciplinary 
enquiry is of some interest.  If you would look please at 
20 
FS13, bundle FS13 at page 531. 
MR MOKHESI:   131? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I am corrected, I am referring 
you to the transcript of Mr Tsoametsi’s interview with the 
investigators. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 50 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 531. 
MR MOKHESI:   531.  Yes, I am on 531. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now his evidence was that he 
participated in the selection of contractors and also that he 
had through a trust an interest in one of the contractors 
which interest he did not see as a conflict of interest but 
that is not for you to account for at the moment.  If one 
looks 
at 
page 
531 
at 
line 
12, 
Mr 
Tsoametsi 
says 
…[intervenes] 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   You say line 12, 531, FS13? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you will see Mr Tsoametsi, it 
is actually line 11. 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not even have 11, it is 10 and 20. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you on the black numbers? 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, okay.  It is 10 – actually for me, it is 
10, 531 black numbers is actually 10. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Now I want to draw your 
attention to the next line which is line 11.  It is not marked 
but it is just the line after line 10.  Mr Tsoametsi says: 
20 
“Now afterward this thing had happened, three 
things happened, I think it is December of January, 
that period.   
2010, it actually would have been 2011. 
Yes, where I now moved to Agriculture.” 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 51 of 186 
 
And then he says: 
“To get to move to Agriculture.  Five of my 
colleagues get to be fired.  That is now the 2010 
onwards information.  The HOD Gift Mokoena gets 
to be in the municipality, I think Mangaung, where 
to now – now those colleagues of mine that gets to 
be fired, a disciplinary hearing gets to be called.  
All what I have said here is what I have said in that 
meeting to say there was a letter coming from the 
National Minister, the meeting of all us was called 
10 
to do a plan.  All of us had the responsibility and my 
responsibility was to produce those document (sic) 
and this is what had happened.  So that is what had 
transpired.” 
It is not very clear from what he said but from what we 
know he is saying that he, together with others, were 
visited with the responsibility of devising the plan and 
implementing the plan, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then Mr Lambrechts, the 
20 
investigator, says: 
“Why were they fired?” 
Mr Tsoametsi: 
“We were told that they were fired because of the 
solution in that disciplinary hearing.” 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 52 of 186 
 
That is obviously the prepayment scheme, right? 
“The fired because of that solution?” 
Mr Tsoametsi: 
Yes, of me.” 
Mr Lambrechts: 
“But you were never charged, that is the belief.” 
And Mr Tsoametsi says: 
“That is it now – that is what I am – I am asked in 
that and I hope it is recorded.” 
He said. 
10 
“I said I am coming here in this disciplinary hearing 
and I am asking myself why my colleagues are 
being charged and I am not party to that charge, I 
am not being charged.  I had asked that.  Even I 
think they can say because I do not know, I was not 
a witness for the department neither was I a witness 
for them.  I was just there to give what had 
happened to that and I said that to them.” 
So two points arise, Mr Mokhesi.  Firstly, that the 
information regarding Mr Tsoametsi’s involvement was 
20 
available at the time of the disciplinary enquiry and the 
second is that even he was puzzled as to why he was not 
charged.  Do you have any comment? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I do not have any comment. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Let us look at the findings.  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 53 of 186 
 
Well, let me just put it to – do you know of the principle in 
labour law of selective dismissal, that it is unfair to select 
certain people who are guilty of the same conduct for 
dismissal and not to discipline others?  That is unfair.  Do 
you know …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you might confuse him, Mr 
Pretorius, by referring to labour law.  Maybe you should 
just ask – put the proposition whether it is fair to charge 
some and not others if they have all done the same thing. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, perhaps I should not have 
10 
put a label to it because that is a specialist endeavour. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But it just seems in the first place 
unfair to charge those who were down the line in the 
pecking order, as it were, in executing the plan and not 
charging the person who devised the plan, on your version.  
That seems unfair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He wants you to comment if you are able 
to comment on that proposition. 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, okay.  I note that, Mr Pretorius. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You do not want to comment on the 
fairness of that.  Even Mr Tsoametsi commented on that. 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, he was talking to other people – I 
note that, thank you very much.  I note, you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you not regard it as unfair if two 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 54 of 186 
 
people have done the same thing to charge one and not 
the other? 
MR MOKHESI:   I would. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would? 
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But there is another point I think 
that is more – perhaps more relevant for present purposes 
and 
that 
is 
instead 
of 
being 
held 
accountable, 
Mr 
10 
Tsoametsi moves department and appears somehow to be 
protected against discipline.  What do you say to that? 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You do not know? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I do not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let us look at the findings of 
that disciplinary enquiry where Mr Tsoametsi actually 
testified and so this evidence was available obviously 
when this testimony was given.  At page 655 of FS19, I am 
going to ask you to change bundles please to bundle FS19.   
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 655. 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, 655, yes.  I am on 655. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You recall evidence relating to the 
war room? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 55 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   The war room? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, the war room. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You recall that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The war room was in fact not so 
much a room as a series of meetings that took place to 
devise and implement the prepayment plan.  Do you recall 
that? 
MR MOKHESI:   I recall that. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Please, if you would speak 
up, Mr Tsoametsi. 
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry, I am not Mr Tsoametsi. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry, not Mr Tsoametsi.  My 
apologies, Mr Mokhesi.  Mr Tsoametsi and Ms Dlamini both 
testified at the disciplinary enquiry.  Now we know that Ms 
Dlamini was the Chief Financial Officer of the Department 
of Human Settlements in 2010, 2011.  She moved to 
Agriculture with Mr Tsoametsi under the leadership of the 
MEC, Mr Zwane.  Both of them testified in relation to the 
20 
activities in the war room.  Now the employees were 
dismissed for amongst other things their participation in 
the deliberations at the war room.  You know that. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I know that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 86 Mr Tsoametsi says – 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 56 of 186 
 
or not Mr Tsoametsi  at this stage, this is the evidence 
summarised by Adv van Graan, the Chair of the disciplinary 
enquiry and he is referring to the evidence of Mr Tsoametsi 
and Ms Dlamini.  He says in paragraph 86: 
“As stated above, the MEC and the HOD created the 
war room.  Five of the employees…” 
And they are then named. 
“…participated in the functions of the war room.  So 
the first fact we have is this war room which is 
specifically there to implement the plan, for which 
10 
the employees are dismissed, was created by the 
MEC and the HOD.” 
That is Mr Mokoena and Mr Zwane respectively.  Paragraph 
87: 
“Mr Tsoametsi testified that the purpose of the war 
room was to create an intervention plan which had 
to be submitted to the Minister.” 
We have dealt with that in your evidence.  Importantly the 
next sentence: 
“The parties…” 
20 
That is the department on the one hand and that would 
have been under your watch and the employees charged on 
the other hand. 
“…have agreed that the employees…” 
That is the employees charged. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 57 of 186 
 
“…have not participated in the decision to make 
advance payments to material suppliers.” 
So the persons charged, it was common cause, had not 
participated in the decision to create and implement the 
plan.  All they were involved in was, amongst other things, 
the discussions in the war room for which they were fired.  
Paragraph 88: 
“Ms Dlamini, the former CFO of Department of 
Human Settlements, however testified that the war 
room, which was established after the formulation 
10 
of the recovery plan, was to monitor the recovery 
plan.” 
Paragraph 89: 
“Mr Tsoametsi testified about the task of the war 
room.  The war room meetings were usually chaired 
by 
the 
MEC. 
 
He 
specifically 
mentioned 
the 
presence of Mr Ndenzi(?) at the war room where the 
implementation of the new systems was dealt with.  
Then Tsoametsi says after the MEC would make 
allocations, 
appointment 
letters 
of 
contractors 
20 
would 
go 
out, 
contracts 
would 
be 
signed, 
amendments were done.” 
And then he refers to the cessions and the tripartite 
agreements.  So what is apparent from the disciplinary 
proceedings is that the decisions at the highest level were 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 58 of 186 
 
made by the MEC and Mr Tsoametsi, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   I see there is also a mention of Mr 
Mokoena as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And of course Mr Mokoena, yes.  
We will speak to him later today, hopefully but neither – it 
seems as far as our investigations have gone, neither Mr 
Zwane – of course could not be disciplined by you, he was 
an MEC, but nevertheless - Mr Tsoametsi or Mr Mokoena 
were held to account in any way.  Is that not strange? 
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply] 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have not answered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is giving you a chance to comment 
on the proposition [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR MOKHESI:   To say is it …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say it is. 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I appreciate and understand the 
concern of Mr Pretorius to say -, you know, I appreciate 
and understand, so [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is strange too strong a conclusion 
to draw? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, did you also find it strange or do 
you not find it strange? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me ask this question.  At some stage 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 59 of 186 
 
did it appear to you that the then MEC Mr Zwane might not 
– might have played a role in this whole project that was 
not proper, not acceptable or did that – is that something 
that did not appear to you to be the case? 
MR MOKHESI:   Chairperson, you know, there is a 
reporting all the time for all of us HODs to MECs around, 
you know?  They have the specific role that they play in a 
department which is clearly defined by the law and account 
officer also have.  Now with all this particular things that 
had been said there, if indeed it did happen, I am not 
10 
saying that it did, if indeed it did happen, one will conclude 
that there was an overstep by the MEC, if indeed this did 
happen.  So, you know, that is my response to that.  That if 
indeed this happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But with all the information that you 
were getting as the time went on from the time you came to 
the department, did you not get at some stage – did you 
not reach the conclusion that maybe this was something – 
his role should be reported to the Premier? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I have my MEC, remember? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   I would have my MEC who would also 
know about this particular – because this – you know, the 
disciplinary processes of the senior managers because by 
law the appointment of the SMS, as we refer to, you know, 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 60 of 186 
 
it rests with the executive authority in the MEC.  The MEC 
will certainly be knowing about what is going – I mean, my 
MEC basically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is your answer that you did not consider 
that it was your role to bring to the attention of the Premier 
the role that MEC Zwane appears to have played in this 
whole thing for him to decide what to do with the 
information? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, it certainly is not my role to inform the 
- you know, to inform the Premier, my role is to have this 
10 
information and also discuss it with the executive authority 
who is the MEC because I do not get into instances where I 
- you know, I discuss directly issues with the Premier when 
I have my executive to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Because that is a potential for conflict. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So you would have to discuss with 
your MEC? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then it would be up to him whether 
20 
he took whatever information to the Premier. 
MR MOKHESI:   Whatever information there is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but did you discuss with your MEC 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 61 of 186 
 
the role that MEC Zwane seems to have played? 
MR MOKHESI:   She will have the reports that are, you 
know, around what has happened.  Even at a point of 
suspending, particularly if you are talking about senior 
managers.  It has got to be in consultation – I do not know 
whether it is consultation after consultation but I think you 
understand what I am trying to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   Basically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   She will know.  Probably not know if it is 
lower than the senior managers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   The director upwards, she will know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Is your answer that you did not 
discuss these matters, MEC Zwane’s role with your MEC as 
such but there were reports …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   There were reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That had been placed before her which, 
if she read, she would have known what role MEC Zwane 
20 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, the reports were there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In relation to the role played by the 
MEC, Mr Zwane, Mr Mokhesi, there will be evidence – not 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 62 of 186 
 
your evidence – that in fact he directed the creation and 
implementation of the plan, he participated directly.  Are 
you able to confirm that? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I am not able to confirm that.  I do not 
know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us get back please to complete 
that series of agreements.  You will recall there was the 
first agreement with the contractors.  You have described 
that to the Chair.  The second was the material supply 
agreement, the so-called tripartite agreement.  You have 
10 
described that.  And then you went to some lengths in the 
affidavit in the review application to describe the material 
supply cession agreements.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we going back to his affidavit now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I am going to deal in 
summary with that in order to avoid …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Must I keep this other file that you were 
dealing with just now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or we can come back later? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will come – the disciplinary 
record, FS19, we do not need that anymore for the present 
at least. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  At some stage, Mr Pretorius, you 
were referring to the findings made by the Chairperson of 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 63 of 186 
 
the disciplinary enquiry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you get to them or did I interrupt you 
and you ended up not getting to them?  The last paragraph 
I referred to was paragraph 89 on page 656 of FS19. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think you were – I got the 
impression you wanted to refer to a finding that might have 
led to Mr Tsoametsi, but I may have misread what you had 
in mind.  As long as you have covered what you wanted to 
cover, it is fine. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, no, the passage that I was 
referring to was the passage testified to by Mr Tsoametsi 
that the MEC made allocation and there will be further 
evidence but that is to follow, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we are back to Mr Mokhesi’s affidavit 
at what page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  We are at page 98 of the 
bundle.  That is bundle FS14, paragraph 98, I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, paragraph 98. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Not page, I apologise, paragraph 
98 on page 129 of FS14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was wondering how we could go back 
so – to almost right at the beginning. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 64 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, we are going to go pretty fast 
now, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MOKHESI:   129? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 129.  There you – same 
paragraph 
98, 
the 
next 
piece 
of 
the 
puzzle 
is 
the 
conclusion 
of 
approximately 
167 
purported 
deeds 
of 
cession term Material Supply Cession Agreements by the 
contractors and material suppliers and agreed to by the 
defendant.  Now it is possible just for the record to 
10 
summarise that by referring to the judgment of the court in 
that application at FS14, page 603 and all I am going to do 
is to ask you if you agree with that finding.  It does appear 
to be consistent with your affidavit but it will save us a lot 
of time. 
MR MOKHESI:   603? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   603, paragraph 13 of the judgment 
of Pohl AJ.  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I am on 603. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have it? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, 603. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   603, paragraph 13. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The judge says: 
“Thirdly, there were the material supply cession 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 65 of 186 
 
agreements.  The cession agreements purport: 
1. To give effect to a cession by the contractor, as 
cedent, of its claim against the department, as 
debtor, to the material supplier.” 
We could just pause there and explain.  The contractor, the 
builder, has the duty to purchase and obtain the materials 
and it then has a claim against the department, the client… 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For the materials so supplied and 
what was happening here is that claim was being handed, 
10 
ceded to the supplier.  Whether this was necessary or no 
we will come to in a moment. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The second point made was that: 
“These agreements were intended to instruct the 
department to pay the claim to the material supplier 
on demand and not to the contractor.” 
Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because the claim had been now 
20 
passed to the supplier. 
“These cession agreements were then used as part 
of 
the 
documentation 
to 
create 
the 
farce 
of 
legitimacy so as to make the payments look regular 
and in accordance with the law.  As indicated 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 66 of 186 
 
before, it was all done to circumvent the provisions 
of DORA.” 
That is the Division of Revenue Act.  Now I can confidently 
say to you that these findings mirrored precisely the 
allegations in your founding affidavit.  Do you accept that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I accept that.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Of course the reason for that 
is that it was entirely unnecessary to have a cession 
agreement other than to give it to the people who were 
paying 
the 
accounts 
in 
the 
Department 
of 
Human 
10 
Settlements to give it a veneer of legitimacy because when 
the materials – when the arrangement was made with the 
suppliers there was no claim. 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To cede because the house had not 
been built yet. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that claim would only arise 
when the house had been built [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Or the milestones. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The milestones, yes, when the 
milestones had been achieved. 
MR MOKHESI:   Completed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And verified.  Only then would such 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 67 of 186 
 
a claim arise. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So it was entirely unnecessary to 
have these cession agreements other than to convince 
people to pay.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I could then go to – back to your 
affidavit please.  At paragraph 107. 
MR MOKHESI:   Page 107 or paragraph 107? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 132, my apologies again, of 
10 
FS14.  Paragraph 107.2, you referring to the documents 
attached to your affidavit and you say in paragraph 107.2 
in NM18 which is an example of a cession agreement:  
“The right ceded is supposedly the contractor ’s 
rights to payment from the department in respect of 
the provision of bridging finance and or securities 
and the supply of financial services. This is frankly 
bazaar, the contractors did not provide bridging 
finance or securities or financial services to the 
department 
and 
had 
no 
claim 
against 
the 
20 
department 
for 
payment 
of 
such 
services 
or 
product.”   
Now we know that the description of the cession agreement 
as being the cause of the cession is described in some of 
the cession agreements as being the provision of bridging 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 68 of 186 
 
finance and the supply of financial services.   
          It 
seems 
that 
at 
that 
stage 
there 
was 
no 
understanding of what was happening and in fact you 
described it as bazaar because those services simply were 
not provided.  Correct?        
MR MOKHESI:   Yes and it is not, we are not in that 
business of giving finance.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but it appears what happened 
and this is in the findings of the disciplinary enquiry at 
least in some cases is that money was being given to the 
10 
suppliers and the suppliers were then passing that money 
on to the contractors.  Did you know of that?  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes that was – yes I know, there are 
instances where it was an investigation it was discovered 
exactly what you are saying.  Now money was paid to - and 
cash was advanced to the contractor for whatever reason.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So this is a way of spending a lot 
of money quickly is simply to give it to the supplier and the 
supplier then hands some of that in cash to the contractors 
completely illegitimate I would assume.  
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But that happened – just for 
reference Chair those findings are in the disciplinary 
enquiry findings at FS19 page 664 and FS19 page 676 
perhaps for completeness we should go there. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 69 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well before you do that Mr Mokhesi I – it 
seems quite clear from your paragraph 107.2 that what was 
being done was to make misrepresentations of facts in 
order to create the impression that there was entitlement 
to payment of money or there was an obligation to pay 
money.   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, there was no cause for a claim.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And what these cessions where it seems 
intended to create the impression as if there was cause for 
payment.   
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When actually there was no cause.  
MR MOKHESI:   There was no cause for payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes Mr Pretorius.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us deal with the first reference 
in the findings of the disciplinary enquiry proceedings at 
FS19 page 664.  Now we know that NURCHA was one of 
the entities briefed to do investigations.  You said that to 
the Chair sorry page 662 of FS19.     
MR MOKHESI:   662, ja I am on page 662.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   662, this is a summary of the 
evidence of Mr Lees of NURCHA which was an entity that 
was engaged to try and remedy the problems that had 
arisen in 2010/2011 you have told the Chair about that.  
Correct?  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 70 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   One of the things that Mr Lees said 
appears 
in 
paragraph 
108 
on 
page 
664. 
 
Mr 
Lees 
established that some of the material…[intervene] 
MR MOKHESI:  Page?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have it? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, page?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   664 paragraph 108.  
MR MOKHESI:   108, yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The disciplinary findings.  Mr Lees 
10 
established that some of the material suppliers were 
advancing the contractor out of the cession payments they 
had received for the material from DHS.  So that appears 
to be conformation of what you have told the Chair that 
suppliers would get money from the department and hand 
some of those moneys onto the contractors, completely 
irregular is it not.  Correct?     
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So your own conclusion at 
paragraph 109 is that:  
20 
“The purpose of these cession agreements was to 
enable the department to spend its money by 
making payments to the material suppliers.” 
You say that…[intervene] 
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry Mr Pretorius are we back on the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 71 of 186 
 
same.     
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay I am sorry we taking it to 
fast, FS14 page 133.  
MR MOKHESI:   133, I am on page 133 yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 109:  
“The department then used the material supply 
cession agreements to make payments to material 
suppliers…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 109 you said page 109 I think 
you mean paragraph.   
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:   So it is the opposite. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 133 paragraph 109.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 109.  Do you have it?  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I have it.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So your conclusion there in the 
affidavit is the department then used the material supply 
cession 
agreements 
to 
make 
payments 
to 
material 
suppliers.  But what is interesting is the manner in which 
they were used and you describe that in paragraph 110 Mr 
20 
Mokhesi you said: 
“The material supply cession agreements form part 
of the paperwork submitted to the departments 
accounting staff together with an instruction to 
make payment.  As I explain below the departments 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 72 of 186 
 
instructions to make payment were accompanied by 
different documents from one case to another.  In 
some 
cases, 
the 
department 
scheme 
was 
completely crude and in other cases somewhat 
more sophisticated.  But the starting point in almost 
every 
case 
was 
the 
material 
supply 
cession 
agreement.” 
And then you say:  
“The material supply cession agreement made it 
look as if there was indeed an amount due and 
10 
payable by the department through the material 
supplier.”   
Do you stand by that observation?        
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the reason is obvious because 
the cession had not created a claim in the first place it was 
just 
used 
as 
a 
document 
to 
persuade 
the 
Finance 
Department to pay.     
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 114 you give an 
example of, some of the corrupt activities that took place 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 73 of 186 
 
under the guise of the scheme.  You say:  
“Moreover many of such invoices are obviously 
false.”   
Those are the invoices submitted as part of the claims. 
“They reflect for example that materials for roofs 
and walls had been delivered but at such an early 
stage of the project, so soon after the conclusion of 
the construction agreement that the contractor had 
no use yet for roofing and wall material and had not 
claimed or purported to claim for foundation related 
10 
work or materials.”   
Correct?       
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So before the contractor, the 
construction entity, the builder has even claimed for 
building the walls and the roofs you have already paid for 
the material which by that stage would not have been 
delivered.  Correct?   
MR 
MOKHESI: 
Oh 
the 
milestone 
which 
does 
not 
exist…[intervene] 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry.  
MR MOKHESI:   The milestone which does not exist.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Oh the milestone had not been 
there.  
MR MOKHESI:   Ja.  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 74 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you make the point of course 
that the reason for this is that roofing material is the most 
expensive of all the material and in that way a lot of money 
could have been spent and received.  
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, in terms of the emphasis has always 
been on it yes, the finishing part.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is where the high cost are.  
MR MOKHESI:   That is where the high cost is.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You make that point in paragraph 
115 on page 134.  In paragraph 118 and I am not going to 
10 
go into the detail of this, it I safe to say that the HSS the 
housing 
subsidy 
system 
has 
its 
own 
rules 
and 
regulations...[intervene]   
MR MOKHESI:   Correct.  
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
…in 
regard 
to 
payment 
on 
milestones.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that system was manipulated 
to put in there supply of material as a milestone when it 
should not have been.  Correct? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 132. 
CHAIRPERSON:   152? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   132, paragraph 132, page 143. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 75 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say:  
“That 
the 
department 
paid 
approximately 
R631million without having received anything in 
exchange.  There was no evidence when the 
department made its payments that it had received 
value for payments made in that houses had been 
built or part built to a satisfactory standard.”   
Was that your information on your research at the time?   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that was my information at the time to 
say we did not – at that time we did not receive value.   
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You did not receive value for 
money, you were satisfied with that statement at the time 
and now.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, because I think even for now given 
what we have gone through and what has – you know the 
claims that we have against the supplier of material I can 
only conclude that we did not receive full value.  Amounts 
might 
have 
changed 
because 
there 
has 
been 
some 
recovery I am aware by the SIU.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then in paragraph 135 you 
20 
make perhaps the most important point of this whole 
exercise.  You say:  
“Aside from the issue of misspending of money this 
scheme has had the result that many of the 
intended beneficiaries of the BNG Project remained 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 76 of 186 
 
homeless.  The department flighting of national 
governments 
requirements 
legislative 
provisions 
ordinary prudent commercial practice and alike has 
had 
a 
practical 
consequence 
for 
hundreds 
of 
families.  Their access to housing has been yet 
further delayed.” 
Perhaps an obvious point but worth emphasis nevertheless.  
You made that point?       
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then paragraph 143 on page 147 if 
10 
we could deal with that briefly please.   
“As I stated earlier.” 
 This is you speaking in the affidavit Mr Mokhesi:  
“The department has instituted action proceedings 
against the contractors and suppliers.  They are 
listed in the schedule attached as NM2”.   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The first question is was action 
taken against all the contractors and suppliers or only 
some?  
20 
MR MOKHESI:   To my personal knowledge it was taken 
against all the contractors and the suppliers.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:   To the best of my knowledge.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There may be other evidence or 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 77 of 186 
 
certainly a need for other investigation in that regard but 
we do know that many of them had gone into liquidation or 
been sequestrated.  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes there are instances like that, yes.  
There 
are 
instances 
like 
that 
there 
were 
some 
that…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got an estimate maybe in your 
mind of what percentage of the contractors and suppliers 
you are likely to get anything from?  I mean you said that 
the all or many of the contractors were put into a better 
10 
place even those who were disqualified.   
          Some who had never built one RDP house were 
given a job to do - build 600 houses.  In terms of their 
financial muscle what are the chances that you are going 
to recover anything substantial from most of them?    
MR MOKHESI:   I am afraid from what I have observed 
Chair 
we 
might 
not 
recover 
much 
in 
terms 
of 
my 
observation, particularly for those reasons that you have 
just indicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  
20 
MR MOKHESI:   So - but we will have to go on up to the 
end you know this process that has been where we have 
got by the courts the latest application that we have done 
will continue against all of those but clearly there are 
others who are liquidated that we know and I am informed 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 78 of 186 
 
that there has been also action that has been taken on 
other.  I think our legal can be in a position perhaps just to 
give the latest report as to how far the process has gone.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But people who have been sued to try 
and recover money from are they limited to the contractors 
and suppliers of material or have you included officials and 
politicians who may have caused this situation by their 
conduct.        
MR MOKHESI:   Well let me – to be fair also to the 
contractors they did not receive you know when money 
10 
went from the department out it went to material suppliers.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MR MOKHESI:   And this is…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It never got to the contractors.   
MR MOKHESI:   It might have got to the contractors as it 
has been demonstrated that there were some instances 
where they were given cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And in certain instances, the material was 
purportedly delivered but there was no proof in the form of 
20 
delivery notes, invoices etcetera, etcetera that indeed that 
material was delivered.   
          In certain instances, you have a delivery note but 
then the contractor is saying ja but this is not my signature 
that is there.   
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 79 of 186 
 
          In 
certain 
we 
have 
instances 
where 
we 
were 
informed that material was simply dumped on site where 
there were no people to receive it and so on.   
          Now and I think this is also what informed the 
second review of you know the review of the decision to 
say to those that receive money you must tell us what is it 
that you did.  If you cannot prove where the money went 
to, it must come back. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
But 
my 
question 
is 
whether 
the 
department has also sued people who may have been in 
10 
the department at the time.            
MR MOKHESI:   In the department?  
CHAIRPERSON:   In the department including politicians or 
their conduct that may have led to a lot of financial loss to 
the department?  
MR MOKHESI:   No.  
CHAIRPERSON:   That has not been done.  
MR MOKHESI:   No that has not happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, has it been raised as something that 
should be looked into within the department or its lawyers?  
20 
MR MOKHESI:   No, it has not been raised.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, yes Mr Pretorius.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Mokhesi at 
page 150 – perhaps before I ask you to deal with the 
matters that appear there.  There have been indications 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 80 of 186 
 
and I put it no higher than that for the present that have 
been drawn to our attention by the investigators that some 
of the suppliers and contractors who should have been 
sued were not sued.  Do you know anything about that? 
MR MOKHESI:   I have only said to the best of my 
knowledge all the contractors.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay.  
MR MOKHESI:   All the contractors or the material 
suppliers.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But that may well be the subject 
10 
for further investigations but at that stage I can put it no 
higher than that there are indications of that.  If you would 
go please to page 150.    
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, page 150? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   150.  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You deal there with the regulatory 
framework and perhaps it is necessary to summarise that 
very 
briefly 
before 
we 
finish. 
 You 
referred 
to 
the 
framework 
of 
legislation 
and 
regulations 
that 
were 
20 
breached 
in 
this 
construction 
and 
supply 
agreement 
project.   
          You start with the constitution we have dealt with 
that in evidence before you deal with that on that page.  
On page 151 you deal with the Treasury regulations and 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 81 of 186 
 
the provisions of the Treasury regulations that are relevant 
and were offended they are there for the record it is not 
necessary to go through them in detail unless you wish to 
Chair.  And then page 162:  
“The department of course has its own supply chain 
management policy as it was obliged to have.” 
Correct?         
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 162 and…[intervene]  
MR MOKHESI:   16? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Of course the provisions in the 
supply chain management policy were also offended.  
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry Mr Pretorius you said page 162?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, page 152 paragraph 162. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh I also thought you said page 162.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well I am…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is 152.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 152 paragraph 162, I could 
easily made another mistake.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
20 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC:   
My 
apologies 
Mr 
Mokhesi.  
Paragraph 
162 
you 
refer 
to 
the 
departments 
supply 
management policy the provisions of which were also 
offended.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:   Correct.  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 82 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you make the point in 
paragraph 163 that there are very good reasons for the 
implementation 
of 
a 
fair 
transparent 
equitable 
and 
competitive supply chain management policy.  You say in 
163.1:  
“It’s fair to do so.”   
Correct?   
“And 
it 
helps 
reduce 
the 
corrupt 
award 
of 
government business.”  
You make that point in 163.1.  Do you see that?  
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I see that, thank you.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It means to – in 163.2:  
“That 
if 
one 
complies 
with 
the 
procurement 
principles laid down in the law and the regulations 
in your own policy it gives people a fair opportunity 
to complete what might be lucrative government 
business.”   
And you make the point in paragraph in 163.3:  
“That the requirement of competiveness together 
with the more specific requirements of how bids 
20 
must be evaluated and awarded helps to ensure 
that government work is awarded to persons who 
are able to do the work.”   
Correct?    
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 83 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So if these procedures are not 
followed not only is it unfair on people who wish to bid for 
the work and do not get the opportunity to do so not only 
would it reduce corruption in the award of government 
business but importantly the process is there to ensure 
that people who are able to do the work get the work.  
Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you would not have the 
problem of people walking off site or less problem of 
10 
people walking off site not completing buildings which 
occurred in this case.  Correct?  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then the provisions of – well 
before we go their paragraph 166 you say:  
“Regarding 
the 
tripod 
type 
material 
supply 
agreements there is no indication at all as to how 
the department identified the material suppliers.  It 
is 
a 
gross 
example 
of 
the 
direct 
award 
of 
government 
business 
without 
the 
proper 
20 
procurement process made all the more flagrant by 
the fact that the department then paid substantial 
amounts of money to the suppliers and received 
nothing in exchange.”   
Now that is an observation you made in order to obtain the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 84 of 186 
 
order as you said but nevertheless, I take it that it is a 
correct observation as far as your concerned.     
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What it does indicate however it is 
the importance of conducting a thorough investigation as to 
how the material suppliers were identified.  It is an 
important investigation.  Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then on page 154 Mr Mokhesi you 
deal with the division of Revenue Act and the requirements 
10 
of that Act which we have canvassed.  In paragraph 
168.2.1 and paragraph 168.2.2 you deal with Section 15.2C 
and B of the division of Revenue Act.  Correct?    
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the reference that – perhaps I 
should have put to you yesterday appears at the top of 
page 155.  There I will read it to you the section of DORA 
reads:  
“In the case of an advanced payment 1, the 
receiving 
officer 
has 
certified 
to 
the 
National 
20 
Treasury that the transfer is not an attempt to 
artificially inflated spending estimates and that 
there are good reasons for the advance payment or 
transfer. 
 
And 
2, 
the 
National 
Treasury 
has 
approved the advanced payment or transfer.”   
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 85 of 186 
 
Now you said yesterday that as far as you are aware that 
approval could be presumed where a certain program had 
been followed.  Correct?      
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then in paragraph 170 to 171 
you talk about the conclusions of unauthorised expenditure 
as well as irregular expenditure in terms of the Public 
Finance Management Act.  We did not go into detail there 
but they are there for the record.  The conclusion you draw 
is in page 177.    
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Page 177? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   177. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page or paragraph? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph I am sorry Chair page 
157, paragraph 177.  You say there:  
“Although agreements of the nature of construction 
agreements and agreements governing the supply 
of building materials are in themselves perfectly 
lawful the agreements at issue in these proceedings 
were concluded for an illegal purpose.”   
20 
Of course, when you say that agreements might be 
irregular, we have dealt with the cession agreements and 
the problems relating to those.  Those are not regular on 
the face of it.  Correct?    
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 86 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But then in the second sentence of 
paragraph 177 you say:  
“They were concluded to facilitate a scheme to spend 
public funds in contravention of DORA and therefore 
then defraud the fiscus.” 
That is the final reference to fraud that you make, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you stand by that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Further detail is given and you deal 
10 
there with the delay which we are not concerned with this in 
this application.  But if I may take you to paragraph 187 on 
page 162.  The head of department during 2010/2011 was Mr 
Mokoena. 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He went to another provincial 
department.  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He did not go to a municipality? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, he went... sorry, sorry.  My apologies.  
20 
He went to the municipality. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And you were appointed as the 
HOD.  You began in January 2012. 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then interestingly.  In paragraph 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 87 of 186 
 
192 having referred to the investigations of the Special 
Investigate Unit, the SIU, you referred to a meeting that took 
place in April 2012.   
“The 
then 
Premier 
and 
the 
MEC 
for 
Human 
Settlements called a meeting with senior department 
officials 
to 
discuss 
the 
fact 
that 
contractors 
appointed to construct the BMG funded houses were 
simply not performing.” 
 
Now this in 2012 in April.   
“At that meeting it emerged that the contractors’ 
10 
failure to perform under their contracts was largely 
caused by the fact that materials had not been 
delivered to them by the suppliers.” 
 
But 
we 
know 
that 
R 600 million 
had 
been 
spent, 
approximately.  The amounts vary but over half a billion rand 
had been spent on suppliers and yet, in April 2012 there 
were still complaints of none-delivery, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in paragraph 193, you referred 
to the fact that, in fact, the suppliers simply had not 
20 
delivered material or at least a significant number of them 
had not delivered material.  That... was that the finding? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that was the finding. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then you talk in paragraph 194 
of the department appointing Open Waters as forensic 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 88 of 186 
 
auditors to investigate certain of the allegations made by the 
contractors.  Now was that the contractors complaining that 
supplies had been paid for but not delivered? 
MR MOKHESI:   Not delivered. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   That is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just to summarise too.  We have the 
Nurcha remedial activity.  They were appointed by the 
department, correct? 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
Yes, 
they 
were 
appointed 
by 
the 
10 
department. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  To do what? 
MR MOKHESI:   In the main to also to matter they are 
involved in project management and building and financing 
at the time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sure. 
MR MOKHESI:   Bridging financing.  That is their mandate.  
So they were assisting us, one, to reconcile and see what 
happened and also to provide a project management support 
to the department which was obviously lacking.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then you refer to the SIU report, the 
Special Investigative Unit support. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 89 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have referred to the appointment 
of Open Waters as forensic auditors, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you have referred to the 
disciplinary proceedings.  All those reports and records 
Chair are part of the bundles and are summarised in the 
investigative report which is before you.  Mr Mokhesi, you 
have assisted us with a great deal of information.  Is there 
anything else that you feel you need to add? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I think none.  Thank you, I have... it has 
10 
been two long days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got any understanding why the 
criminal trials have not taking place arising out of all the 
investigations that have been done?  I see the disciplinary... 
the rulings, judgments in the disciplinary hearings, which 
were quite extensive and comprehensive, were completed in 
2015.   
 
I think some people may have been judge at some stage, 
I am not sure.  Do you have any understanding and simply 
being the head of the department, you would have wanted to 
20 
find out how the law enforcement agencies were proceeding 
or were progressing with the investigations and they would 
have told you. 
MR MOKHESI:   Chair, we had an understanding with SIU.  
And one of the things that they said that they would handle 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 90 of 186 
 
because at some stage as well, I think they made me sign an 
affidavit.  I suppose it was around the documents.   
 
I cannot recall what exactly because they did on my 
behalf.  But they will deal with the recovery part.  They will 
deal with the investigation.  Because you know, they are able 
to do certain things that we cannot do.   
 
You know, like accessing bank accounts of the individual 
and so on and so on.  But they will into that.  They will make 
that investigation and then hand over that information to 
appropriate law enforcement agency,  whether it is assessing 
10 
for SARS, et cetera.   
 
So that was the understanding.  And I am informed that 
the case has been opened.  I assumed that that was in that 
light in that understanding that we had with them at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How long ago was this understanding? 
MR MOKHESI:   Right at the beginning when we made this, 
when we started. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would that be about 2013/2014? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, it would be around... although, by the 
way, they had already... by the time I assumed office 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   ...the proclamation and so on had already 
been made.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 91 of 186 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Already.  They had already started and 
hence also that me then to say... they were struggling to get 
information.  That is something that we have discussed.  It is 
not for now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   To say, this is how we will proceed.  And 
indeed, we proceed around the civil route because it was... 
given the amount of money that I will say we did not receive 
value for ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   ...it became important for the department 
and try and recover as much as possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And SIU will deal with these other issues.  
So there has always been cooperation between ourselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So nobody has been arrested or 
charged or anything? 
MR MOKHESI:   Not to my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Not to your knowledge? 
MR MOKHESI:   Not to my knowledge but I am aware that 
20 
the law enforcement agency are working on it.  We have 
been interviewed by the law enforcement agencies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  It is just that it is concerning 
because part of the complaints connected with allegations of 
state capture is that some of the law enforcement agencies 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 92 of 186 
 
were paralysed or did not do their job in regard to certain 
matters.   
 
Of course, it may be that in this case they have done 
their job to the best of their ability given whatever resources 
they have and may be given the enormity of the job, I do not 
know, but it is concerning when the taxpayers have lost as 
much money as we are talking about here, you know.   
 
And they lost it in 2010 and 2011 by the end of the 
financial year, the 2010/2011 financial year since March 
2011.   
10 
 
Now that is close to ten years and no arrests, nobody 
charged and yet, the taxpayers, on your estimate, at least 
lost about R 500 million or even more.   
 
And ten years later there is nothing that the public 
knows that the department knows that gives confidence that 
something is being done.  That the matters are being given 
the urgent attention it deserves.   
 
I mean, as I say the disciplinary hearings seems to have 
elicited a lot of information and quite comprehensive.  Your 
own affidavit was deposed to in December 2016.  2017, 
20 
2018, 2019 – where next week, we are going to be October 
2020.   
 
That is about four years since your very comprehensive 
affidavit was given and yet, nobody has been arrested, 
nobody has been charged.  It is quite concerning.   
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 93 of 186 
 
 
And of course, I have heard evidence in relation to 
PRASA for example, where also millions of rands were 
involved, where the chairperson of the board of PRASA, at a 
certain time Mr Molefe said:  We presented all the evidence 
to the Hawks and asked them to investigate and take action.  
They did not take action.  We had to go to court to get them 
to be forced to do their own job.   
 
And my information, if my memory serves me well, I 
have not had any arrest connected with that or people being 
charged.  And I am sure there are many others.  So it is very 
10 
concerning.   
 
So that is why I was asking whether as the HOD you had 
been given any information that gives one confidence that 
maybe something is about to happen because we are about 
ten years after these things happened.  But you have 
indicated 
what 
you 
have 
been 
told 
or 
what 
your 
understanding is.   
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you very much Mr Mokhesi 
for coming to give evidence. We appreciate it.  I know that 
20 
we have not seen you for the last time because there is one 
evidence you still need to give in due course but thank you 
very much.  You are... I am not getting any indication that 
your counsel wishes to re-examine you or anything.   
COUNSEL:   No, nothing Chair.  Thank you. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 94 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Thank you.  So you are 
excused Mr Mokhesi.  Thank you.   
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You... maybe we should keep our 
resumption at two. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As you please. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  Okay we will take the lunch 
adjournment now and we will resume at two o’clock.  We 
adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Pretorius are we ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, thank you Chair, the next 
witness is Mr Mpho Moses Mokoena, and may he take the 
oath? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, please administer the oath or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:    Please state your full names for the 
record. 
MR MOKOENA:   My full names are Mpho Moses Mokoena. 
20 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MOKOENA:   No I don’t. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 95 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear the evidence you will give will 
be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the truth, 
if so please raise your right hand and say so help me God. 
MR MOKOENA:   So help me God. 
MPHO MOSES MOKOENA   [D.S.S.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may be seated Mr Mokoena.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair there is a bundle that has 
been handed to you, FS12, Bundle FS12, that is the bundle 
of the statements of the various witnesses, some of whom 
10 
will testify, may that be admitted as Bundle FS12 and the 
affidavit of Mr Mokoena appears at page 334. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the bundle will be referred to 
Bundles FS12, but we will admit each exhibit as and when 
we have to deal with it.   Mr Mokoena’s one is at what page 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 336, Exhibit UU3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, alright, once he has confirmed 
what he needs to confirm about it we will admit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would you look at Bundle FS12 
please Mr Mokoena at page 336, yes and we refer to the 
20 
black numbers in the top left hand corner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The bundle number will be on the spine 
of the file and I think he needs assistance. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Are you at FS12 336? 
MR MOKOENA:   [No audible response] 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 96 of 186 
 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Would 
you 
speak 
into 
the 
microphone please Mr Mokoena and speak loudly so that 
the transcriber can pick up your voice.  Would you please 
go to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think let him just get settled, he is still 
trying to tidy things up in front of him.  Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Are you settled?  Alright, if you 
could go to page 353 please.  Also the black  numbers, top 
left hand corner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So whenever you are referring to a page 
10 
number Mr Mokoena just remember that that will be a 
reference to the black numbers at the top left corner of 
each page. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you at page 353. 
MR MOKOENA:   353 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No FS you know, look at the top left 
corner you will see a black number starting with FS- maybe 
12 and then -353, that 353 is the page number that Mr 
Pretorius is referring you to, ignore the FS and the 12, just 
focus on the last digits, the three digits. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So when we refer to page numbers 
we will be referring to the last three numbers in the top left 
hand corner Mr Mokoena, if you would just look at the 
signature on page 353, whose signature is that? 
MR MOKOENA:   It is my signature. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 97 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the document at page 336 to 
353 is your affidavit? 
MR MOKOENA:   It is my affidavit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And are the contents of this 
affidavit as far as you concerned at least true and correct.  
MR MOKOENA:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Mokoena are you currently 
employed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, do you want me to admit it 
Mr Pretorius? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry yes Chair please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit deposed to Mr Mpho Moses 
Mokoena appearing from page 336 to 353 of Bundle FS12 
is admitted and will be marked as Exhibit – is UU, UU3? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   UU3, okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokoena you may be referred 
to somewhere in the papers as Gift Mokoena but another 
name? 
MR MOKOENA:   It is my other name.    
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Are you currently employed? 
MR MOKOENA:   I am currently unemployed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Between July 2009 and December 
2011 what position did you occupy? 
MR MOKOENA:   I was occupying a position of Head of the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 98 of 186 
 
Department for Human Settlements in the province of the 
Free State. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  To whom did you report in that 
capacity? 
MR MOKOENA:   I reported to Mr Mitzebenzi Zwane. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And what position did he occupy? 
MR MOKOENA:   He was my LEC for Human Settlements. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you could go to paragraph 5 
please on page 337, when did you join the Free State 
Provincial Government? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   I joined the Provincial Government of the 
Free State in 1995. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you’ve told the Chair that you 
were appointed as Head of Department of Housing of 
Human Settlements in July 2009.  
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And how did it occur that your 
appointment came to an end in December 2011? 
MR MOKOENA:   In December 2011 I resigned, due to the 
pressure that I was feeling as the Head of the Department, 
20 
especially from our Premier, Mr Ace Magashule. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Could you go into a bit more detail 
please, what pressure was this? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before he does so Mr Pretorius, 
what were your qualifications at the time you became HOD 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 99 of 186 
 
Mr Mokoena? 
MR MOKOENA:    My qualifications were Master of Science 
in Development and Planning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, thank you.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right you were describing the 
pressure 
which 
you 
experienced 
which 
led 
to 
your 
resignation in December 2011? 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, the pressure I meant I experienced 
at that stage was that we were under a state of ensuring 
that we turn the houses, the material that we had into 
10 
houses, but at the same time when we go out on the 
outreach programme called Operation Hlasela the Premier 
would still be allocating and announcing radically and that 
would happen even if we sat down in the session where we 
brief him but we don’t have any additional budgets for 
those allocations but he will continue to go and allocate, 
announce allocations, new allocations everywhere we go 
and on top of that he was also pressurising us to build 
bigger houses but the amount of money that we had from 
National is for only the 40m², that was the biggest pressure 
20 
on me.   I wanted ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, sorry, try and look this side so I 
can hear your story so you – are you saying that the 
pressure that you felt which drove you to resign was that 
the Premier of the Province, Mr Magashule, was making 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 100 of 186 
 
announcements to the public that your department would 
build bigger houses than you were able to build or that you 
had funding for.  
MR MOKOENA:   That’s correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that beyond the thing that 
constituted 
pressure 
that 
he 
kept 
on 
making 
those 
announcements or is there something else? 
MR MOKOENA:  Mainly those are the two key pressures 
that I was feeling, because my main pressure was to 
ensure that the material, the building materials that we had 
10 
already purchased as a department should be converted 
into houses as per our agreement in February 2011 with 
the Minister, because certain Minister said, Mr Tokyo 
Sexwale said follow the money and turn those building 
materials into houses, so when we were busy trying to do 
that with the less capacity because we’re only about one 
year old, because it was a new department that started in 
2009 so in 2010 we were just one year old, so we were still 
trying to grapple with own capacity, to build our own 
capacity in terms of the technical side, as well as our 
20 
capacity in terms of project management, so we were still 
v0ery weak at that stage, so when we are busy with that he 
continued to allocation on the other side sporadically, 
outside of our budget, so that for me was a very big 
pressure. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 101 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Pretorius.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So in short, the pressure you 
experienced, which led to your resignation was that there 
was an expectation placed upon you by the Premier to 
build more houses than you had funds and capacity for and 
bigger houses than you had funds and capacity for? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And these demands were public 
demands as I understand it? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
10 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Alright, 
you 
mentioned 
an 
operation, is that spelt Hlasela? 
MR MOKOENA:   That’s correct Operation Hlasela. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Operation Hlasela? 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Ja, that’s just for the transcriber.  
After your resignation as Head of Department what position 
did you then occupy? 
MR MOKOENA:   After my resignation I became HOD for 
Human Settlements in our newly established Mangaung 
20 
Metropolitan Municipality. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you moved from the Province to 
a municipality? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was the position in October 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 102 of 186 
 
2010 in relation to the budget that had been allocated by 
National Department and Treasury for the Construction of 
Houses. 
MR MOKOENA:   We were under-spending on our budget, 
we were level about 10% of our expenditure to the 
R1billion that was granted to us as a province. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is a question that arose earlier, 
can you assist the Chair and tell the Chair by October 2010 
how many houses had been built for that particular period? 
MR MOKOENA:   I won’t be having the figures right now, 
10 
because I think at that time we were only at, we had just 
started putting up our war room so I do not have figures 
right now. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Were there any houses built by 
that time? 
MR MOKOENA:   Not yet. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So no houses by October 2010. 
MR MOKOENA:   October 2010 there were no houses here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that something you remember quite 
well or is it something that you are not sure about that as 
20 
at October 2010 the Department had not built any houses 
under that project? 
MR MOKOENA:   I think my recollection is correct but we 
had not built at that stage and we had a problem because 
we didn’t have service providers appointed yet. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 103 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   The service providers had not yet been 
appointed. 
MR MOKOENA:   As contractors yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who would have built the houses? 
MR MOKOENA:   Who would have built the houses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So obviously if no service providers had 
been appointed there could not be any houses built. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it possible that – well if you had used 
10% of the budget allocation for that project and I 
10 
understand that the budget was about R1.2 or R1.3million, 
billion, I’m sorry, billion, if you had spent 10% it seems 
that would have – that meant you must have spent less 
than R200million, just over R100million, is that right? 
MR MAKOENA:   That is correct, it would have been on 
issues like foundations for instance, not a full house, just a 
few foundations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there may have been foundations 
that had been built or erected but no houses would have 
been completed. 
20 
MR MAKOENA:   That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you are sure about that? 
MR MAKOENA:   And I am sure about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now if the service providers had not 
been appointed who would have built the foundations, or 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 104 of 186 
 
erected the foundations? 
MR MAKOENA:   Okay I think I am running ahead of 
myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKOENA:    Yes, okay I get the point.   By October 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   2010. 
MR MAKOENA:   That less than 10% was not on product, it 
was because we didn’t have a service provider, so it was 
not on product. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was not on houses? 
MR MAKOENA:   It was not on houses yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the 10% spent on, of the 
budget? 
MR MAKOENA:   I can’t recall but it might have been on 
...[indistinct] as well as ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But it was not on the houses? 
MR MAKOENA:   It was not on houses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you are sure about that? 
MR MAKOENA:   I am sure about that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, there would have been 
expenditure on title deeds, surveys, basic services and the 
like?   
MR MOKOENA:   Something like that, correct. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 105 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is there any reason why whoever 
followed you, succeeded you as HOD, would not have 
found it easy to establish that simple fact that as at 
October no houses had been built, bearing in mind the 
information that would have been there, as far as you 
know, is there any reason why it would have been difficult 
for the next HOD to know that as at that time actually no 
houses at all had been built? 
MR MOKOENA:   The information was available, I don’t 
think it could have been difficult to get that information. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it should not be difficult, should not 
have been difficult? 
MR MOKOENA:   Should not have been difficult. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the fact that no suppliers had been 
– no service providers had been appointed before October 
2010 that also should have been easy to establish? 
MR MOKOENA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have just told the Chair Mr 
Mokoena that by October 2010 six or so months before 
20 
year end only 10% of the budget allocated had been spent.  
What was their reaction to that situation at the National 
Department of Human Settlements, I am referring to 
paragraph 8 on page 339 of your ... 
MR MOKOENA:   The reaction was that we are under-
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 106 of 186 
 
spending and that they are going to withdraw the amounts 
of amount that we have because we cannot lose out on that 
money just because we are not spending, because we don’t 
give – the performance of province. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Mokoena, you will have to 
raise your voice and as far as possible look this side as 
well, I know you have to look at the person who is putting 
questions to you but just raise your voice, I want to hear 
that story properly. 
MR MOKOENA:   My apologies, I thought that my voice 
10 
was audible, I will try to be louder.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MOKOENA:   What I was just saying is that that 
situation meant that the National Department of Human 
Settlements that informing us that we are down-scheduled 
in terms of our performance and therefore they said to us 
we will give you notice that we are going to withdraw a 
particular amount from your budget, which you are not 
going to get, we are going to withhold it in the National 
Department so that it can be given to other provinces that 
20 
are performing, so that is what I wanted to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What happened then during 
October 2010, as you’ve described in paragraph 9? 
MR 
MOKOENA: 
 
 
What 
happened 
then 
was 
that 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 107 of 186 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe – I am sorry Mr Pretorius, 
maybe briefly are you able to say why your department had 
not been able to build houses six months into the financial 
year, because by October that was six months into the 
financial year, why is it that you had not been able to build 
even one house, why was it that you had not appointed 
service providers on time, because you were the HOD. 
MR MOKOENA:   As far as I can recall it the two key things 
that need us not to perform at that stage, the first one was 
10 
that we had advertised the tender, we closed the tender 
and did all the processes only to find out we took too long 
and the validity period expired, so that was the first part.  
The second part ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And the period expired? 
MR MOKOENA:   The period of the tender expired. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   The other part as far as I can recollect is 
that we heard as we came in that decision that was before 
us they had allocated or they had got into the budget of 
20 
2009 and the budget of 2010 so they had already 
appointed contractors, so those contractors had taken us 
to court, so that was delaying us as well, so those are the 
two things that I can recollect that delayed us before 
October 2010. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 108 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course the failure to do whatever was 
necessary in order to make sure that by the time the tender 
period expired everything had been done, the failure to do 
that you must take responsibility, must you not, because 
you were the HOD? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Why was there that delay in 
completing the tender process before July 2010? 
MR MOKOENA:   I can’t recall right now what was the 
10 
delay but I think we had too many tenders, we had too 
many tenders that were coming, that came in and so I think 
the delay was in processing those tenders. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In any event you were dealing with 
the October 2010, what happened, was there a meeting? 
MR MOKOENA:   In October 2010 there was a speci8al 
meeting called by Mr Zwane, who was our MEC at that 
stage, he called to say that he wanted us to meet because 
he had a solution, or a problem of non-spending on the 
grant. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Before you go there where did this 
meeting take place?   
MR MOKOENA:   This meeting he organised in his 
boardroom, the meeting took place in his boardroom. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In Bloemfontein? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 109 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   In Bloemfontein. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who was present at the meeting? 
MR MOKOENA:   In the meeting mainly it was my 
managers, and the CFO we were still sharing, the CFO at 
that stage we had our CFO was also the CFO for Local 
Government, that was Ms Sepati and under ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Dlamini? 
MR MOKOENA:   Ms Sepati Dlamini ja, and then it was Ms 
Manite Mogele on my side and then on the side of the 
MEC’s office it was ...[indistinct] who was the advisor to 
10 
the MEC at that stage and then also from the MEC’s side 
was Ms ...[indistinct] Motahu who was the MEC’s PA, and 
then on my side also there was Mr Kaizer Maxatshwa and 
Mr Koloi, Kabelo Koloi 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right Mr Tsoametsi just for the 
record is that spelt Tsoametsi? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will talk of him later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this was – was this in October when 
this meeting took place? 
20 
MR MOKOENA:   As far as I can recollect it was in October 
indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what was the purpose of the 
meeting? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 110 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   The purpose of the meeting was to come 
and listen to his proposed solution to our problem. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, so what was the problem? 
MR MOKOENA:   Our problem was that we are not 
spending on our human settlement grant. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And who proposed this solution? 
MR MOKOENA:   The solution was proposed by the MEC, 
Mr Zwane. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And as far as you were aware who 
thought of or devised the solution? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   As far as I could ask in the meeting I 
realised that he was saying that he also got an advice, 
that’s why he came with that, he got advice, expert advice 
but there was asking him who is this advisor, where did 
you get this advice from, he did not want to mention, 
because as a person who was working with almost all 
departments, all provinces I would have known who might 
have spoken to him about it, because for me it was illegal, 
and what is worse is that as I am sitting in the meeting the 
tensions that – I am the only one who is asking questions 
20 
of clarity who is talking to him, as if the meeting is 
between me and him and all others are quiet, so I think 
that for me said that it looks like there was a discussion 
before, all those who were in the meeting with me knew 
about what was going to proposed in the meeting, and I 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 111 of 186 
 
was the only one who didn’t know about what was going to 
be proposed in the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe, it may be that the other people 
who I assume were junior to you, were leaving it to you as 
head of department to ask Mr Zwane questions on the 
matter.   Isn’t that also a possibility? 
MR MOKOENA:   That could also be a possibility but just 
for example when it comes to the CFO, the CFO is – the 
CFO’s strong point is supply chain management, issues of 
procurement is known more by the CFO than us as HOD’s, 
10 
so I expected the CFO to come in and say this is illegal in 
terms of the procurement because even from that side I 
didn’t get any support. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius?   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say that Mr Zwane informed 
the meeting that he had a solution for the problem? 
MR MOKOENA:   Exactly. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was that solution? 
MR MOKOENA:   The solution was that we must go out and 
buy materials, building material, for the service providers 
20 
so that service providers cannot be held up in terms of 
getting on the ground, getting on site to start working 
faster, that was his way of putting this solution in front of 
us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did he mention anything about 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 112 of 186 
 
invoices? 
MR MOKOENA:   At that stage no, he didn’t mention any 
invoices.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Have a look at paragraph 11 please 
of your statement.  
MR MOKOENA:   Okay, you are saying that his plan was 
we will get these materials and these materials will be 
managed in the way that the contractors would get the 
invoices and then go to the material suppliers, get the 
invoices from the material suppliers and then come back to 
10 
us and we signed with them and ensure that they get 
materials delivered to them, but not in too much details, I 
was just saying that there must be some invoices that must 
show that how material or building material that must go 
out.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you ever any occasion to 
question 
the 
validity 
of 
the 
invoices 
during 
the 
implementation of the plan? 
MR MOKOENA:   I think at this stage we were still was 
talking to him and because I was so in my uncomfort on the 
20 
legality of the process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, well let us get to that then.   
MR MOKOENA:   Then we are agreed that – he said that 
he was going to send Mr Tsoamatsi to go and do further 
research because I was adamant this is illegal. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 113 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes perhaps we are getting ahead 
of ourselves, we should slow down a little 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would like ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKOENA:   ...[Indistinct – speaking simultaneously. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius I would him to finish telling 
me about that meeting who said what, how did it conclude 
before we move further. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, the invoice issue arose in the 
statement and in the course of the meeting but – Chair, 
please, and in fact you are quite correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  From the beginning what happened at 
that meeting?  Who started speaking; whose idea was it; 
what was the idea and then your intervention and the 
response to your intervention? 
MR MOKOENA:  Thank you.  When we got to the meeting in 
the 
board 
room, 
he 
gave 
us 
his 
[00:00:21] 
his 
recommendation of proposed solution.  And his solution was 
that we are supposed to buy materials; building materials so 
that we can ensure that the contractors are not delayed.  
20 
The schedules of implementation or of building houses not 
delayed by the time they start building.  And that what will be 
managing those materials is invoices.  Then I said but this is 
illegal you cannot pay first before you get service.  That is 
what I know about the government.  He said, no this is being 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 114 of 186 
 
done in other provinces; this is legal.  Then I said, I am not 
comfortable with it.  I would not agree that we do this plan of 
yours because it is bordering on illegality.  Then he said, Mr 
Tsoametsi is going to go out – he was given a task to go and 
research and come back with the document which will be an 
internal memorandum which will be guiding these strategies 
that he is giving to us. This plan that he is giving to us.  And 
so the meeting ended at that.  And when the meeting ended, 
I called him back into the board room. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you go back to the board room is 
10 
there anybody in the meeting other than yourself and Mr 
Zwane who spoke?  Did any other person speak … 
MR MOKOENA:  As far as I could… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Anything of substance?  Obviously, I am 
not talking about greeting. 
MR MOKOENA:  As far as I can recall it was only me and the 
MEC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  The others were … 
MR MOKOENA:  They were not required. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And you say the meeting ended on 
20 
the basis that Mr Tsoa… 
MR MOKOENA:  Metsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes was going to go and do some research 
about this solution? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 115 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And prepare a document – an internal 
document? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would then be circulated? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Just if I may Chair?  Before you go to 
the meeting with the MEC after this general meeting may I 
ask you please who gave the instruction to Mr Tsoametsi to 
go and research the legitimacy of the plan? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  The instruction came from the MEC.  
Because Mr Tsoametsi was the advisor to the MEC. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So as I understand your evidence it 
was not Mr Tsoametsi’s advice that started the whole idea? 
MR MOKOENA:  No it was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well do you know that?  Because you said 
Mr Zwane did not want to disclose to you the identity of his 
advisor who gave him this advice and you are saying Mr 
Tsoametsi – Tsoametsi – is it Tsoametsi? 
MR MOKOENA:  Tsoametsi. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you saying Mr Tsoametsi was his 
advisor but you are saying that the idea did not originate 
from Mr Tsoametsi; how do you know that? 
MR MOKOENA:  Let me hasten to say I can correct it.  I hear 
the Chairperson. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 116 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  Because we did not get to know who is this 
person who advised the MEC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  To come with this – with this plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKOENA:  If he did not mention it and now, he is 
asking – his tasking Mr Tsoametsi to go and do the research. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And research it ja.  But you do not know 
whether this might be an idea… 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  They spoke before the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That came from him or not. 
MR MOKOENA:  You are correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MOKOENA:  I withdraw that part. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well let us just clarify that.  The 
evidence this morning and yesterday was that Mr Tsoametsi 
produced a memorandum and it was said that that was the 
origin of the idea.  Now the memorandum – the only 
memorandum we know of authorised by Mr Tsoametsi is the 
20 
one you refer to in paragraph 15 of your affidavit.  On page 
243, do you see that? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Now leave aside what 
discussions might have taken place before the meeting.  The 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 117 of 186 
 
memorandum was that the first and the origin of the plan or 
did as far as you were aware were there some preceding 
discussions about it before the memorandum? 
MR MOKOENA:  As far as I am aware the task to Tsoametsi 
came from the MEC from the meeting in the board room 
which was a response to my questioning the legality and the 
illegality of the plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So is that memorandum the document that 
Mr Tsoametsi produced pursuant to being asked by Mr 
Zwane to go and do research? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And if one looks at page 355 of FS12 
what document is that? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is exactly the document we are talking 
about. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. The date on the 25 November 
2010. 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now we have looked at this document 
20 
and it perhaps not necessary to go through the whole 
document but this does not appear to be an opinion on the 
legality of the plan at all.  In fact, it assumes the legality of 
the plan and says how the plan should be implemented.  Am 
I correct? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 118 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  To your knowledge was there ever a 
document prepared advising on the legality of the plan? 
MR MOKOENA:  To my knowledge this is the only document 
that was prepared.  This went from the MEC’s meeting in the 
board room to ensure that we implement his plan.  These are 
the only document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see from this document. 
MR MOKOENA:  And Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see from this document that Mr Tsoametsi 
10 
is 
described 
as 
Deputy 
Director 
General. 
 
Now 
you 
mentioned earlier on that he was an advisor or – to Mr 
Zwane.  I take it that you cannot be advisor to the MEC and 
be Deputy Director General, am I right? 
MR MOKOENA:  Chair you are correct.  But sometimes there 
are things that are happening on the ground that are not 
necessarily according to how things should be traditionally.  
He came to work into the MEC’s office as an advisor.  He 
was residence inside the MEC’s office.  But then sometimes 
a position that he was holding according to the structure of 
20 
the department were the DDG post.  So sometimes that for 
an example as I was the HOD the DDG for my Human 
Settlements was another person.  He never [00:07:56] from 
the first year up until the last year I left.  But she was in our 
structure for Human Settlement as a DDG. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 119 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But… 
MR MOKOENA:  But she was working somewhere else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But … 
MR MOKOENA:  Outside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Department – your department at that 
time of Mr Tsoametsi how many DDG posts did it have? 
MR MOKOENA:  It only had one DDG post which was 
occupied by a person who was not handling anything to do 
with Human Settlements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  So I just – I was just using an example 
about the conflating of the DDG Tsoametsi as the post in the 
structure as against him working in the MEC’s office advising 
the MEC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see my understanding about advisors 
to Ministers and I assume that would apply to MEC’s 
evidence that I have heard suggest that you know an advisor 
to a Minister which I assume would be the same with an 
advisor to a MEC you know does not get involved with the 
operations of the department.  Those are left to the Head of 
20 
Department or to the Director General. 
MR MOKOENA:  That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he or she is there to just advise the 
Minister or MEC. 
MR MOKOENA:  That is true. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 120 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now that – that has given me the 
impression that when you are an advisor to the Minister you 
occupy a particular space that you are not – you cannot be 
Deputy 
DG 
of 
the 
department 
because 
that 
is 
now 
operations.  Is the position that simply he was paid at the… 
MR MOKOENA:  DDG. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Level of DD? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which did not necessarily mean that he 
was occupying the position of DDG in your department. 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  In the MEC’s office.  Because the MEC was 
the MEC for both departments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  He was the MEC for Local Government as 
well as the MEC for Human Settlements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but was there a DDG post that he was 
occupying as far as you know? 
MR MOKOENA:  He was occupying a DDG post in Local 
Government. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOKOENA:  But working in the MEC’s office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It seems quite complicated.  Maybe we do 
not need to understand it for purposes – present purposes 
Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes perhaps there have more serious 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 121 of 186 
 
irregularities we have to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is just that of course when… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Not that that started… 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
When 
there 
is 
a 
blurring 
of 
roles 
sometimes that is where problems start. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event if one looks briefly at 
10 
the MM2 at page 355 of FS12 I do not intend to take you 
through it in any detail but it is clear from the background 
section on page 355 that it assumes that the decision to 
implement the plan – the intervention strategy it is called 
had already been taken. 
MR MOKOENA:  Exactly. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it then goes on to set out how 
that would be implemented by setting out the responsibilities 
of the various parties.  That is the contractor, supplier and 
department. 
20 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right we will come back to that in a 
moment and its signature.  But that document was presented 
to you on the 25 November 2010, correct? 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 122 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let us go back to the meeting that 
took place in Bloemfontein during October 2010.  You say 
that the plan was put as the plan of the MEC.  It was tabled; 
you responded to it and questioned its legality.  Mr 
Tsoametsi was then mandated to go and prepare a document 
as you say to do some research regarding the legitimacy of 
the plan.  We have looked at that document that you say is 
the – that document.  You then referred the Chair to a 
private meeting you held with the MEC after this meeting.  
Would you tell the Chair about that please? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  Thanks very much.  Immediately after the 
meeting when everyone stands up to go out of the meeting – 
out of the board room then I got – I approached the MEC and 
say MEC can we have a word please?  Then we go back into 
the board room; we sit down.  I still say to him that  
1. I feel like the plan that you are bringing is illegal. 
2. I thought that we are going to work as we traditionally 
used to.  When he has got an issue, he calls me as the 
HOD we talk first about it so that when we talk to other 
colleagues in my department then at least I know what 
20 
it is they are going to be talking about. 
That is the protocol traditional that we have been using in 
the Province but he did not approach it that way.  So that 
was the two issues that I wanted to raise with him.  And then 
what happened is that he said then to me, look we have 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 123 of 186 
 
discussed about this.  This is my plan and it is going to 
happen.  We are going to implement it.  But if you have a 
problem with it you just submit your resignation letter and 
know that once you have submitted your resignation letter 
you will get out on the street and you will be poor.  Your 
house will be taken back by the banks.  Your car.  Your 
children will be out of school and he stood up and left me 
sitting in the board room.  But what he was saying [00:14:04] 
and it is like someone like who is boasting. So we did not 
finish that but in a correct way.  I think it was frustrating.  
10 
Then I left I went to my office. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  When he spoke to you in this manner 
that you have just described to the Chair did he use a Sotho 
expression? 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes he used a Sotho expression. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well would you tell the Chair what 
that expression was? 
MR MOKOENA:  That expression in Sotho he was saying 
that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Say it in Sotho first and then you can 
20 
translate it. 
MR MOKOENA:  It was something like [African language] 
meaning that you will be poor, you will be like grey; like dust 
[African language].  So meaning that he is saying what is 
going to happen to me after I have resigned. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 124 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKOENA:  He said it was the three that was going to 
be in abject poverty in short. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he not say anything about shoes? 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes that is exactly the – when I – [African 
language].  So I translate it here into figuratively and not – 
literally as he said it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKOENA:  Because I wanted it to be understood the 
way he was putting it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Just repeat that what is – but it means 
literally in what he means in substance. 
MR MOKOENA:  In Sotho he was saying [African language].  
Meaning that you will be walking next to your shoes you will 
not walk in your shoes.  There will be no shoes to walk in in 
other words. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes. That is what I was trying to say.  That 
is why I wanted to capture it in that way so that I do not 
forget it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It may seem pretty obvious but what 
conclusion did you draw from his discussion with you at that 
private meeting as to what would happen to you if you did 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 125 of 186 
 
not comply and refuse to implement the plan? 
MR MOKOENA:  It was obvious that he was saying that I 
must resign because I do not want to implement his plan.  So 
it was a threat to keep me out of the post I was in or out of 
the job.  Simply that is how I understood it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But he did not say he would fire you? 
MR MOKOENA:  He said I must submit… 
CHAIRPERSON:  He said you… 
MR MOKOENA:  My resignation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He said if you did not want to implement 
the plan or the strategy you would have to submit your 
resignation letter? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The document we know from your 
evidence was ultimately prepared and presented on the 25 
November 2010, correct? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Was it shown to you? 
20 
MR MOKOENA:  The document was brought to me in my 
office by Mr Tsoametsi. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did you read the document? 
MR MOKOENA:  I went through the document.  I read the 
document.  I still had – I still was uncomfortable. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 126 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did the document manage to 
convince you of the legality of the plan? 
MR MOKOENA:  Not at all.  That is what – that is what 
frustrated me therefore I said to him no I cannot agree with 
this document it is still not saying anything about the legality 
and the illegality of this plan.  Then he took the document 
went back to the office and then – the MEC called me.  As I 
got in there he said, have you changed your plan?  Are you 
going to submit your resignation letter now?  Then I realised 
that what you are saying to me is that earlier on I said you 
10 
must submit your resignation letter if you do not want to go 
with this plan.  Now he is talking about the plan again.  So it 
is almost three [00:17:59] down the line.  So I realise that he 
is still holding onto that that I must submit a resignation 
letter if I do not want to implement this plan.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. I am sorry.  I think I missed 
something somewhere.  Mr Tsoametsi brought this document 
to you. 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you remember when it was when he 
20 
brought the document to you? 
MR MOKOENA:  It was the 25t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was the 25t h November? 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what was the purpose of him giving 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 127 of 186 
 
you this document?  I see it was addressed to you. 
MR MOKOENA:  The purpose was for me to sign and 
approve it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And approve the… 
MR MOKOENA:  For implementation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – what was to be done. 
MR MOKOENA:  As what to be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the document sought to spell out how 
the plan or strategy would be implemented. 
MR MOKOENA:  Exactly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.  Did you have a discussion with Mr 
Tsoametsi at that time when he brought this document? 
MR MOKOENA:  We did.  We discussed it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you say that you still felt 
uncomfortable? 
MR MOKOENA:  I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did he say anything to make you 
believe that there was nothing illegal about the plan? 
MR MOKOENA:  He could not convince me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but did he say anything?  Did he try to 
20 
persuade you? 
MR MOKOENA:  He tried to persuade me but it was empty 
because if you give a document the document does not say 
what you should be saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 128 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:  I cannot listen to what you are saying which 
is not in the document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  Because it will incorrect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  So then we – I did not agree with him then 
he took the document he went back to the MEC’s office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And how did the meeting – your meeting 
with Mr Tsoametsi come to an end?  How did it conclude? 
MR MOKOENA:  We could not agree so he left. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He left your office without the two of you 
agreeing. 
MR MOKOENA:  He left the office.  Without me agreeing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and what was your way forward after 
he had left? 
MR MOKOENA:  Then I got a call to come to the MEC’s 
office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh immediately? 
MR MOKOENA:  Immediate.  Immediately.  When I got to the 
MEC’s office the MEC is asking me why I am not signing the 
20 
document.  I said no I am not comfortable with that 
document.  He said but…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you made it clear to Mr Tsoametsi you 
are not going to sign the document? 
MR MOKOENA:  I had made it clear to him. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 129 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR MOKOENA:  That is why he went to the MEC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – oh okay I think that is what I missed.  
So – so the MEC called you to his office.  You went there.  
He asked you why you were not prepared to sign the 
document. 
MR MOKOENA:  I told him that this document is not telling 
me anything that shows that this is legal in terms of us 
implementing it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  He said this is my plan you either sign this 
sign this document or you submit my letter.  I asked you a 
letter earlier on but if you do not agree with me on my plan 
submit your resignation letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  So I think when I heard that I realised that 
okay it means he is still putting me into the same corner.  
Then I signed it [00:20:45] in his office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Coughing] excuse me.  Was – was that 
meeting just between the two of you or was Mr Tsoametsi 
20 
also present? 
MR MOKOENA:  No it was now only me and the MEC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was only the two of you? 
MR MOKOENA:  I think Mr Tsoametsi had left the document 
with the MEC. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 130 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Did you not take the document at 
all or you did keep a copy and Mr Tsoametsi left with another  
copy?  When Mr Tsoametsi left your office earlier did you 
keep a copy of the document or did you not keep any copy? 
MR MOKOENA:  He came with one document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He came with – he came with one? 
MR MOKOENA:  He came with one that is why he left with 
that same one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And left with it. 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So – so you had this meeting with 
Mr Zwane.  So he said he reminded you that he had told you 
that if you were not prepared to implement his plan then you 
must – you should submit your resignation letter? 
MR MOKOENA:  Resignation letter yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you had not obviously submitted any 
resignation letter up to that point?  So what did he say in the 
light of that? 
MR MOKOENA:  In the light of that I thought that he was 
saying to me so if you do not sign then bring me my letter. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  I think that is what he was saying.  So for 
me they are saying I must resign. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And how did your meeting end?  On what 
basis did you conclude that meeting? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 131 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:  We concluded the meeting by me signing.  I 
signed that document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you sign it in front of him? 
MR MOKOENA:  Inside of – in front of him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Why did you sign it? 
MR MOKOENA:  Because I had to resign if I do not want to 
sign the document. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why did you not say MEC I am sorry this is 
illegal I am not prepared to do – to sign it and I am not going 
to give you a resignation letter because there is nothing to 
resign for? 
MR MOKOENA:  I think that did not come my way because 
for me it was only – it is either you go with my plan or you 
resign.  I looked at it as either or.  I did not look at the other 
way in between.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But you knew did you not that you could 
not be dismissed for refusing to do something illegal, is it 
20 
not? 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes I knew. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You knew that? 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if you refused to submit a letter or 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 132 of 186 
 
resignation he would have to dismiss you and you would 
have known that he could not dismiss you for refusing to do 
something illegal. 
MR MOKOENA:  I know Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So why did you not adopt that 
position namely I am sorry MEC this is illegal I am not going 
to be party to it and I am not giving you a resignation letter? 
MR MOKOENA:  I think that is what I should have done but I 
missed on it because I thought that if I do not sign it it 
means I must come with my resignation letter to him. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  Because that was for the second time now 
that he is telling me to bring this – one letter if I do not go 
with him according to his plan.  So for me I think my – my 
thinking – my flow of thoughts was now locked on two things.  
It is either I submit your resignation letter and go or you sign 
the document and then the plan goes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  This was now the 25 November 
2010? 
20 
MR MOKOENA:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There was a builder’s holiday to 
come on the 15 December 2010 for a month? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So effectively … 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 133 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  At three weeks. 
MR MOKOENA:  Three weeks yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Ja there were four months left in the 
year – three weeks of which would be a builder’s holiday.  So 
just over three months left in the year. 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And as I understand your evidence 
correct me if I am wrong because I may have misunderstood 
you that by this time still before the plan had been devised 
and the document signed no houses had been built? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  No houses have been built by this time still. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is now in November? 
MR MOKOENA:  This now is in November yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 20 you say shortly after 
your meeting with the MEC.  That is the meeting where – 
well  
MR MOKOENA:  The … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Either the meeting in Bloemfontein or 
the meeting where you signed the document, they may both 
20 
have been in Bloemfontein but in any event did Mr Zwane 
approach you with a list of contractors? 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes he approached me with a list of 
contractors a week later.  He said here is the list of my 
contractors that I want you to approve.  I want you to call to 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 134 of 186 
 
come in so that they start implementing construction of these 
houses. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now the list that he gave you were 
those builders in other words contractors meaning builders 
or were there suppliers on that list? 
MR MOKOENA:  It was only contractors on that list. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did you notice anything about the 
list? 
MR MOKOENA:  My glance on the list was that I saw many 
companies that I saw for the first time. I know the persons 
10 
who have been working in the Province for years.  I could 
realise that no there is something wrong here.  When I asked 
him why do you have so many new contractors with so many 
units because for us a new contractor would give 200 and 
less not more than 200.  He said this is my plan.  This is the 
document that I have the power to allocate and these are the 
people I am allocating to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – was he correct to say he had power 
to allocate? 
MR MOKOENA:  He has power to allocate he is the political 
20 
– is the executive authority’s power.  It is not the DG’s 
power. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He had – he had power to allocate which 
contractors get what job? 
MR MOKOENA:  Construction job. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 135 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes he had that power as an MEC? 
MR MOKOENA:  As MEC yes they have got power to allocate 
projects to contractors. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I thought that that would be the job of a 
DG and his or her officials and not a politician. 
MR MOKOENA:  Well he – but tradition would have been – 
been all along of that.  We used to prepare a list where the 
other MEC’s before him looking at the performance which 
either contractors were not performing and then try to grade 
them and give them more [00:27:42] so that we can have 
10 
more performance on the ground so that we can protect our 
own grant.  And then the new ones we will give them lesser 
so they get in the groove of construction and once they 
understand construction then we will increase as it goes.  
But now this time he told me that his list is close to his chest 
and then when he brings the list the list of many people that 
I do not know.  Many contractors that I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry are you saying that prior to him 
being an MEC for the Department of Human Settlements 
there was a practice in terms of which in the department you 
20 
would show the list of contractors to the MEC whoever the 
MEC happened to be. 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the MEC would then allocate – 
indicate which – which contractors should be given jobs. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 136 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:  According to our recommendation that we 
have submitted. We were the ones who were… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would make recommendations? 
MR MOKOENA:  It originates with us as officials it goes to 
the MEC.  That is how we used to do it with all other MEC’s 
before him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So – but what you were doing as 
officials was making recommendations to the MEC? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the MEC would have the final say? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As to who should be given which tender or 
which job? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And who was the MEC before – for Human 
Settlements before Mr Zwane? 
MR MOKOENA:  Before Mr Zwane it was Mr Mafereka. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so with Mr Zwane you did the same? 
20 
MR MOKOENA:  With Mr Zwane we did not because he said 
he was going to do it himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you did not make recommendations he 
came with his own list? 
MR MOKOENA:  Yes his own list. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 137 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he said that is my list? 
MR MOKOENA:  That is his list.  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The evidence you have just 
given is let me put it - and it seems to me you are referring 
to a practise rather than a law or a regulation.   
MR MOKOENA:   Just a practise, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because the first point that must be 
made is that no minister of MEC would have the power to 
appoint contractors.  That must be done through a proper 
10 
competitive process. 
MR MOKOENA:   On the procurement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The procurement law and regulations 
and policy must be followed. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So we are dealing here with an 
appointment process that takes place in absence of the 
procurement process. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   My understanding and please correct 
20 
me if I am wrong, but apart from a formal approval that might 
be required, an MEC as MEC, member of the Provincial 
Cabinet would have no power to appoint contractors at any 
stage of the process.  It is a matter of law. 
MR MOKOENA:   It is a practise, not law.  You are correct. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 138 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In any event, he says here is a list of 
a 106 contractors, right? 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did he give you an instruction at the 
same time he presented the list to you? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct.  He gave me an instruction.  
He said:  Here is the list.  These are the contractors that I 
want.  They will able to construct the houses in the province. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  You have told the Chair that 
you have looked at the contractors that were listed and you 
10 
raised 
some 
questions 
in 
your 
own 
mind 
and 
you 
communicated your concerns to the MEC. 
MR MOKOENA:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you said something about 
unknown contractors been given a high number of houses to 
build.  Will you just detail that for the Chair, please? 
MR MOKOENA:   Thank you.  My argument and as well as 
our colleagues always would say that if you want to have 
performance so that we always get better percentage in 
terms of budget at national, we must perform better.   
20 
 
So we must allocate more units to the best performing 
contractors in the province.  So that is what I raised with him 
and he said:  This is my plan and this is the list of the 
contractors that are going to implement my plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Continue. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 139 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   And so then, I had to go and sit down and 
look at all of them and then I checked with my team and they 
said but they also did not know most of the contractors on 
the list. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was this list written on a paper, I take it? 
MR MOKOENA:   It was on a paper. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And it was 106 contractors all 
together? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was your understanding that he meant 
10 
that these were the only contractors who are supposed to be 
given the job? 
MR MOKOENA:   That was my understanding Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And in the document that he gave you, 
was it already indicated how many houses, some of them 
must be given to build? 
MR MOKOENA:   The units were already allocated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Were the units allocated to all the 106? 
MR MOKOENA:   All 106. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it was a complete plan as to who must 
20 
build how many houses? 
MR MOKOENA:   Complete.  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 140 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At the bottom of page 344, you refer 
to six contractors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius, if we do have that document 
here, it will be good to see it but if we do not, then it would 
be good to find out whether it still exists somewhere, the 
document that Mr Mokoena was given by Mr Zwane. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  I am told that we do not have 
that document but we will certainly make enquiries.  It could 
be mentioned in one of the reports and we will research that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Otherwise, we will try and find it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What happened to that document Mr 
Mokoena? 
MR MOKOENA:   Well, after that you have to start calling 
those contractors to come in. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, I am sorry. 
MR MOKOENA:   Oh. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Maybe I did not make myself clear.   
MR MOKOENA:   Yes? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The document itself, the piece of 
paper, what happened to the piece of paper?  Because the 
DCJ is interested in seeing that document. 
MR MOKOENA:   That list came to me.  I had to implement 
it. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 141 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   I had to give it to our Project Management 
Unit to start now calling those people and ensuring that they 
get onsite in different municipalities so that we can steer up 
the process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you by any chance have it somewhere 
yourself or other than what may be in the department? 
MR MOKOENA:   Unfortunately, I did not take any document 
when I left the office, you know, in the province. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Was it handwritten, was it 
typed, the names ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKOENA:   It was typed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The names were typed? 
MR MOKOENA:   The names were typed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKOENA:   And the units were typed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Not signed? 
MR MOKOENA:   Not signed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MOKOENA:   Certain list did not have any space for 
signing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it on the letterhead of the MEC’s 
office or not? 
MR MOKOENA:   It was on a ...[intervenes]  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 142 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Plain paper? 
MR MOKOENA:   ...plain paper. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have told the Chair Mr Mokoena 
that you raised your concerns about the contractors on the 
list, 
including 
concerns 
about 
the 
number 
of 
houses 
allocated to particular contractors. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was the response of the MEC 
10 
to you raising these concerns? 
MR MOKOENA:   The MEC said that he is going to work with 
us and ensure that he goes on the ground to speed up the 
process.  You can change that document so if anything, that 
is improved.  In fact, we help the contractors to deliver 
quickly.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was he amenable as far as you to 
revising the names of the names of the contractors on the 
list? 
MR MOKOENA:   He was not amenable to revise it. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did he say as much? 
MR MOKOENA:   He said as much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you... you said that some of the 
contractors whose names were on the list were contractors 
that you did not know.   
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 143 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it just some or was it most that he did 
not know or are you not able to remember? 
MR MOKOENA:   It could be around ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Many of them? 
MR MOKOENA:   Many of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might not recall how many but 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOKOENA:   I may not recall out of the 106. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKOENA:   If I see the list, I can tick them.  I can 
highlight them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can tick.  Yes, yes.  Out of a 106, do 
you think that there were maybe more than 50% that you did 
not know? 
MR MOKOENA:   I think there might have been around 
40/45. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, around 40/45 that you had never 
20 
heard of? 
MR MOKOENA:   That I have never seen before. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You said that normally you used to, 
the principle that you followed in allocating construction work 
before was that those contractors who had a history of 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 144 of 186 
 
performing well when doing this kind of job for the 
department, you would give them more houses to build. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that principle followed in the 
allocation of houses that was reflected in the document that 
Mr Zwane gave you? 
MR MOKOENA:   Chair, it was not followed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to say what principle was 
followed?  Was it the opposite of that principle or it was not 
necessarily the opposite but it was a mixture? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   It was a mixture. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright. 
MR MOKOENA:   Because it looks like he took from the list 
of those... the tenders that expired. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   As well as from the CSD, from the Central 
Database.  It was taken from all over. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   Others were not appearing anywhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MOKOENA:   They not appearing in the database, they 
are not appearing in our provincial list. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKOENA:   Those contractors that we used every year 
and they were not also appearing on the tender.  So when 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 145 of 186 
 
we looked at them, it was such a mix. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you saying that when you looked at 
the list, you were able to recognise that some of the 
contractors on the list were you on your database of the 
department. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct.  We used that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you... are you saying that there were 
some who were not on your database and you did not know 
where he got them from? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Before we move on, just two points, 
please.  At this stage, how long had you been working in the 
Department 
of 
Housing 
of 
the 
Department 
of 
Human 
Settlements in the Free State? 
MR MOKOENA:   At this stage, I think... I started in 1995. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   About 15-years? 
MR MOKOENA:   Almost 15-years, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And during that time, did you 
come to know of the contractors who were good performers 
20 
and those who were not? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you were able to make an 
informed judgment of that list, correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 146 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The second point is, there has been 
evidence in the last few days Mr Mokoena of the context with 
in which these events would have taken place and that is the 
earlier tender process which had been abandoned.   
 
You mentioned it now in your evidence.  And a number of 
categories of bidders formed part of the database, including 
those who failed the bid process. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And including those who were judged 
incompetent to be given work, correct. 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Those ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Make sure that you speak loud enough for 
the mic to capture what you say Mr Mokoena. 
MR MOKOENA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said correct to the last question that 
Mr Pretorius asked you, is that right? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And amongst the 106 contractors, 
20 
were there those that had been disqualified during the 
bidding process or can you not remember? 
MR MOKOENA:   I cannot remember Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I think that fact emerges from the 
reports and we have summarised some of that of your benefit 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 147 of 186 
 
Chair.  In any event, at the bottom of page 344, Mr Mokoena 
you refer to the names of some of the contractors.  Could 
you tell the Chair about that, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that page 344? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   344 of Bundle FS12, the last 
paragraph on that page. 
MR MOKOENA:   Thank you.  As they were implementing the 
project or his plan, we realised that there were three 
companies that were very close to him.  Close to him, I 
mean, when our guys go on site, we find them in those and 
10 
not many times in other projects but many times in these 
projects.   
 
So then they started saying to me:  We are worried 
that... it looks like the MEC has got a close relationship with 
these contractors.  Then out of the thin air, I have been 
given three names that I could recall.  Aleatory, Quinoa 
Property Developers and Renate Properties.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now you say these developers were 
very close to Mr Zwane in your own words but you do not 
really give the basis of that conclusion.  On what basis could 
20 
you conclude that? 
MR MOKOENA:   ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words, what makes you say 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKOENA:   They were close. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 148 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...they were close to him or he was close 
to these contractors? 
MR MOKOENA:   It was just a physical closeness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MOKOENA:   Not just the physical closeness but the 
functional closeness in terms of the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, in terms of their relationship. 
MR MOKOENA:   Ja, I say so because there were these from 
Mpumelelo, from the area where he comes from.  Number 1 
and number 2.  When we were going around in different 
10 
areas on Operation Hlasela Programme, the premier, as I 
have earlier alluded, would allocate or announce some new 
sporadic allocations.  
 
 And then you realise that at the end of the day, the 
people are based in the Free State.  The contractors that 
were given those jobs of Operation Hlasela houses were 
these three.   
 
I think of Harrismith.  I think of Senekal and I think 
Vrede.  So on top of the allocation that they are in the list, 
this is where they were carrying also under the allocations 
20 
from Operation Hlasela Project.   
 
And also, the third point.  I think, Aleatory and Quinoa 
were also allocated the Restitution Housing Project in 
Ode(?).  So it means, it the most three layers that makes me 
think that it means there is some kind of closeness here.   
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 149 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But was he the one allocating them, 
houses to build under the Operation Hlasela Project? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was the one allocating that? 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, he was the one allocating there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MOKOENA:   And maybe sometimes me and him were 
saying to the premier that we do not have subsidies.  You 
must not allow this.  Even sometimes when the premier 
announced, he comes back again to allocate those to him, 
10 
his close companies.   
 
So it means, he is just saying to me, we are together.  
By saying to the premier we do not have any budget for 
these allocations but give it some time.  He goes back to use 
the same thing that he was doing to allocate for himself 
these contractors. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, it may be that from what you 
said, one could conclude that these contractors were 
favoured by being given contracts at all three levels but 
being very close to Mr Zwane implies something more than 
20 
that or must be limited to what you have said is the reason? 
MR MOKOENA:   Chairperson, for me, if you allocate so 
many units, the newly established contractors, not just that 
the overbearing them, it means also that there is something 
that brings you close to them.  Although I cannot vouch.  We 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 150 of 186 
 
have not seen anything but it means there is also some 
benefits that comes from that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So apart from the fact that these 
contractors appeared to be favoured by Mr Zwane in his 
allocation of the housing contracts, you have no other 
evidence of closeness. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes.  But I think there should have been a 
benefit. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, that is your assumption. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is my assumption. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have no evidence of that. 
MR MOKOENA:   No evidence about that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Good.  Because it is a serious 
allegation. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you also mentioned here that Mr 
Zwane communicated to you the need to expedite process 
payment.  What was that all about? 
20 
MR MOKOENA:   Okay that was on the subsidy section on 
that list. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right? 
MR MOKOENA:   So wherever they were building with these 
contractors and contractor in Kroonstad, they would call me 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 151 of 186 
 
and say, this contractor that submitted their claims, make 
sure that you speed up their claims.  Speed up the 
processing of those claims.   
 
But with other contractors it was not coming to us to 
pressurise us to ask us to expedite the processing.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  But quite apart from the 
allocation of contracts to particular contractors, is it the job 
of the MEC and your experience to be involved in expediting 
payments to these contractors? 
MR MOKOENA:   Not at all.  Not at all Chair. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was your conclusion about 
whether this was regular or irregular? 
MR MOKOENA:   My conclusion was that there was a 
relationship that was beyond just a functional procedure.  
That is, I was talking about benefits. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 21, you talk about tenders 
and instructions of the MEC.  What was that?  I think you 
have already given this evidence.  Is there anything to add, 
paragraph 21. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, I have already given this evidence 
20 
about the projects. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And you have given the 
evidence in paragraph 22 about how in your department you 
would work on a grading system. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 152 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And award contracts consistent with 
that grading system. 
MR MOKOENA:   Their performance. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That was not followed in this 
allocation. 
MR MOKOENA:   Not at all. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, what do you say there at the 
bottom of page 345?  You provide some more detail. 
MR MOKOENA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I think you have given this evidence 
10 
but perhaps just for completeness so that we do not leave 
anything out.  What do you say there in the last part of 
paragraph 22? 
MR MOKOENA:   In the last part of 22, all I am saying there 
is that these six contractors, when you look at the span of 
the work that they were doing, they were doing more than 
500 per contractor per day but they knew.   
 
And for me within that capacity to do, to deliver on this, I 
think it is just because they wanted more money to be 
reallocated to them because at that time, the subsidy house 
20 
was roundabout R 55 000,00 per unit.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that R 55 000,00 at the end of page 
345, is R 55 000,00 per unit? 
MR MOKOENA:   R 55 000,00 per RDP unit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 153 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So if you allocate ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKOENA:   Five hundred multiply by ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You get about 275 million. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Really? 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is a lot of money. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   R 55 000,00 times 500.  I am sure 
10 
someone can work it out for me.  But it is a lot of money. 
MR MOKOENA:   It is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  This programme then, you 
say in paragraph 23, again with the signing of contracts with 
the contractors.  When did that take place? 
MR MOKOENA:   Mainly from November after the signing of 
that document of 25 November. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And once these contracts had 
been signed, how did the plan continue to be implemented? 
MR MOKOENA:   As the plan was implemented in a way that 
20 
the advertise(?) contract.  It needs the material supplier.  
Will have a contract... will enter into a contract with the 
department as well as with the contractor through the 
cessions.   
 
So they start delivering the materials to the contractor 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 154 of 186 
 
on site and then when the... when we pay... when the 
contractor claims and the money goes back to the material 
supplier because the material supplier supplies. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  We have learnt in the review 
application of the papers of the detail of the three chairs of 
contract. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The first being the contract with the 
contractor, the second being the try-part(?) contract for the 
supplier and delivery of materials. 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the third being the cession 
agreement.  But I do not want to go back through those 
detailed agreements. 
MR MOKOENA:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So if I understand what you are 
saying that pursuant to this contractual arrangement of 
cessions 
and 
supply 
agreements 
and 
contracts 
with 
contractors, materials were delivered. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, that is true. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To the contractors.  And the claim 
was made against the department against which claim the 
department paid. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now was... were you satisfied when 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 155 of 186 
 
you received the claim in the form of an invoice or how ever 
that in fact the materials had been delivered? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is why I had reservations from the 
beginning because I knew that when it comes to invoices, 
you can never be sure about any invoice that we are getting 
because some invoices will be inflated, the prices will be 
changed from area to area, from region to region.   
 
So I think I had a fear that we were not going to be able 
to control that because if we have enough stuff, we have 
enough technical people.  So the authenticity of these 
10 
invoices was always a reservation for me. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And that is a subject matter of 
later investigations.   
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  Just to try and 
follow and this is as Mr Pretorius just said, it was something 
that was covered in the review application but I just want to 
have clarity in my own mind.   
 
You have a material supplier, you have a contractor, a 
20 
building contractor and you have the department.  Now in 
terms of Mr Zwane’s solution of strategy, the material 
supplier would supply the material or deliver material to the 
contractor. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 156 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then the contractor would then issue 
an invoice to the department. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then on the basis of that, the 
department would then pay the contractor. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or the material supplier. 
MR MOKOENA:   Will pay the material supplier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so the department will pay the 
material supplier. 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it would do so without checking 
whether the material had been delivered. 
MR MOKOENA:   And whether the material and the invoice 
are in sync. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Match.  Ja.  
MR MOKOENA:   That is where the problem was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But of course, if the department 
wanted to check, they could check that, is it not? 
MR MOKOENA:   If we had capacity we could check. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   If the capacity to check. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But did the department also asked the 
contractor to certify or confirm in writing that the material 
had been delivered? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 157 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   I think that is what our technical people 
were doing with the contractors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   To get all the materials that he needed 
from this material supplier according to this invoice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOKOENA:   Because the invoice were brought to us by 
the contractors from the material suppliers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   They checked that part. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So your department would have something 
from the contractors saying:  Yes, the material has been 
delivered. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether that was factually true or not, 
would be something that you did not know. 
MR MOKOENA:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, we have heard evidence and 
again one does not want to go back into the complexity of 
20 
the relationship between these three chairs of agreement.  
But we have heard evidence that, firstly that the agreements 
of cession were used as documentation to justify the 
payments. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 158 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we have also heard evidence 
that the document required to verify a payment such as the 
certification of receipt by the contractor.  Those were not 
always present when payment was made. 
MR MOKOENA:   Were not always available. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.   
MR MOKOENA:   I think that is exactly the problem that we 
had because we were still a new department.  We did not 
10 
have sufficient staff, sufficient capacity that could do this 
very well.  So I was right in the beginning not in agreement 
with this type of plan to be implemented because it 
overwhelmed us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  But of course, the original 
agreement and the standard form arrangement of the 
relationship between the contractor and the department had 
its own safeguard because the contractor would have to 
source the materials. 
MR MOKOENA:   H’m. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The contract would have to pay. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if there was anything untoward 
in 
that 
relationship, 
the 
contractor 
would 
suffer 
...[intervenes]  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 159 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...if the contractor had now to pay 
for materials that had pay for materials that were not even 
delivered, correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So the contractor would in its own 
interest check that supplies were actually delivered in 
correct quantities of the correct quality because it ultimately 
is responsible for payment. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And only after a milestone has been 
reached, can the contractor then claim for those materials 
from the department, correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So that system has its own inherent 
safeguards. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   None of those safeguards existed or 
very few of those safeguards existed in this new plan.  Is 
that correct? 
20 
MR MOKOENA:   No, they were not ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that was your concern. 
MR MOKOENA:   Ja, that was my concern.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say in the third paragraph, not 
the third numbered paragraph on page 346, that during the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 160 of 186 
 
period November 2010 to February 2011, an amount was 
spent in pursuance of this plan of supplying materials and 
paying materials supplies.  How much was that? 
MR MOKOENA:   Rounding it off to R 500 million.  That was 
first a bit below R 500 million. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But this plan of paying suppliers to 
supply materials to contractors cost in a short period of time 
R 500 million. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And do I understand correctly, this 
10 
would then be... or what was the purpose of spending the 
money?  Let me not put words in your mouth. 
MR MOKOENA:   The purpose of spending the money was to 
ensure that this money is not withheld by the Department of 
Human Settlements.  It was to circumvent that, according to 
him. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I would like to show you, if I may, 
another document which you do not mention in your 
statement but before I show you that document.  The 
position now is, November/December 2010, no houses have 
20 
been build and the department’s plan is to pay half a billion 
rand and more to suppliers in order to avoid losing the 
money. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 161 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you look behind you, please and 
file or Bundle FS14, and if you would please go to page 
226? 
MR MOKOENA:   226? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  The document on the right 
hand side of that page, begins there, at least. 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That one.  Do you recognise that 
document? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is it? 
MR MOKOENA:   It was our expenditure recovery plan. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   How did that document come to 
exist? 
MR MOKOENA:   This document came to exist after we had 
started working through our war room. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, we will get to the war room 
later. 
MR MOKOENA:   Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That war room we have learnt was 
a series of meetings that devised and monitored the 
implementation of the expenditure – the advance payment 
plan, correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 162 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  So – and we have heard 
from other sources about this document.  If I could take 
you please to the document at FS14, 233.  It is headed 
Cash Flow Projection.  Now more or less what was the date 
of this document?  When would it have been compiled? 
MR MOKOENA:   Compiled around October. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   October 2010?  
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And if you look at the cash flow 
projections, we can go through it in detail, if you like, but 
10 
in 
summary 
what 
those 
projections 
represent 
is 
the 
completion of several thousand houses or units at a total 
cost of R1 billion.  Do you see that? 
MR MOKOENA:    That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was there any hope on earth that 
this could ever have been achieved?  Or perhaps I should 
phrase my question more neutrally.   What prospect was 
there of this being achieved if it were made in months of 
the financial year? 
MR MOKOENA:   Ja, you have got me there.  I think the 
20 
projections were made with the understanding that we are 
going to speed up in terms of getting our capacity but we 
were thinly stretched, I must agree.  If you do not have a 
capacity in technical circumstances you do not have 
sufficient capacity in project management, we are not 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 163 of 186 
 
going to get to that level.  I think this is the amount that 
was allocated to us, we were trying to work from the 
allocation backwards. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I see.  So you were saying look, 
we have been allocated …[intervenes] 
MR MOKOENA:   1.2. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   …over a billion rand, this is how 
we would like to spend it. 
MR MOKOENA:   Exactly.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that…? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   That is some kind of a map for us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But was it realistic? 
MR MOKOENA:   It was not realistic.  Not realistic. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.   
CHAIRPERSON:   How was that helpful in the context of 
the real problem that you were trying to deal with namely 
to do a wish list or a wish programme to say by end of 
March 2011, end of the financial year, we should have 
spent the whole R1,3 billion that has been allocated to us?  
Now let us work backwards and see how we would like – 
20 
what milestone we would like to achieve between now, 
October 2010 and March 2011.  How was that going to help 
you? 
MR MOKOENA:   Chair, I think here we were working 
without being focused.  I think here we were working based 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 164 of 186 
 
on the funds that we have and to say from these funds 
what are the things that we could do and then we looked at 
dividing the milestones of payments per unit, foundations – 
so many foundations, this is how much we can spend.  
Then when we come to expenditure on the whole place, if 
you can build so many whole places, how much you can 
pay.  So I think it was helping us in terms of looking at 
what are the tangible milestones that we could achieve.  
But we knew that we are not going to spend the whole 1 
billion. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but how was that exercise of 
preparing this document if it was prepared on that basis 
going to help you because what you should be looking at, I 
would imagine, is given our capacity, given the short time 
left before the end of the financial year, given the 
allocations we have, what can we realistically achieve?  
Let us prepare a document that will reflect what we can 
realistically achieve.  If you were talking about such a 
document, I would understand but, as I understand what 
you are saying, that is not what you were seeking to do, 
20 
you were seeking to say what would be nice to achieve 
with this R1,3 billion in three months?  It would be nice to 
achieve so many houses, to build so many houses in 
January.  It will be nice to build so many houses in 
February and it would be nice to build so many houses by 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 165 of 186 
 
end of March, but it does not help anyway. 
MR MOKOENA:   You are correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So why were you doing it? 
MR MOKOENA:   I thinking we taking an exercise(?) trying 
to look at when we throw our eyes(?) right at the end and 
say we wanted to have so many – or build so many 
foundations, so many units by March.  If we cannot achieve 
that, where else are we going to fall to?  We were looking 
at it in terms of projection and rather(?) than in terms of 
what we can achieve.  I agree that it is not practical.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But did you not …[intervenes] 
MR MOKOENA:   Given the time and the capacity that we 
had. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, you have used the words 
unfocused, impractical and unrealistic but at this time you 
were engaged with a different project and that is the 
material supply expenditure of over half a billion rand, 
correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You were not engaged in this 
project that you see on the paper. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But this was a document that was 
to be given to National, not so? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 166 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, it was. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Was the purpose not to persuade 
National not to take your money away? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true.  That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that being the case, Mr Mokoena, 
you were misrepresenting to the National Department.  You 
were saying to them we are capable of achieving this and 
we are going to achieve it, it is realistic, so that if they 
bought that story they would not take the money away but 
you knew that that was not true, did you not? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   We did, we knew. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So why did you misrepresent the facts to 
them? 
MR MOKOENA:   I do not have an answer for that. 
MR MOKOENA:   I do not have an answer for that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, it is concerning because you 
were the HOD, that is a very responsible position and you 
have 
certain 
responsibilities, 
you 
are 
dealing 
with 
taxpayers’ money under your leadership.  The department 
had not built a single house by October 2010, six months 
20 
into the financial year and now you are coming up with a 
document that misrepresents the situation, you put – you 
send it to the National Department in order to prevent the 
National Department from taking money and giving it to 
other provinces who are prepared to work.  That was 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 167 of 186 
 
wrong, is it not? 
MR MOKOENA:   It was wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It should not have happened. 
MR MOKOENA:   That was wrong, Chair, I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you sorry about having done this? 
MR MOKOENA:   I am sorry about that, we should not have 
misrepresented the facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKOENA:   Because we did not have capacity for 
this, that we put in here. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I am sure that in time the 
Chair will appreciate and will express his appreciation for 
your frankness.  Thank you. 
MR MOKOENA:   Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Of course, one does not have to 
emphasise or even mention the prejudice that these 
actions and misappropriation of monies caused for the 
people who deserved to have decent housing. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What happened then in November 
and December? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before that, before you answer that 
question, Mr Mokoena, of course if you had stood your 
ground and said I am not going to be party to this, this is 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 168 of 186 
 
illegal and you let Mr Zwane do whatever he wanted to do, 
if he wanted to fire you, let him do that, if he wanted to do 
that or you reported this to National Department, maybe 
other 
authorities 
within 
the 
province, 
but 
National 
Department, it may be that the National Department would 
have taken the money and therefore the money would not 
have 
been 
paid 
to 
suppliers 
and 
would 
not 
have 
disappeared as it seems to have happened, over R500 
million.  You appreciate that? 
MR MOKOENA:   Chairperson, I know that in life there are 
10 
other – there are decisions that you make that you say I 
am correcting this decision but the other decision that you 
make that you realise that on hindsight, this decision I 
should not have taken because now I can see that – the 
wrongs that came out of that decision, worse than if I said 
no.  If I said no to this, we could have saved this money, 
some houses would have been built in other provinces 
because we are also gaining from other provinces that 
were not building, were not performing.  Because we are 
smaller province but our budget was bigger because in the 
20 
years 
that 
we 
have 
been 
building, 
we 
have 
been 
performing, building about 9 000 to 10 000 units every 
year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   So that is how we are getting this money, 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 169 of 186 
 
which was bigger than other provinces that were almost our 
size, Mpumalanga and North West.  We are getting money 
more than them.  So I am sorry about that, I think this 
should not have happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   In hindsight I think I should not have 
taken that decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokoena, in November and 
December or rather, in December, did you take leave? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   Correct, Chair, I took leave in December. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was the instruction of the 
MEC about leave for your department’s employees during 
that time? 
MR MOKOENA:   The instruction of the MEC was that no 
one must take leave for December vacation because he 
wanted us to implement this plan.  But as we have spoken, 
that this plan came in October and my leave, specially the 
cruise that I was taking, we had already paid – we paid in 
June, so the plan was done six months before so I could 
20 
not cancel it because if I cancelled it, I was going to lose 
out on the money I had paid. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, you look leave? 
MR MOKOENA:   I took leave. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And who did you appoint to act in 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 170 of 186 
 
your place during the time of your leave? 
MR MOKOENA:   I appointed Mr Kaizer Maxatshwa. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what was the response of Mr 
Zwane to that? 
MR MOKOENA:   Mr Zwane’s response was that he cannot 
work with Mr Maxatshwa, he does not want me to appoint 
Mr Maxatshwa to act, he wants me to appoint Ms Maniki(?) 
Mokhele to act on my behalf. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And did that happen? 
MR MOKOENA:   And I had to do that, Chair. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you had two HODs during that 
time? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  You were good earlier on to 
give a spelling of some of the names.  I do not think we 
gave yesterday, Maxatshwa’s spelling for the record, for 
the transcribers.  Maybe let us do that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it is M-a-x-a-t-s-h-w-a, is that 
correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And Kaizer is K-a-i-z-e-r, is that 
20 
correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And Ms Mokhele, M-o-k-h-e-l-e. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   During that time then, the 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 171 of 186 
 
payments that were made, by whom were they approved? 
MR MOKOENA:   It was approved by Maniki Mokhele. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you able to comment on what 
you describe here as deliverables, in other words the 
actual success of the project or is that something we must 
leave to the investigators? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you gone back to his affidavit? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I have, page 347. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  This other file we can… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, please, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will not need it for some time.  Okay, 
yes, thank you, page 347. 
MR MOKOENA:   Chairperson, in summary, what I am 
saying here is that after then all this, implementing this 
plan, the only thing that we could say we could have done, 
there was not a single project that was completed.  Instead 
we had many more foundations in different areas in the 
province rather than complete houses and too few  were 
built(?).  So for me we did not achieve anything in terms of 
complete projects although we spent so much money on 
20 
materials that we bought and in the running up and down 
paying for the officials to go and do inspections and all 
that but we did not achieve what we were supposed to 
achieve.  That is in short what I was saying about our 
performing. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 172 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see here you say that you ended up 
having – the department ended up having two acting HODs 
during your absence. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct, it should not be like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because there is only one post. 
MR MOKOENA:   There is only one post.  I had appointed 
Maxatshwa but I could not go back to him physically and 
get the letter back. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   So I had to write another letter, another 
acting letter for Maniki Mokhele, so therefore there were 
two letters of acting but I contacted Mr Maxatshwa and 
said no, that the MEC has asked me to withdraw your letter 
of acting and give Maniki Mokhele a letter of acting.  So he 
was aware, I informed him.  But the letter physically is still 
with 
him. 
 
So 
that 
is 
why 
I 
am 
saying 
officially 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But were they both paid as acting 
20 
HODs? 
MR MOKOENA:   No, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Only one person? 
MR MOKOENA:   Only one person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Mokhele? 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 173 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   Mokhele, that is true, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is the position that although you did 
not withdraw Mr Maxatshwa’s appointment as acting HOD 
but you told him verbally? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That the actual acting HOD would be Ms 
Mokhele? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is true, Chair.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so it would therefore not be 
correct, would it be to say they were both acting HODs 
10 
because 
you 
might 
not 
have 
withdrawn 
the 
acting 
appointment 
in 
writing 
but 
you 
effectively 
told 
Mr 
Maxatshwa that the acting – the real acting HOD would be 
Ms Mokhele. 
MR MOKOENA:   Ms Mokhele. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct.  I think he was just 
showing that where I had two sent letters to two different 
people at the same time although I had already spoken to 
Mr Maxatshwa that he was not the one who was acting. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright. 
MR MOKOENA:   But because of the MEC who does not 
want to work with this person, that he wants to work with 
that person, for me I think it was not correct because they 
are both working in his department. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 174 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKOENA:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mokoena, 
under 
the 
heading 
Deliverables 
do 
I 
understand 
in 
summary what you are saying is that some houses were 
built up to foundation stage? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But no more, no complete houses 
in this period. 
MR MOKOENA:   There were no completed houses, that is 
10 
correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And, of course, NURCHA was then 
appointed to attempt to remedy the situation, is that 
correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   Chair, I must say in meetings at National 
Department they realised that I had this problem and 
NURCHA was part of us in those meetings where I was 
putting our position that we have a problem, we do not 
have capacity in terms of monitoring our project.  When 
NURCHA came to us and said we are here to help you then 
20 
we signed an SLA with NURCHA, then they started helping 
us, working very closely in our war room because we 
wanted to build our own capacity in that way.  Thank you, 
Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On page 348 under the heading 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 175 of 186 
 
Meeting with the National Minister of Human Settlements 
you described a meeting that took place in February 2011. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was this meeting elsewhere 
referred to as the Welkom meeting? 
MR MOKOENA:   No, this meeting was held in the 
honourable Minister ’s office in Pretoria. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  But if you could help us 
please, do you recall a Welkom meeting? 
MR MOKOENA:   I am not sure. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, then we will have to find 
out about that meeting from someone else.  So do not 
concern yourself with that.  Tell us about the meeting that 
happened during February 2011 please.  Who attended? 
MR MOKOENA:   As far as I can recall it was myself, our 
new CFO, the late Mr Hattingh and Mr Tsoametsi, Muso, 
from the officials’ side and then the MEC himself and in the 
meeting at National it was then himself, Mr Sexwale and 
the Director General Mr Thabane Zulu.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, what was the purpose of the 
20 
meeting? 
MR MOKOENA:   The purpose of the meeting was the 
Minister wanted to talk to us about this delivery model that 
we were implementing.  That was the purpose of the 
meeting.  He wanted us to discuss it. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 176 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, prepayment model. 
MR MOKOENA:   Prepaying of material. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What did he say? 
MR MOKOENA:   He said he does not agree with this, we 
must stop it immediately, he was not aware that this was 
happening, he only got word of it in January but now must 
not continue, we must stop where we are which was 
February when we met him and we agreed that February 
month end we will never hand out any further advance on 
building materials. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now you knew prior to February 
2011, Mr Mokoena, that the National Department of Human 
Settlements 
and 
Treasury 
was 
concerned 
about 
expenditure. 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have told the Chair already 
about 
the 
expenditure 
recovery 
plan 
what 
misrepresentation had been made to National in that 
regard but was it ever told to National or ever reported to 
National that this prepayment scheme had been devised 
20 
and was in force?  Did you ever say to them in October 
that the scheme had been devised and they should know 
that this scheme with all its question marks was taking 
place? 
MR MOKOENA:   I think when we were still submitting our 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 177 of 186 
 
recommended strategy, which was recovery plan, they 
rejected it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you continued nevertheless? 
MR MOKOENA:   We continued nevertheless. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you ever tell them that despite 
their rejection of the plan you were still going to continue 
with it? 
MR MOKOENA:   No, we did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the February meeting with the 
National Minister – because I think you already asked on 
10 
that, Mr Pretorius, is that right? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said you agreed to stop the 
payments.  When you said that, did that include MEC 
Zwane also agreeing or you were talking about yourself? 
MR MOKOENA:   It was including MEC Zwane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He also agreed? 
MR MOKOENA:   He also agreed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did he – before he agreed, did he 
20 
engage the National Minister at all? 
MR MOKOENA:   Yes, in the meeting he engaged the 
Minister about the legality of the plan and all that.   We 
discussed and the Minister said no, I will not agree to it.  I 
hear you but this is not correct. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 178 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did the MEC attempt to persuade 
the National Minister that the plan was legitimate? 
MR MOKOENA:   He did try in the meeting but he did not 
succeed – we did not succeed, in fact. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And in attempting to 
persuade the National Minister of the legitimacy of the plan 
did the MEC refer to any document? 
MR MOKOENA:   No, he did not refer to any document. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, just have a look – if we 
have to correct this we have to correct it but if you look at 
10 
the second last paragraph on page 348 you there refer to 
the Tsoametsi document. 
MR MOKOENA:   Okay.  No, he did not mention the 
document, he just spoke about his plan without mentioning 
the document.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, so he did not mention that 
document. 
MR MOKOENA:   He did not mention the document in the 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you – it might be necessary to just 
20 
clarify that because I think your affidavit says he did. 
MR MOKOENA:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, well let us go there.  In your 
statement at page 348, paragraph 27, you deal with the 
meeting that we are discussing now. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 179 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The meeting that took place in the 
office of the National Minister Sexwale, correct? 
MR MOKOENA:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say that: 
“During the meeting the Minister said he heard that 
we were paying advance and that same must be 
stopped as it is illegal and it could not happen 
whilst he is the Minister of Human Settlements.” 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That happened? 
MR MOKOENA:   That happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  So the Minister did not say 
you told me, he said he had found out. 
MR MOKOENA:   He found out. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  In the second sentence you 
say: 
“In this regard the MEC said we had a document 
showing that it was legal to make the advance 
payments.  For reference purpose he was referring 
20 
to 
the 
document 
attached 
to 
my 
affidavit 
as 
annexure MMM2.  The Minister, however, insisted 
that we stop the payment.” 
Now there is the reference you make to that document, is 
that correct?  
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 180 of 186 
 
MR MOKOENA:   That is not correct, I think I should pull 
up the reference, I think I was summarising what you are 
saying, he was talking about this document as a way of 
trying to debate with the Minister but without saying that 
we have a document.  He did not mention it.  So it 
[indistinct] 27.17 wanted to show what I am talking about 
here. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, so you inferred that what 
he was referring to was that document? 
MR MOKOENA:   I inferred it. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes and we looked at that 
document, that document does not say anything about 
legality, it presumes the legality. 
MR MOKOENA:   It does. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It might be helpful if you did a 
supplementary affidavit just to correct that. 
MR MOKOENA:   Correct it.  Okay, thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think they will assist you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say in the last paragraph that 
20 
in view of the meeting and what happened at the meeting 
you had to give an undertaking as the accounting officer in 
the Free State that we would stop the advance payments.  
Did you give that undertaking? 
MR MOKOENA:   I gave that undertaking in that meeting. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 181 of 186 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And did you stop those payments? 
MR MOKOENA:   And I stopped those payments in 
February 2011. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, there is some evidence or 
some allegations at least that the payments continued after 
that.  Do you know anything about that? 
MR MOKOENA:   No.  After February 2011? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   Let us see if I can be reminded. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, there is evidence to the 
10 
effect that the payments continued – or at least there are 
allegations to the effect that payments continued after 
February 2011 to suppliers pursuant to the scheme.  Do 
you know anything about that? 
MR MOKOENA:   No because during the time when there 
were 
contractors 
coming 
to 
my 
office 
with 
material 
suppliers, it was after February and I told them that I will 
not sign anything, this is has stopped.  So I am surprised if 
that happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, have a look at the next page, 
20 
page 349, paragraph 28.  Just have a look at that and tell 
the Chair what you say about those three lines there. 
MR MOKOENA:   Okay, here what I am saying is that 
although it came from the meeting at National with the 
agreement and the undertaking that we will not give out 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 182 of 186 
 
new contracts in terms of advance for materials for the 
projects the MEC, when we got home, started asking me to 
allocate to new then I said no, we cannot do that.  I think 
that is what I was mentioning here is that he wanted us to 
continue although we had made an undertaking that we 
were going to stop this system.  I think maybe I did not put 
it correctly there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry I missed out, I missed that, what 
is it that you say you didn’t put correctly? 
10 
MR MOKOENA:   All that I am trying to say is that coming 
from the meeting where we took an undertaking – we made 
an undertaking with the Minister that we are going to stop 
this scheme of advance ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Advance payments. 
MR MOKOENA:   Advance payments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm? 
MR MOKOENA:   Then ...[indistinct] came to me after that, 
asking me to do that revenue contractors, then I said no 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   To make advance payments to some 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKOENA:   Yes to continue with this scheme. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOKOENA:   And I said no. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 183 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKOENA:   And then we stopped there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, he didn’t try further? 
MR MOKOENA:   He didn’t try further. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKOENA:  But here I think what I was saying here is 
what 
we 
have 
already 
mentioned 
that 
there 
were 
contractors in his list that were close to him.  I think I 
might have misplaced it here because we had already 
discussed it on the other side.   I am sorry about that. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So is it correct that Mr Zwane 
insisted that you continue paying contractors? 
MR MOKOENA:   He insisted that we must continue with 
the scheme. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The scheme, the prepayment 
scheme? 
MR 
MOKOENA: 
 
 
The 
payment 
scheme 
and 
then 
...[intervenes]    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you said no?  
MR MOKOENA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Were there other payments that 
had to be made that were of a regular nature or milestones 
being reached and the like? 
MR MOKOENA:   For the regular nature yes we had – we 
continued with that. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 184 of 186 
 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
And 
you 
continued 
those 
payments? 
MR MOKOENA:   Those payments, we didn’t agree to any 
new contract after that, after February month. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well did you pay in terms of 
existing contracts before supplies were delivered?  Did you 
make any prepayments after February in terms of existing 
agreements to do so? 
MR MOKOENA:   No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, you only paid the regular 
10 
contractors milestone achieved payments? 
MR MOKOENA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair I am almost finished but 
there are a number of issues that I must still put to Mr 
Mokoena arising out of the last two days evidence, and I 
would like an opportunity just to check my list, I could go 
on, but it might require me to come back tomorrow anyway 
and in any event we will finish tomorrow with the witnesses 
set down for tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay is the next witness after Mr 
20 
Mokoena on Friday or is there one tomorrow? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No tomorrow ...[indistinct – 
microphone off] yes I don’t intend, unless I am directed 
otherwise Chair calling Mr Koloi because all that he does is 
confirm what Mr Maxatshwa says. 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 185 of 186 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So we will finish in time tomorrow 
with those witnesses.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so tomorrow another witness will 
be Mr Maxatshwa. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and then Friday it will be another 
witness? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that is fine, let us adjourn then 
10 
for today and then resume tomorrow at ten o’clock. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we will adjourn Mr Mokoena, we will 
resume at ten o’clock tomorrow morning. 
MR MOKOENA:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 23 SEPTEMBER 2020 
 
 
20 
   
  
 
 
 
22 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 269 
 
Page 186 of 186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
