 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 337 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 211 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 3 of 211 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 04 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must make sure you call me when 
Counsel is on the screen.  Mr Myburgh are you available?  
He is not available.  Oh he is helping with the technicians 
today Mr Van Stamela is not here.  Good morning Dr. 
Khoza. 
DR KHOZA:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Counsel who is supposed to lead you 
has disappeared it seems.  We – 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes but Chair if I could indicate I am 
10 
here I am seeing you; I am hearing you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I do not know whether you can hear it 
is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh who controls who appears when; who 
disappears when on the screen? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair I believe that probably what has 
happened is that the Zoom setting that has been put in 
place is that you see the person speaking only. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but they make sure at least the – 
20 
that Counsel is on the screen when I enter because that is 
the first person that should be.  So – but I – technicians 
please make sure that that is how it happens.  Good 
morning Mr Freund, good morning everybody. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Good morning Chair. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 4 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready for this morning? 
ADV FREUND SC:  We are ready Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh.  Yes okay.  You want to call your 
witness, first witness for this morning and then the 
Registrar can administer the oath or affirmation. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  The first witness this 
morning will be Dr Makhosi Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.  Will they let her come 
onto the screen please?  Who is – it looks like today things 
are not working out as they normally do.  Sorry.  Okay Dr 
10 
Khoza please speak so that you can appear on the screen 
so that the oath or affirmation can be administered. 
DR KHOZA:  Okay Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you are there. 
DR KHOZA:  I am hearing you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Ja.  Registrar please 
administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  It looks like – can you – it looks like you 
cannot hear the Registrar speak to you Dr Khoza. 
20 
DR KHOZA:  I can – I could not hear her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let her just… 
DR KHOZA:  If she could speak a little loader please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja she will just speak up a bit. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 5 of 211 
 
DR KHOZA:  Makhosi Busisiwe Khoza. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
DR KHOZA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
10 
help me God. 
DR KHOZA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Dr Khoza.  Okay Mr 
Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Dr Khoza is it correct 
that you deposed to an affidavit which has been submitted 
to the commission by yourself? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes that right – that is correct Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And that affidavit is to be found – it is 
to be Exhibit ZZ4 it is to be found in Bundle 1 at pages 744 
20 
to 837.  Could you please Dr Khoza just go to the end of 
the affidavit itself which is at page 774?  That is the – that 
is the numbers of the pages on the top left of the page.  
Could you please confirm that that is your signature? 
DR 
KHOZA: 
 
Yes 
this 
is 
definitely 
my 
signature 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 6 of 211 
 
Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair I will request that Exhibit ZZ4 be 
formerly admitted into the record as an Exhibit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Dr Makhosi Busisiwe 
Khoza which starts at page 744 of Bundle 1 will be 
admitted together with its annexures and marked as Exhibit 
ZZ4. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Khoza you deal in 
your 
affidavit 
briefly 
from 
paragraph 
4.1 
to 
your 
background within the African National Congress could you 
10 
just briefly summarise the extent and the duration of your 
involvement with the African National Congress? 
DR KHOZA:  When I became associated with the African 
National Congress when I was 12 years old in 1982 until 
2017 and basically I have spent almost 35 years in that 
organisation – associated with that organisation. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And could you just mention very briefly 
functions 
you 
have 
performed 
in 
public 
life 
as 
a 
representative of the African National Congress? 
DR KHOZA:  Well there are quite a number of them and the 
20 
first one would be when I was the Deputy Mayor of then 
Pietermaritzburg Msunduzi Transition and Local Authority 
in 1996 and there subsequent to that I then – I went to the 
private sector but then I was called back and I found 
myself in the legislature KwaZulu Natal Legislature initially 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 7 of 211 
 
as the Chair of the Economic Development and Tourism 
Committee and subsequently I became the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on public accounts.  And I was also 
serving on the Standing Committee on finance at provincial 
level in KwaZulu Natal. 
 
Then in 2014 I was then elected to serve in the 
National Parliament and – and whilst I was there I held a 
position – I was initially a back bencher and subsequently I 
became the Chair of the Public Service and Administration. 
 
As a back bencher I was in the – I was serving in 
10 
the Standing Committee on finance in Parliament and that 
will be it. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright and we will come back to that in 
a little more detail shortly.  Just briefly as regards your 
educational background; your university qualifications? 
DR KHOZA:  Well I hold a – three of my under-graduate 
degrees that is the BA the post graduate diploma, the 
Masters Degree I obtained them at the University Of – of 
the then then University of Natal which is now University of 
KwaZulu Natal and I also – I then obtained my PH3 through 
20 
a 
– 
a 
partnership 
between 
Florida 
Agricultural 
and 
Mechanical University and the University of Zululand and I 
obtained a degree in administration specialising on total 
quality 
systems 
development 
using 
local 
government 
development and local government in South Africa is my 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 8 of 211 
 
case study. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 
Alright 
now 
you 
have 
already 
mentioned that you served on the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts in the KwaZulu Natal Legislature in 
paragraph 5.8 of your affidavit you explain very briefly 
what you 00:10:41.  Could you just briefly explain to the 
Chair what happened then? 
DR KHOZA:  Sorry I did not hear you what you said about 
5.8. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well if you have a look at paragraph 
10 
5.8 it deals with what came of your activities on the SCOPA 
of the KZN Legislature.  I am just asking briefly to 
summarise 
how 
your 
career 
on 
SCOPA 
of 
the 
KZN 
Legislature came to an end and why? 
DR KHOZA:  Well I – when I was a – the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts I was removed 
from that position because the ANC felt that I was too 
vocal on issues that were supposed to be internal issues 
and that was specifically on my call I used – my call on 
calling on the then Counsellor Alpha Shelembe to be 
20 
removed as the Deputy Mayor.  There is a history to that.   
 
Alpha Shelembe was removed as – he was amongst 
the counsellors that were removed as – as a counsellor in 
that Municipality because the Municipality had collapsed. 
 
And – and as a spokesperson the ANC at that time I 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 9 of 211 
 
was the one that was leading the – the whole campaign 
election campaign and went – what I did I was telling 
people how committed we are on corruption – in fighting 
corruption.  And so when we – when the ANC won the 
elections in that Municipality they then brought back Alpha 
Shelembe that we had recalled before the elections. 
 
So I then used my position as the Chair of SCOPA 
of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts to have him 
– to – I called on him to resign and indeed he resigned 
within 24 hours but subsequent to that I was also removed 
10 
as 
the 
Chair 
of 
the 
Standing 
Committee 
on 
Public 
Accounts. 
 
I was what I call upward – I was – I was demoted 
upward I became the Chief Whip of the Legislature but I 
was not happy with that position so I – I left.  I resigned 
from the Legis – KZN Legislature. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you have referred already to the 
fact that you became – you were elected as an ANC MP to 
the National Assembly from May 2014, is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:  That is absolutely correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you say in your affidavit that you 
served amongst others on the Standing Committee on 
Finance known by the abbreviation SCOF – S-C-O-F from 
June 2014 to February 2017.  You served on the ad-hoc 
committee to nominate a person for appointment as Public 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 10 of 211 
 
Protector.  In fact there you served as Chairperson.  You 
served on the ad-hoc committee on the South African 
Broadcasting Corporation board’s inquiry into the fitness of 
the SABC board in November 2016 to September 2017 and 
as we will deal with in due course you served on the 
Portfolio Committee on Public Service Administration, is all 
that correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Absolutely correct Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So I would like to start with your 
experiences 
as 
a 
– 
as 
a 
member 
of 
the 
Standing 
10 
Committee of Finance you deal with that in paragraph 8.2 
of your affidavit and you refer there to the fact that: 
“Whereas 
South 
African 
Airways 
have 
previously fallen under the jurisdiction of 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Public 
Enterprises 
when 
it 
got 
into 
serious 
financial difficulty oversight over that entity 
fell to Treasury and because of that SAA 
became 
accountable 
to 
the 
Standing 
Committee on Finance.” 
20 
 
Is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes that is correct 
ADV FREUND SC:  And in the course of your oversight 
activities on that committee you refer in paragraph 6.2.2 to 
an engagement between yourself and Ms Dudu Myeni who 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 11 of 211 
 
was before the committee to present a rescue plan for 
SAA.  Could you just tell us very briefly what – what type 
of engagement you had and then if you could explain what 
the consequences of that were as you deal with in your 
next paragraph? 
DR KHOZA:  Thank you Chairperson.  Basically we had 
requested the SABC board – I mean the – the South 
African Airways board to present a rescue plan and Ms 
Dudu Myeni in her capacity as a chairperson of that – of 
the board was invited to appear before the committee. 
10 
 
So when she came before the committee her main 
concerns were around – were around certain – the 
awarding 
of 
certain 
contracts 
including 
the 
catering 
contracts and one of those issues that she was also 
concerned about which she included as part of the rescue 
plan was to replace the white – white pilots – old pilots 
with young black pilots.  I then raised an issue on that. 
 
Now it is very important to understand that where I 
come from my understanding of transformation is not 
necessarily about one’s skin pigmentation but it is also 
20 
about quality systems that you put in place.  And it is also 
about ensuring that the people that get appointed have the 
key competencies to be able to – to do that job. 
 
My view was that – I asked her if she removes all 
the white – the white pilots – old pilots has she considered 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 12 of 211 
 
the fact that South African Airways is internationally 
acclaimed as the safest airline simply because of those 
very pilots.  How is she going to mitigate against that? 
 
And it was then that it became a heated debate 
because I was viewed even by own colleagues as being the 
anti-transformation. 
 
There 
were 
notes 
that 
were 
exchanging – that we had to exchange it to say you cannot 
ask that question or whatever. 
 
But after we finished that meeting I was he called 
by Des Van Rooyen who was at the time the Chief – who 
10 
was the Whip of the Committee and he also invited Pinky 
Kekana – I believe she is currently the Deputy Minister of 
Communications.  I stand to be corrected – I am not sure 
what exactly – what kind of – what position she is holding 
currently.   
 
So we then went for lunch.  They invited me for 
lunch and we usually do that anyway when we wanted to 
engage on some issues.  When we got at that lunch 
meeting Des Van Rooyen my Whip – the Whip of the 
Committee then asked me why did I do something that was 
20 
counter-revolutionary 
and 
that 
his 
questioning 
the 
transformation agenda that Comrade Dudu – Dudu Myeni 
was putting forward and I was then told that I must never 
ever challenge comrades. 
 
And that argument was quite heated because I then 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 13 of 211 
 
told them that to me you know one of my favourite even it 
is not there in the – in my affidavit but I do remember 
clearly even saying to them, you know sometimes as 
comrades and I am just quoting myself verbatim here.  I 
said sometimes as comrades we – we – we adopt certain 
phrases and I was referring specifically to the one in the 
constitution the phrase “acting without fear, favour or 
prejudice” and we then turn against ourselves because 
when we are supposed to do so we do not do so.  I do not 
understand why I should not be asking Comrade Dudu 
10 
Myeni you know those kinds of questions because to me 
the intention is to come up with a rescue plan is not to 
undo what is working with SAA.  And the safety record of 
SAA at the time remained intact and I still believe there is 
still hope that – that report.   
 
So basically that is what had happened. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now those allegations that you have 
just made Mr – what Mr Van Rooyen said to you have been 
put to Mr Van Rooyen and he has submitted an affidavit to 
the commission and he says that no discussion ever took 
20 
place between you and him.  He did not criticise you for 
the manner in which you had treated Ms Myeni and this is 
all lies.  Do you want to comment on that? 
DR KHOZA:  Well I think Des Van Rooyen knows very well 
that that actually did take place and – and Pinky Kekana 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 14 of 211 
 
was there at that meeting and it was during lunchtime and 
we were at Max Building which is usually used by the DA 
members and I am sure some of them probably did see us 
at that table.  Because I remember as we were having that 
kind of engagement some of them because they were also 
having lunch they even kind of looked at us and then we 
had to lower our voices.  So what Des Van Rooyen is 
saying to me I am disputing that because he did and that is 
a fact – he did say it. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I want to move on now to the SABC 
10 
inquiry.  You deal with this in paragraph [talking over one 
another] affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Freund.  I am sorry Freund.  
Does Mr Des Van Rooyen’s version include denying that 
the lunch took place between or involving the three of 
them? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have not seen the affidavit. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes it does – it does include that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  So he denies the lunch as 
20 
well? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair can I also – well let me – let me 
be as accurate as I can Chair.  This is to be found in the 
Reference Bundle at page 91 and if I could just – he refers 
Chair to the allegation because he was furnished with a 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 15 of 211 
 
Rule 3.3 Notice and he refers to the content of the Rule 
3.3 Notice and the content of paragraphs… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You got the page number? 
ADV FREUND SC:  6.2. –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you got the page number? 
ADV FREUND SC:  6.2 – 91 in the Reference. 
CHAIRPERSON:  91 okay.  Yes continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Then at paragraph 8 of Mr Van 
Rooyen’s affidavit he having referred to what he was told 
was going to be said in paragraph 6.2.2. and 6.2.3 of Dr 
10 
Khoza’s affidavit he says the following: 
“The allegations that Khoza makes against 
me in paragraph 6.2.3 of her affidavit are 
devoid of all truth.  No such discussion ever 
took place between her and me.  I did not 
criticise her for the manner in which she 
had treated Ms Myeni in fact I did not say 
any of the things that she alleges that I said 
that is all lies.” 
And he continues.  I – it is not absolutely clear that he 
20 
says there was no lunch but he certainly disputes the nub 
of what Dr Khoza contends. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no I … 
DR KHOZA:  Chairperson I have no reason to lie on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think on my reading of paragraph 8 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 16 of 211 
 
he appears to deny that there was such a lunch.  In any 
event if he – if he wanted to say no such discussion took 
place but there was such a lunch that took place he would 
have said so.  So it seems to me that there is justification 
in understanding that paragraph as including denying that 
lunch – that such a lunch took place.  Okay Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Dr Khoza I want to 
turn 
to 
the 
SABC 
inquiry 
which 
you 
deal 
with 
in 
paragraph6.4 of your affidavit and Chair just… 
DR KHOZA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Just for your own convenience there 
will be a witness later today one Mr Johnston and Mr 
Johnston attaches to his affidavit a – a more detailed 
summary of the events of – that are described here.  You 
will find that in Bundle 1 pages 250 to 254.  But we will 
deal with that when we get to Mr Johnston. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now in relation to the – sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  In relation to the SABC 
20 
inquiry you deal in paragraph 6.4.4 of your affidavit to 
certain critical comments you made about the then Minister 
of Communications Ms Muthambi and Dr Ben Ngubane who 
had been chairperson of the SABC board.  In very brief 
terms – very brief what was the gist of the sorts of 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 17 of 211 
 
comments or criticisms that you expressed in the course of 
that hearing? 
DR KHOZA:  Well first of all it was the manner in which 
they were – they were running the SABC the Public 
Broadcaster and – and secondly because at the time you 
must remember that I was a member of the ANC.  I probed 
their credentials first of all as members of the ANC and if I 
remember very correctly I even spoke about the principles 
that are enshrined in the constitution of the ANC if I 
remember correctly. 
10 
 
And – and basically I was critical at the manner in 
which they were running the affairs of the SABC because in 
my view I felt that even when you look at it from the party 
perspective the ANC perspective I felt that that was in 
contravention of what is expected of them as people who 
are claiming to be members of the ANC. 
 
And there is public records to that regard that whole 
SABC hearing was broadcast live so that would be known – 
it will be there – the record will be there. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes and you say in the – in paragraph 
20 
6.4.5 that an example was that you were critical of the – of 
the appointment and continuous in office of the Chief 
Operating Officer Mr Hlaudi Motsoeneng despite as the 
Public Protector had already found his lack of formal 
qualifications.  Is that one of the points you made? 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 18 of 211 
 
DR KHOZA:  Definitely I did.  I think what is important you 
also have to understand that apart from just being a 
politician I am also a scholar and a scientist and to me 
when you – when we have so many highly qualified people 
who are not able to get into the private – into the public 
sector in those kinds of positions I feel that it negates the 
whole commitment to education.   
If we are committed to improving education in South 
Africa we are not going to be taking somebody who had 
only up to a standard 9 and make that person a Chief 
10 
Operations Officer.   
So you are correct that is exactly one of the things 
that I was questioning that why did we continue with Hlaudi 
Motsoeneng as the Chief Operations Officer when there 
was an adverse finding by Advocate Thuli Madonsela on 
his qualifications. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then also just very, very briefly you 
refer to a remark you made at this hearing about Dr 
Ngubane.  What was the gist of the remark that you made? 
DR KHOZA:  Well with – with Dr Ngubane you know first of 
20 
all you must – you will recall that Dr Ngubane is a medical 
doctor and – and as a medical doctor he has to adhere to 
certain standards and – and he also has to function within 
a particular professional code of conduct. 
 
And my main issue with him was that I was 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 19 of 211 
 
identifying something different which – how he is running 
SABC and with him as a doctor who adhered to certain 
standards of professional codes – moral codes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright now you deal in paragraph 6.4.7 
with Ms Muthambi’s response to you outside of the formal 
inquiry about your criticism of Mr Motsoeneng being 
retained.  What did – what did Ms Muthambi say? 
DR KHOZA:  In fact Ms Muthambi not on one occasion on 
many occasions at some point she had called me to a 
meeting in – at Inter-Continental Hotel in Johannesburg. 
10 
She did not tell me why she was calling me.  At the time 
she was the Minister of Communications and I went there 
because – and she communicated that through Munali 
Soma [?] who was an MP but also a friend of mine – a 
personal friend of mine.  
 
So I went there and I remember because clearly 
because when we were there when I got at – at Inter-
Continental 
Hotel 
I 
found 
Ms 
Muthambi 
with 
Hlaudi 
Motsoeneng.  It was before the SABC inquiry and that 
statement that she made to me wherein she said she has 
20 
only one boss she mentioned it to me when she was telling 
me that President Zuma would like to consider me as the 
Minister of Finance.  However I must accept that I will have 
one boss and that one boss will be President Zuma.  And 
she made that statement during that time as well.  She was 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 20 of 211 
 
reminding me the statement she had made earlier to say 
she has one boss; she does not care about the NEC of the 
ANC; the people – the person that hired her is President 
Jacob Zuma and that was her only boss. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So when you said a moment ago she – 
she said it at that time she reminded me of what she had 
previously said are you referring to the time of the SABC 
inquiry? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes because you must remember at that 
meeting that we had at Inter-Continental took place before 
10 
there was SABC inquiry. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes and then she again raised the 
same issue if I understand you correctly? 
DR KHOZA:  She raised the same issue about having one 
boss. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Now in paragraph 6.4.8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am sorry Mr Freund.  I am sorry.  Dr 
Khoza I may have misunderstood but I just want to confirm 
that I have got this right now.  I thought when you said that 
meeting happened before you had the SABC inquiry I 
20 
thought 
you 
were 
talking 
about 
the 
one 
where 
she 
reminded you but I may have misunderstood because it 
looks like the one where she told you about her having one 
boss seems to – when she told you that for the first time it 
looks like it was – it happened before the SABC board took 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 21 of 211 
 
– the inquiry took – the SABC inquiry took place.  Am I 
right? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes.  The context under which she said it with 
at – during the SABC inquiry was in relation to Hlaudi 
Motsoeneng.  Hlaudi Motsoeneng you must remember that 
had been appointed and I am saying she – when she said 
that she was saying it within that context.  Because she 
was repeating what she had said earlier to me before. She 
said if President Zuma is happy with Motsoeneng even with 
his qualifications she has only one boss and that boss if 
10 
that boss is happy she is also happy with that.   
 
Basically what I was trying to emphasise here is 
that this statement that I have put here was not – it was 
not the first time that it was coming up but in this instance 
when she was mentioning it about Hlaudi Motsoeneng it 
was the first time she was mentioning it within that context 
of Hlaudi Motsoeneng’s qualifications. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And the occasion on which she would… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay I am sorry Mr Freund.  I may 
have missed this.  So before you had a meeting with Ms 
20 
Muthambi before or the first of the two meetings or the first 
of the two meetings did it happen before the SABC inquiry 
started or did it happen while the SABC inquiry was going 
on Dr Khoza? 
DR KHOZA:  We never had any private meetings – I never 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 22 of 211 
 
had any private meetings with Minister Faith Muthambi 
after the SABC board inquiry because we – our relationship 
broke down and I would say irreversibly. 
 
But that she said before it was long before the – it 
was long before the SABC inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR KHOZA:  And I had requested Advocate Freund earlier 
on that I wanted to make some amendments to my affidavit 
because I wanted to – this is one of the things that I 
wanted to raise because at a time when we put it together 
10 
there were quite a number of details that I did not put in 
primarily because of the time when we met you would 
recall that I actually even broke down because I was 
extremely, extremely emotional about – I was still going 
through my own pain with the manner in which I was 
treated and I was actually even reluctant at a time when 
we put this affidavit together.  I was reluctant to participate 
in the state capture commission but once we engaged and I 
reflected I then agreed and I said no that is fine I will go 
ahead.   
20 
 
So I am saying please take into account the fact 
that when we wrote this affidavit – when we put forward – 
when we put together this I was – it was at a time when I 
was not really right emotionally.  And I was not keen really.  
I was not really forthcoming but once I took that decision I 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 23 of 211 
 
was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well just so that I do not forget I must 
thank you for making the decision to come and give 
evidence Dr Khoza.  Mr Freund shared with me I think the 
correspondence – the correspondence so I know – I know 
the challenges that you were of concern to you but I am – I 
think that it was a very good decision you made to come 
and testify.  Okay thank you.  I think we can – we may 
proceed Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  I just want to digress 
10 
briefly because you are quite correct Dr Khoza that you did 
mention to me and before you came to testify today that 
there are some corrections that you would have wanted to 
make to the affidavit.  Maybe we could just deal with that 
and then we will come back to where we are at the 
moment. 
 
If you can just draw attention to other aspects of 
the affidavit if there are any? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well thank you.  In fact it was 6.4 it 
was specifically this part 6.4, 6.5 the entire of 6.5 and the 
20 
6.6.  In 6.6 it says in respect with line 4 which starts with: 
“This happened when I was removed from 
my 
position 
as 
Deputy 
Mayor 
of 
Pietermaritzburg.  In fact this happened 
when I was the Chairperson of Economic 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 24 of 211 
 
Development 
and 
Tourism 
in 
the 
KZN 
Legislature not Deputy Mayor.” 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right I have that correction and we will 
attend in due course to…  
DR KHOZA:  Ja but otherwise the other ones they are 
captured correctly.  The only thing that is – that is missing 
there is that I was very, very economical with the details 
and because I was trying to be careful and at the same 
time I also wanted to – I was – I wanted to raise as much 
as possible that was in respect of Parliamentary oversight 
10 
and in the process I omitted critical detail that will when I 
reflected I thought that it is going to be critical to be on 
record as we move forward in strengthening Parliamentary 
oversight. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So Dr Khoza if I can distinguish 
between two different issues?  The one is that you feel 
more detail is required and I understand that; the other is 
where you think that something you said is inaccurate.  
 
Now you have referred us to a – an inaccuracy in 
paragraph 6.6.1 you said position of Deputy Mayor of 
20 
Pietermaritzburg should have been a different position. 
DR KHOZA:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Are there any other inaccuracies to 
which you wish to draw attention? 
DR KHOZA:  No it is only that.  That is the technical one.  
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 25 of 211 
 
In other ones it is where I have more detail that I did not 
divulge at the time. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you very much.  Now I just want 
to go back because I am not sure that I understand clearly 
the 
evidence 
you 
have 
just 
been 
giving 
about 
the 
discussions you had with Ms Muthambi.   
 
As I heard you but please correct me if I am wrong 
you referred initially and in particular to a meeting at a 
hotel.  You had a comment about one boss was made.  Am 
I correct in understanding that there was a subsequent 
10 
occasion on which she referred back to that comment and 
she 
referred 
to 
it 
with 
specific 
reference 
to 
Mr 
Motsoeseng’s appointment and the views of her one boss 
the President? 
DR KHOZA:  I need to clarify this.  When she mentioned 
this for the first time it was when we were meeting at Inter-
Continental Hotel as we were engaging I think Gwede 
Mantashe walked in she – he was going to another meeting 
and they then said hey let us move away from where we 
were so that he does not see us.  And I said I think I made 
20 
reference to the fact that but Gwede is our boss as the 
ANC you know.   
 
So the first time she mentioned that she also said 
no you have to know that since President Zuma is 
considering you as the Minister of Finance you must 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 26 of 211 
 
remember that you have only one boss because I have only 
one boss and that one boss is President Zuma.   
 
So when she mentioned that she mentioned it in 
different context.  The one that it is in the affidavit that I 
am mentioning here it was in relation to my questioning 
Hlaudi Motsoeneng’s qualifications wherein she says if 
President Zuma is happy with Motsoeneng’s qualifications 
therefore you note I have one boss if my boss is happy 
therefore I am happy with that. 
 
So it was in relation to – to Hlaudi Motsoeneng the 
10 
second time.  It was not 00:42:42. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And that second time did that take 
place during – so before, during or after the SABC inquiry? 
DR KHOZA:  It was during the SABC inquiry.  We got – we 
went out and that is what she said to me. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Outside of the hearing itself? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right. 
DR KHOZA:  Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now in paragraph 6.4.8 you say that 
20 
you had both support and criticism.  If you could just 
explain very briefly what you are addressing in this 
paragraph? 
DR KHOZA:  I think it has to be said that prior to the late 
Jackson Mthembu – Minister Jackson Mthembu becoming 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 27 of 211 
 
assuming the position of Chief Whip in Parliament we 
heard Stone Sizani who was the – was the Chief Whip in 
Parliament. 
 
Now Stone Sizani was clearly not as appreciative of 
the critical importance of Parliamentary oversight over the 
Executive.  In his – my and this is my own opinion – this is 
my own view of him.  He never really took it kindly when 
we were criticising the members of the Executive as 
members of the ANC. 
 
And he – he in many instances he would even 
10 
remind us that we should not be speaking like the 
opposition when we are engaging with our Ministers.   
 
However when Jackson Mthembu became the Chief 
Whip we suddenly had the space to express ourselves as 
members of the ANC. 
In a way I do believe that Jackson Mthemba was kind of 
conflicted.  On one hand, he wanted us to do the right thing 
but on the other hand he was a party loyalist.  By a party 
loyalist, I am referring to the fact that there were – there was 
– there were limitations to which you can criticise your – the 
20 
senior leadership of the ANC but... 
 
And also, you must remember we also are operating 
within a very fractional environment.  So when you are taking 
on those that did not necessarily belong to the Chief Whip’s 
fraction, okay, Jackson Mthembu would be happy with that.  
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 28 of 211 
 
There was no limit. 
 
But when you were actually there will be others to 
account that may be belonging to his own faction, he was not 
very keen. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I want you also please to refer to 
the other persons who expressed criticisms of your conduct 
and oversight as you refer to in paragraph 6.4.8. 
DR KHOZA:   No, I received a lot of criticism from Sis Zani 
Dlamini, Duduzane, from Nomvula Mokonyane, from Doris 
Dlakude.  From quite a number of members of Parliament 
10 
that were not really not happy how we were tackling this 
especially those that were supportive of the President.   
 
And I must say this at the onset that I was never a 
factionalist.  So probably that was within that environment I 
was not – it was very difficult for me to get hundred percent 
support because to me it was – I was – it was very difficult to 
operate in a factional environment.   
 
I treated every member of the executive the same 
whether you belong to this ANC faction or the other faction.  
If you are coming before my committee and I had to do my 
20 
job, I just did my job.  It did not matter which faction you 
belong to. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I want to move on now to paragraph 
6.6 of your affidavit where you explain that you moved from 
the Standing Committee on 
Finance to the Portfolio 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 29 of 211 
 
Committee on Public Service and Administration.  Could 
you just explain what happened? 
DR KHOZA:   Well, there was a growing perception that in 
the Finance Standing Committee I was extremely critical of 
Dudu Myeni.  And it was a matter that was widely discussed 
about how I tackle her.   
 
At 
some 
stage, 
I 
remember 
that 
one 
of 
the 
comrades, I do not even remember who was that comrade 
but an ANC comrade, came to me and said:  But Comrade 
Makhozi a problem with you when you start agreeing with 
10 
Floyd Shivambu.  
 
Floyd was coming from the EFF and sometimes we 
aligned in terms of how we were looking at the situation, at 
the financial position, the critical financial position of South 
African Airways. 
 
So there was a view that when the opposition is 
raising something that you are not necessarily - that is – 
even if it is correct, whatever that opposition is raising is 
correct, you have to oppose it.  And my view was not like 
that.  
20 
 
I felt that if the opposition is opposing something 
and they are putting forward a compelling business case and 
they put forward evidence before us, I did not see why we 
should not – we should disagree with them. 
 
So basically I am saying to you.  I was finding 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 30 of 211 
 
myself constantly in conflict with some of the comrades even 
those who were supportive of me but when I do it with other 
comrades, they were like kind of cautious in dealing with me. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So what happened?  What happened to 
your membership of the Standing Committee on Finance 
and where did you go next? 
DR KHOZA:   Eventually I was removed from the Standing 
Committee on Finance and I remember very well because 
Eunice Karriem who was the chair was actually very 
aggrieved by that.  He felt that, you know, his committee – 
10 
he had – each chair of the Portfolio Committee had this.   
 
You will have your members that you will rely on to 
raise certain issues.  For example, he was relying on me.  
When the African Bank collapsed, he actually was the one 
that proposed that I should run with that process of 
rescuing the African Bank.  Meeting with BASA, the 
Banking Association of South Africa and engaging with 
them in order to try and strengthen that.   
 
So when I was removed, he was very aggrieved, 
Eunice Karriem.  In fact, he did say to me that this is 
20 
weakening the committee when I was removed.  So I was 
removed and put – I was then promoted as the Chair of 
Public Service and Administration. 
 
But to me it was also a demotion but – which was 
obviously a promotion if you look at the monetary side of 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 31 of 211 
 
things but if you look at the value that I was adding.  I am 
a person that love to do things that I am passionate about.  
So I was more passionate in the Finance Committee and I 
was more competent in that committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now I want to move on to 
issues where you came clearly to national attention in the 
media.  In fact, we deal with this in paragraph 7 of your 
affidavit and you refer in paragraph 7.1 to the events as 
they unfolded from April of 2017.  Could you maybe just 
talk to paragraphs 7.1 and 72 and explain to the Chair 
10 
what this is all about? 
DR KHOZA:   What had actually happened is that we had – 
you will remember when President Zuma did that reshuffling 
which was – which became known as the Midnight Special 
where he removed Nhlanhla Nene and replaced him with Des 
van Rooyen.   
 
And most of us were extremely unhappy with that 
especially because the leadership – and I want to put this on 
record because I subsequently started criticising the top 
leadership of the ANC in my private Facebook page which is 
20 
obviously accessible to the members of the public. 
 
It was when they – I think it was the then Deputy 
President of the ANC, who is currently the President of the 
Republic, Cyril Ramaphosa.  They came out in the open 
including Gwede Mantashe and Zweli Mkhize.  Those 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 32 of 211 
 
comrades came out against what the President had done.  
They were even saying publicly. 
 
And this is something that I am not generating.  It is 
something that everybody knows.  They came out publicly 
criticising President Zuma, not directly but saying they did 
not know about the decision that Nhlanhla Nene was going to 
be replaced by Des van Rooyen but subsequently they 
backtracked.   
 
So I then started writing.  Then what actually 
happened after that.  There was then a march that as 
10 
organised by Civil Society throughout the country.  If I am 
not mistaken, I think it was on the 7t h of April in 2017.   
 
And I think what happened there was that, there was 
– everybody was...  Oh, subsequent to that, after Des van 
Rooyen was removed, you will recall that then Pravin 
Gordhan was called back to take over that position.  And 
subsequently – then after – when Pravin Gordhan was also 
removed, again there were public pronouncements on the 
fact that they did not know about that decision of the 
removal of Pravin Gordhan. 
20 
 
So I am saying to you, it is then that I then decided 
to take a decision to start speaking out openly because 
clearly the leadership was not committed to dealing with the 
issues that were confronting us as members of Parliament 
who are supposed to perform the oversight function. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 33 of 211 
 
 
So as you know, during April – in April after Pravin 
Gordhan was removed, there were marches all over the 
country and there were even remarks made by Nomvula 
Mokonyane that if the Rand falls, we pick it up.  And there 
was generally the failure of appreciating the effects of global 
markets on position such as that of the Finance Minister.  
So. 
 
And it happened to me that on the day when this 
march took place, I was going to see my mother in 
Maritzburg and I saw this biggest march ever post-1994.  I 
10 
have never seen that kind of march.  Those kind of marches 
I knew them during the 1980’s when we were fighting 
apartheid but post-1994, I had not seen those kind of 
marches. 
 
In fact, they reminded me of the time when this – I 
think it was a cricketer or somebody like that that came to 
South Africa and people were – it was during the time when 
there were sanctions against apartheid and this guy who was 
a cricketer who came to South Africa. 
 
And Maritzburg there was a big – it was a very, very 
20 
big march.  So when I went there and I saw that, to me that 
was speaking to myself directly.  It is then that I then 
questioned the ANC.  I wrote about leadership on my 
Facebook page because I felt that we were not listening to 
the people. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 34 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Can I then now refer you to 
paragraph 7.3 of your affidavit about what your hope or 
expectation was when you returned to Parliament after that 
march? 
DR KHOZA:   Well, when...  In fact, you must – this was 
happening within the context of the fact that we had heard 
several votes of no-confidences on President Zuma.  To me 
the marches on the 7t h of April – and you will bear with me if 
I am making a mistake – I think it was the 7t h of April. 
 
To me it was a defining moment because when I 
10 
went back to Parliament I was expecting that the ANC having 
seen that this is no longer just a matter of the opposition 
parties in Parliament but this is now the matter of society. 
 
It is a matter that is about the members of the 
public.  It is not petty political scoring.  It was a matter that 
had been taken up structures of civil society and the general 
members of the public.  I was expecting that the ANC was 
going to be toned, was going to change but it did not 
change. 
 
It was very clear that the ANC was hell bound at 
20 
protecting President Zuma.  And I must say that I was very 
disappointed especially on President Cyril Ramaphosa that I 
considered as the architect of the South African Constitution. 
 
I was expecting them to even in the ANC caucus 
meetings, because we did have the ANC caucus meeting 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 35 of 211 
 
subsequent to that march, I was expecting them to be 
forthcoming in terms of the impact of how quickly the ANC 
was losing its popularity with the members of the public in 
South Africa because of its conduct. 
 
And I could not understand why we had to protect 
President Zuma at all costs because it was clearly protecting 
him at all costs.  So basically on the 9t h it is then that I then 
decided to write – I then decided to defy the leadership. 
 
It was not out of disrespect but it was more out of 
concern that they were not doing what they were supposed 
10 
to do.  They were not giving us direction as members of the 
ANC in Parliament but what they were doing to us, they 
wanted us to protect something that was wrong.  Basically 
that is what had happened. 
 
And as you can see in 7.4, there is also an extract 
of what I actually said, what I wrote about those incidents. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is what you wrote on your 
Facebook page on the 9 t h of April 2017.  Is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now it is all quoted in your affidavit.  I 
20 
am not going to read it all onto the record but I will just 
quote one or two extracts.  You refer there and you say: 
“I want more tools to see the 7 April 2017 
marches 
across 
the 
country 
as 
not 
conspiracies or wiping out of the capital but 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 36 of 211 
 
genuine concerns of the majority of marches.” 
 
And then you make a comment at the bottom of the 
quote: 
“I am led by an injudicious leadership who are 
deleterious of ANC relevance and lifespan.  
We are directed to maintain unity at all costs 
even if it leads us into the ditch...” 
 
Now what was the consequence to your life of 
having published that on Facebook? 
DR KHOZA:   Well, I was called ill-disciplined.  And I think 
10 
even 
Jackson 
Mthembu 
was 
getting 
increasingly 
very 
uncomfortable with me because he did not take it kindly that 
I was criticising the ANC. 
 
In fact, I think we even have it in one of the 
annexures here where Mthembu was complaining about my 
ill-discipline and saying I need to be disciplined.  But 
basically I cared so much about the ANC.   
 
Mind you, I grew up in the ANC and I spent most of 
my life more with the ANC than with my biological parents 
and that is a fact because I got involved in the ANC when I 
20 
was 12-years old and I then left my home.   
 
I 
became 
an 
international 
refugee 
during 
the 
violence in KwaZulu-Natal and I was living in different 
houses, with Eunice Karriem and Rene Hazel and all those 
people. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 37 of 211 
 
 
And I could not understand how can people reduce 
the marches that were taken place to white monopoly capital 
because they were not at that stage – the sentiment was 
really against Mr President Zuma’s capacity, moral reflective 
capacity. 
 
And it was not so much about the ANC.  It was more 
about President Zuma.  They were calling on him to be 
removed as the President of the Republic.  And therefore, 
that is the conflict that I was finding myself in. 
 
So as you rightly pointed out in how I was quoted.  
10 
That quote is absolutely correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you refer in paragraph 8.1 and 
8.2 to an opposition proposed a vote of no confidence on 
the 18 t h of April 2017.  This is not the so-called final vote 
of no confidence.  This is an earlier one.  And you refer 
there to instructions that ANC MP’s received.  Could you 
just elaborate on that briefly, please? 
DR KHOZA:   Well, during that time consistently on 
Thursdays during our Parliamentary, ANC Parliamentary 
caucus meetings, we were addressed by the Secretary 
20 
General, Gwede Mantashe and often – I think Jessie(?) was 
often there as well.   
 
And both of them were taking turns and sometimes if 
one of them is not there, the other is there.  They were 
telling us that the ANC is under attack.  We need to defend 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 38 of 211 
 
the ANC.  And we were told that an attack in the position of 
the President of the ANC is the attack to the entire 
organisation. 
 
And some of us were feeling strongly that that was 
not so.  To us it was one man that was a liability to the ANC 
at that time.  It was President Jacob Zuma and not 
necessarily the entire ANC but we were then instructed to 
vote in favour of President Zuma’s continuation as the 
President of the Republic and we were even told that no one 
will be allowed to vote against the motion of no confidence. 
10 
 
And I recall that.  In fact, in one of the media 
houses, even quoted Gwede Mantashe saying:  If anyone 
who will vote against the President, in other words, if you 
are voting against the – if you are voting in favour of the no 
vote of confidence of President Zuma, Gwede Mantashe said 
that will be the highest form of betrayal. 
 
In other words, as member of the ANC, if we are 
voting in favour of – if you are voting with the opposition 
against President Zuma, you will then be considered as 
somebody who has betrayed the ANC. 
20 
 
And to me that was a problem because – and I 
maybe I need to make this point because that is what was – 
one was finding herself in.  I found myself in a situation 
where the ANC was failing to transition from a liberation 
movement that was operating underground which is marked 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 39 of 211 
 
by the high levels or a culture of secrecy. 
 
You know when you are in the arm struggle and you 
are a liberation movement, the culture is there, is that of 
secrecy.  There is no accountability because you are trying 
to hide whatever information from the enemy and at that time 
it was apartheid. 
 
Now we are in a democratic dispensation where we 
are supposed to account where the constitution is calling for 
openness, for transparency but now we cannot do that.  We 
are now forced to retain the culture of the liberation struggle 
10 
of underground culture in a democratic dispensation.  
 
And yes, they were then saying to us we must vote.  
In fact, we were even guarded.  All Whips of committees 
were even instructed to make sure that members are voting 
against 
the 
opposition 
that 
had 
put 
a 
motion 
of 
no 
confidence. 
ADV FREUND SC:   We will get back to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, do you intend coming back to 
the topic? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I do intend coming back to the topic 
20 
Chair because there is yet another vote of no confidence 
that we will be coming to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Then I will not ask Dr Khoza 
the questions that I wanted to ask her now.  I will ask her 
when you come back to the topic but this might be a 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 40 of 211 
 
convenient time to take the tea adjournment.  Let us take the 
tea adjournment.  The time is quarter past eleven.  We will 
resume at half-past eleven.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS FOR THE TEA-BREAK: 
INQUIRY RESUMES   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us proceed Mr Freund.  Thank 
you. 
EXAMINATION BY ADV FREUND SC (RESUMES):   Thank 
you, Chair.  Dr Khoza, can you hear me? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, I can hear.  Thank you. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Can I refer you now please to 
paragraph 8.6 of your affidavit? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   There you referred to Rule 4.17 of the 
Constitution of the African National Congress and I just 
want to read into the record just extracts from that Rule 
because this is what, as I understand it, persons joining 
the ANC are required to solemnly declare when they join.  
Is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:   Absolutely Chairperson. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And presumably, you did that as well? 
DR KHOZA:   I did that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the declaration ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Freund.  There is some noise 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 41 of 211 
 
coming from my – this – it is disturbing.  Okay Mr Freund, 
continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The declaration 
that persons joining the ANC make reads in part as follows: 
“I solemnly declare that I will abide by the 
aims and objectives of the African National 
Congress as set out in the Constitution of 
Freedom Charter and other duly adopted policy 
positions.” 
 
But it also says near the end of the declaration: 
10 
“..and that I will defend the unity and integrity 
of the organisation and its principles and 
combat any tendency towards disruption and 
factionalism.” 
 
Are you with me Dr Khoza? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, I am listening.  Sorry. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And did you hear what I just said, the 
extracts that I read from the Constitution? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes.  Yes, I have it before me. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I presume that you were comfortable 
20 
when you joined the ANC to make such a declaration? 
DR KHOZA:   Indeed, I was.  And especially, because the 
extract to me was appealing most that I will work towards 
making the ANC and even more an effective instrument of 
liberation in the hands of the people and that I will defend 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 42 of 211 
 
the unity and integrity of the organisation and its principles 
and 
combat 
any 
tendency 
towards 
disruption 
and 
factionalism. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  Now ...[intervenes]  
DR KHOZA:   However, what the leaderships was telling us 
was that we have to unite at all costs.  In other words, it 
does not matter.  The integrity part does not matter.  We 
have to unite behind President Jacob Zuma irrespective of 
the call that was made by the public, his resignation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Freund.  Dr Khoza, what was 
10 
your understanding – and you must tell me if you cannot 
hear 
me 
well 
with 
the 
mask 
on 
– 
what 
was 
your 
understanding of the concept of defending the integrity of 
the organisation in practical terms? 
DR KHOZA:   In fact, in that very extract that I quote in my 
affidavit, it is very clear.  It is talking about, I am joining the 
organisation 
voluntarily 
without 
motives 
of 
material 
advantage.   
 
So my understanding was that, when you are joining 
the organisation, when you are talking about the integrity.   
20 
 
First of all, we are talking about understanding the 
fact that we are no longer individuals absolutely but we are 
now representatives of the people and that we are going to 
uphold the constitution, not only of the ANC but that of the 
country as the supreme law of the land.  So to me that is 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 43 of 211 
 
what it meant. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What would it mean or what would you 
have understood it to mean in terms of the integrity of 
members of the ANC and the integrity of those who are put 
in leadership position with the ANC, the personal integrity 
of each member, the internal – the personal integrity of 
those who are put in leadership positions of the ANC?  Did 
you see it in that context as well, this idea of defending the 
integrity of the organisation?  In other words …[intervenes] 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...if a member of the ANC engages in 
conduct which you regarded as showing lack of integrity, 
how would defending the integrity of the ANC be used in 
that situation by somebody, namely another member of the 
ANC, who wants to say what am I expected to do as a 
member of the ANC in terms of this declaration that I 
signed?  It says I will defend the integrity of the 
organisation.  Did that have something to do with personal 
integrity or did that talk about avoiding the disintegration 
of the organisation.  In other words, did it have anything to 
20 
do with honesty, with ethical leadership, those kinds of 
things or not really, it is more about making sure that the 
organisation does not disintegrate?  What was your 
understanding? 
DR KHOZA:   Okay, Chairperson, I think in annexure 10, I 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 44 of 211 
 
think it is annexure 10 or 11, there is a – we have a 
constitution of the ANC and if I may, if you could allow 
me… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, could I just …[intervenes] 
DR KHOZA:   If you could allow me to …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Could I just interrupt? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Dr Khoza …[intervenes] 
DR KHOZA:   Because it kind of captures …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, hang on one second, Dr Khoza.  
10 
Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I would just like to give the Chair a 
reference to the constitution to which the witness is 
referring.  It is in bundle 1 at page 821 and following. 
CHAIRPERSON:   821? 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is correct, it is not the whole 
constitution, extract from it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay, alright.  Thank you, I 
have got it.  Thank you, Mr Freund.  Dr Khoza you may 
proceed then I have – I see extracts from the constitution 
20 
of the ANC starting at I think page 821, annexure MK10. 
DR KHOZA:   Yes.  To me, you know, like if you – if we go 
to the jurisdiction which is 25.4, it talks about that: 
“The ANC shall have jurisdiction to discipline any 
member, office bearer or public representative for 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 45 of 211 
 
committing any act of misconduct as contained in 
rule 25.17 below as a member of the ANC and/or by 
virtue of his or her contract of deployment and/or by 
virtue of his or her membership of the structures of 
the ANC.” 
Now if you go to 25.17 that this particular clause refers to, 
it is in the next page under the heading: 
“Acts of misconduct.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR KHOZA:   It says, 25.17 says: 
10 
“The following conduct by a member, office bearer 
or public representative shall constitute misconduct 
in respect of which disciplinary proceedings may be 
invoked and instituted against him or her.” 
I am going to go straight to 25.17.4: 
“Behaving in a manner or making any utterances 
which brings or could bring or has the potential to 
bring, or as a consequence thereof, brings the ANC 
into disrepute.” 
Then it also speaks about sowing racism, tribalism and so 
20 
forth and 25.17.6, it says: 
“Behaving in a manner which provokes or is likely to 
provoke or has the potential to provoke division or 
impact negatively on the unity of the ANC.” 
But it also speaks specifically on the issues of personal 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 46 of 211 
 
gain, those that are using state power to pursue personal 
gain and which is contained in that very solemn oath that 
each member of the ANC takes when they join the 
organisation.   
It speaks about the fact that when you are joining 
the ANC you shall not use your position of authority for 
personal 
gain 
and 
it 
even 
talks 
about 
even 
misappropriation of funds and whether that of the state or 
even those of the ANC itself. 
So I am saying to you, basically the parameters, it 
10 
is not ambiguous, I think it is the leadership that made that 
ambiguous.  But otherwise, in terms of what is written 
here, it is very clear of what integrity is about.  Integrity is 
about being truthful, is about being honest, is about being 
able to understanding how to discharge your power without 
– will have to represent the members of the public 
truthfully because it is very clear but even as it talks about 
the unity of the organisation, it is not talking about it 
outside the moral and ethical code, it sets the moral and 
ethical code of unity. 
20 
So what we were beginning to see is that we were 
being told that we have to unite and outside the moral and 
ethical code of the ANC and that, to me, was problematic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Dr Khoza, can I also refer 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 47 of 211 
 
you to paragraph 25.17.8 in the constitution which reads as 
follows: 
“Abuse 
of 
elected 
or 
employed 
office 
in 
the 
organisation or in the state to obtain any direct or 
indirect undue advantage or enrichment” 
In your view is that of any relevance to the question you 
have just been dealing with? 
DR KHOZA:   Absolutely correct and thank you very much, 
I was looking for it and I could not see it.  Thank you very 
much for bringing it to my attention because I wanted to 
10 
read that specific one too.  But there is also, as a woman, I 
also wanted to read this specific one, which is 25.17.7 
which: 
“Engaging in sexual or physical abuse of women or 
children or abuse of office to obtain sexual or any 
other undue advantage from members or others.” 
To me, President Zuma was not the embodiment of this 
value that is presented here and I do not have to talk about 
the Khwezi saga and with his own views of on how he 
viewed woman and have he would actually harvest them – I 
20 
am sorry to use this word, but he never really accorded 
them the kind of respect that women ought to have gained. 
 
So I am saying the integrity is – embodies all these 
values, of non-sexism, of non-racialism, of anticorruption, 
ethical conduct, trying at all times to making sure that the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 48 of 211 
 
public purse is not used for one’s personal gain. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now could I refer you to paragraph 
8.10 of your affidavit where you refer to the now famous 
judgment of the Constitutional Court, what became known 
as the Secret Ballot Judgment, the case of the United 
Democratic Movement and the Speaker of the National 
Assembly and there the Chief Justice held as follows, on 
behalf of the court: 
“In 
the 
event 
of 
conflict 
between 
upholding 
constitutional values and party loyalty, their…” 
10 
Referring to members of parliament. 
“…irrevocable undertaking to in effect serve the 
people and do only what is in their interests must 
prevail.” 
Now that judgment was, as you will recall, in the context of 
whether the next vote of confidence after the one to which 
we have previously referred was due to be held and I would 
like you to comment on whether, if at all, you believed that 
that judgment and in particular that sentence that I have 
quoted had any impact? 
20 
DR KHOZA:   It is actually very relevant because I think a 
number of ANC members were finding themselves having to 
being told by the leadership to, in covertly, to disregard the 
constitution of the country and even with that of the party, 
they were selecting clauses that were suiting their own 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 49 of 211 
 
narrative, their own agenda of what they wanted to 
achieve. 
 
So my understanding was that this judgment was 
making it clear that the constitution of the Republic of 
South Africa, 1996, is the supreme law of the land.  Where 
there is conflict, obviously the constitution of the Republic 
takes precedence. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now there was a subsequent vote of 
no confidence and before that vote of no confidence took 
place, I am referring now to paragraph 8.13 of your 
10 
affidavit, you made it public that in the planned no 
confidence 
motion 
you 
intended 
to 
vote 
with 
your 
conscience and not to toe the party line, is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:   It is correct and I do think that somewhere in 
my affidavit I even make it clear that I am going to vote not 
only with my conscience but I will also vote for the survival 
of the ANC because, to me, voting against – I mean, voting 
for – voting against the vote of no confidence on President 
Zuma was tantamount to liquidating the ANC and my view 
was the public is going to judge us harshly and I was not 
20 
just making that up.  It had already happened in the  City 
of Johannesburg, in the City of Tshwane, at Ekurhuleni and 
even  - in fact Cape Town came first, where the ANC lost 
Cape Town and the ANC was becoming more of a rural 
party, a party that belongs to the periphery because the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 50 of 211 
 
ANC was simply not listening, not following its own code, 
moral code and that of the constitution of the Republic. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in paragraph 8.17 you quote 
something that you were quoted saying at a conference in 
July of 2017, you said: 
“I am here to defend the ANC mission and not a 
dishonourable and disgraceful leader.” 
You then in the same – at about the same time, you called 
upon the president to step down, is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, I did. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in paragraph 8.18 you say that 
that prompted certain severe criticism, if you could just tell 
the Chair about that? 
DR KHOZA:   I think that my woes started during this 
period, probably from the day I wrote that first article in 
the first book.  The ANC would leak even went to – in 
Kwazulu-Natal in EThekwini region even went to an extent 
of publicising my home address on social media, calling for 
a revolt really against me and calling for me to be 
disciplined and I also started receiving dirty threats and 
20 
this also even escalated to other spheres of government 
and because, you know, my property happened to be below 
a reservoir – in fact during that time water was discharged 
onto my property and because I knew that each time I saw 
something, the water from the reservoir, which belongs to 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 51 of 211 
 
EThekwini Municipality, which is under the ANC, would be 
discharged into my property and I would be left with having 
to clean up and doing all that.  There was just a lot of 
things that were happening to me at a time.   
So, however, I was clear that I was not going to 
backtrack because to me it was very important to not only 
just 
represent 
the 
people 
of 
South Africa 
but 
also 
defending the forefathers of the ANC, the people that 
founded the ANC.  I do not think the ANC was founded to 
do what it was doing and that is why I decided that I am 
10 
not going to backtrack, I decided that I was going to – I 
became a little stubborn, I admit. 
You refer in paragraph 8.18 to – you have given an 
example of what was said to you by Deputy Chief Whip, 
Doris Dlakude, would you just put that on record please? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, Doris Dlakude did say that there are 
some comrades who are – I think she said there are some 
comrades who are saying they are going to vote according 
to their conscience and she was saying no, none of the 
ANC comrades that are in parliament came to parliament 
20 
because of conscience, they came through the ANC 
structures, through the ANC as a party.  So nobody can 
claim to represent a conscience.   That was the essence of 
what Dlakude was saying, she was basically saying we 
must divorce ourselves from our own conscience and follow 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 52 of 211 
 
the instructions of the party directives.  That is what she 
was trying to say to us and in fact, subsequently, it is not 
only Doris Dlakude, at the ANC policy conference in July 
2017, Fikile Mbalula threatened the ANC MPs that would 
be voting with their conscience and he even synonymised 
them with suicide bombers and I knew  - and in fact I think 
at some stage he even called by name that I am a suicide 
– Makhosi is a suicide bomber, you know, because of my 
commitment to following my conscience and I was not just 
acting arbitrarily, I was just acting within the confines of 
10 
what the constitution of the country and that of ANC was 
saying.  Those are the values that they embody. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you refer in paragraph 8.19 to 
similar comments from Mr Mantashe who I believe was then 
the Secretary General of the ANC and from Ms Jessie 
Duarte who was then I believe the Deputy Secretary 
General, is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what was the …[intervenes] 
DR KHOZA:   And it was also – it was not – and this whole 
20 
thing of the attack on conscience despite it being, if I am 
not mistaken, I think it is Section 15 of the constitution, it 
is covered even in the constitution of the country yet this 
was coming a lot from the leadership, being – the 
leadership 
I 
am 
referring 
to, 
Jessie 
Duarte, 
Gwede 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 53 of 211 
 
Mantashe, they were all talking about attacking this whole 
concept of conscience and which was really making it very 
difficult for even members – there were some members, as 
it would be seen later on when members were voting, that 
did follow their conscience in their voting in this particular 
motion. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you deal in paragraph 8.21 in 
more detail with the position of Mr Mantashe and Ms 
Duarte and you make the point there that neither of them 
were in fact members of parliament, is that correct? 
10 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, they were not members of parliament 
and that is why during that period you must understand 
they were coming to caucus, to ANC caucus meetings 
every Thursday and I viewed that as intimidation because 
they were saying the same thing, there is nothing – there 
is no conscience here, we have to go and vote as a block 
and retain the unity of the ANC. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So where does that …[intervenes] 
DR KHOZA:   So this was – they were not members of 
parliament and that the challenge that you have is that you 
20 
have 
people 
who 
are 
not 
necessarily 
members 
of 
parliament coming in and instructing us to violate the 
constitution. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I want to deal briefly and only briefly 
with what you deal with in paragraph 9 of your affidavit 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 54 of 211 
 
which is threats that you and your family received.  Would 
you just maybe highlight the core incidents that you think 
explain the sort of pressure you came under? 
DR KHOZA:   Ja, I always have a difficulty when I get to 
this part.  The threats were not just directed at me, they 
were directed at my children.  I was able – I was stronger 
when – and I did not mind when the threats were directed 
at me but my children were going through so much 
emotional pain.  One of those key things that the ANC did 
to me, during that same period certain people came to my 
10 
house – I lost my husband when I was 28 years old and my 
son was one year old at the time, they even came to my 
house and told my son that I killed my husband and that 
was also covered in the City Press – not City Press, I think 
it was Sowetan, where I was saying that I did not – I had to 
now start defending myself, being accused of things.  They 
were even making my life at home miserable.  As I earlier 
said, I am also, apart from being a politician, I am a 
scholar, I am also a scientist, I happened to have 
developed a system, a new [indistinct] 1.53.06 system that 
20 
will demystify mathematics and make it easy for learners to 
comprehend 
mathematical 
concepts 
using 
their 
own 
languages and I started with isiZulu and I wrote those 
textbooks from grade 4 to grade 12 and I even made them 
– I subjected them for quality processes, they were 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 55 of 211 
 
scrutinised by the Department of Basic Education and the 
Department of Basic Education basically even went to an 
extent of saying, you know, writing the letter, telling the 
provinces to say, you know, we highly recommend these 
materials 
because 
they 
were 
not 
only 
demystifying 
mathematics but they were also dealing with the language 
barrier 
crisis 
because 
there 
are 
bilingual 
grammar 
textbooks.   
So I have had a situation where even universities 
and in this instance – and I wanted to say this carefully 
10 
before I have worked – I am working – we started engaging 
with 
the 
University 
of 
Kwazulu-Natal 
as 
we 
speak.  
Professor Tsonga(?) even was very honest with me, he 
sent me that email, which I can share with you, that you 
can even see where he is saying to me, you know, Dr 
Khoza, nobody can question your scholarly or scientific 
standpoint and I am aware that the university wants to use 
– of certain people in the university that wants to use your 
materials.  However, your public stance, can – are 
construed as a destabilising factor.  In other words, my 
20 
public pronouncements and corruption and stuff like that 
and on the ruling party and so forth were considered as 
destabilising factor. 
So I am saying it is not just my children that had to 
suffer, my family, but even the fields of interest that I am 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 56 of 211 
 
pursuing that have been – the children, the black African 
learners have not been allowed to study, to have materials 
that 
have 
been 
assessed 
and 
recommended 
by 
the 
Department of Education due to this stand that I made in 
parliament.   And in fact at some stage I was called by one 
of the officials to say you know what, just apologise then 
your nightmares will be offer and obviously I refused to 
apologise. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I just want to refer to one further 
incident that you deal with in your affidavit, it is in 
10 
paragraph 9.4.5, the man in a balaclava outside your 
house pointing a gun at you, would you just briefly 
summarise that incident? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, there was one night when I came home 
and I came home and there was a black Mercedes Benz in 
the property on the driveway of my neighbour and I still 
believe that it was – I am not necessarily a very religious 
person but I still believe that maybe it was the grace of 
God or maybe even the ANC ancestors that were thinking I 
was doing the right thing, you know, because for whatever 
20 
reason, this person who had a black balaclava and black 
gloves and so forth, slipped – he was standing on the 
stone and the gun went on the other way and that is how I 
survived that night and – so I am saying a threat to my life 
was such that were my children were forever worried 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 57 of 211 
 
whether I am going to come back alive.  And mind you, I 
live in Kwazulu-Natal.  In Kwazulu-Natal we are known as a 
province that has the highest levels of political intolerance 
and of violence, political violence and these things were 
happening to me and then the incidences are numerous, I 
cannot call all of them. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, I want to move beyond that 
issue.  Paragraph 10, paragraph 10.1, you refer to the fact 
that following the Constitutional Court’s judgment on the 
secret ballot issue, the then Speaker of Parliament Ms 
10 
Baleka Mbete announced that she was going to allow a 
secret ballot in that particular vote of no confidence, that 
is an announcement she made on the 7 August 2017 and 
you deal in the next paragraph 10.2 with what happened in 
the ANC caucus on the following day.  Could you please 
just tell the Chair about that particular caucus meeting? 
DR KHOZA:   You know, this particular paragraph is very 
important to me because it kind of in a way explains what 
we are seeing now and I am glad that I presented this – I 
wrote this affidavit before what we have seen President 
20 
Zuma doing to the Commission because at this particular 
meeting, Gwede Mantashe at this particular meeting after – 
at this particular meeting, parliament had a caucus meeting 
on the 8 August 2017, Gwede Mantashe said we have a 
danger of becoming judicracy.  What I understand by that 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 58 of 211 
 
was that democracy was now going to be replaced by 
judicracy.  In other words, there was no respect of the rule 
of law or the independence of the judiciary but that the 
judiciary was now taking over the powers of the country, of 
the running of the country, so that is what Gwede Mantashe 
said.  In fact that term he repeated a number times, the 
judicracy.  He repeated it a number of times at the caucus 
meeting before we went to vote. 
ADV FREUND SC:   [indistinct] 01.59.59 on what members 
of parliament were required to do, ANC members of 
10 
parliament were required to do in that vote on that 
occasion, was that the same as before? 
DR KHOZA:   Pardon? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Did he give any guidance as to how 
ANC MPs should vote in that particular vote of no 
confidence.   
DR KHOZA:   It was very clear, he did say – obviously 
when he was saying we have to be careful and be mindful 
of the judicracy, he was also stressing the question of unity 
and it was repeatedly mentioned to us that the attack is not 
20 
just on President Zuma, it is on the ANC itself.  So we 
were told that we have to go and defence the ANC. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now it is matter of public record as 
appears from paragraph 10.3 of your affidavit that there 
were 177 votes for the motion of no confidence and 198 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 59 of 211 
 
against and you say there it appears that a number of ANC 
MPs voted for the motion and you say you did the same. 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Just very briefly – we really touched 
on this already but very briefly you can summarise why you 
felt that that was the right thing to do on that occasion? 
DR KHOZA:   To me it was very important, we have a 
budding democracy and the truth is, we have had one state 
after another state in the African continent failing and as a 
result 
of 
this 
failure 
to 
transition 
from 
a 
liberation 
10 
movement to a democracy.  To me it was particularly 
important during this time because I felt strongly that this 
was not just about only the people of South Africa but it 
was also about the people in the continent because they 
were beginning to look at South Africa, what South Africa 
is doing was likely to send a very good message to the 
entire continent. So it was not just about South Africa, 
hence I felt strongly that I needed be open about it even 
though I had the right to vote secretly and not declaring 
how I voted.  I thought it was important to do that. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Then you deal …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, I am sorry, I am going to 
interrupt you.   Ahead of that vote of no confidence in – 
was 
it 
August 
2017? 
 
I 
just 
want 
to 
make 
sure 
…[intervenes] 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 60 of 211 
 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …that I understand what happened.  
Was there – did Mr Mantashe seek to persuade members of 
the ANC in parliament to vote against the motion or did he 
instruct them how to vote? 
DR KHOZA:   Chairperson, the language – yes, Gwede 
Mantashe – you must remember that the Speaker at this 
stage, it was very clear that she, the Speaker, Baleka 
Mbete as the Chairperson of the ANC was under enormous 
pressure which is why she – her language was also 
10 
beginning to change somewhat, you know, in favour of this 
secret ballot.  However, Gwede Mantashe, he was still 
trying to persuade us.  I would not say that he was as 
harsh as he was previously but on this day when he was 
talking to us about judicracy, he was very, very – he was 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was emphatic. 
DR KHOZA:   He was cautious about what he was saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR KHOZA:   He was saying it but he was very measured. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR KHOZA:   He was not speaking as usual. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  He was not saying no member of the 
ANC will vote in favour of the motion, he was not saying 
that but he was emphasising points which sought to say 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 61 of 211 
 
the right thing for you ANC members to do is to vote 
against the motion.  Would that summarise it, capture it 
correctly? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  But either you or somebody 
else may have said that in other – on other occasions when 
there were motions of no confidence in President Zuma the 
ANC was direct instructing its members in parliament not to 
support the motion, is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, in previous ones, yes, the ANC was – 
10 
the leadership, Gwede Mantashe and I mean and Jessie 
Duarte, the entire leadership was direct but this time they 
were very measured and if they were very academic, if I 
may say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR KHOZA:   Because it was the first time that Gwede 
Mantashe, if my memory serves me well, mentioned the 
concept of judicracy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, thank you.  Proceed, Mr 
Freund? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
DR KHOZA:   Chairperson, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR KHOZA:   I wanted a break, a bit of a break, my battery 
is dying, I was not charging my laptop. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 62 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine, we can take a break, how 
much time do you…? 
DR KHOZA:   I just want to organise that it gets charged. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it five minutes, ten minutes?  That 
would be enough for that?  How much time?  Would that be 
enough? 
DR KHOZA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Five or ten? 
DR KHOZA:   Five minutes, ten minutes, it is fine with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us take an adjournment of ten 
10 
minutes.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let’s proceed Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Dr Khoza before the 
break you had been referring to the vote of no confidence 
on the 8 t h of August 2017, I would like to take you now to 
paragraph 10.5 of your affidavit, where you describe the 
views expressed by President Zuma on the 14 t h of August. 
Could you just explain what happened then? 
20 
DR KHOZA:   Well the President, the then President Zuma 
stressed that unity was paramount, and that we needed to 
vote, you know, we needed to ensure that there was unity 
amongst us as the members of the ANC.  In other words, 
we had to vote the same as per the directive of the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 63 of 211 
 
organisation. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Did he indicate whether any steps 
should be taken?  
DR KHOZA:   Pardon? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Did he give any views as to any further 
steps that should be taken? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, it did say that, we demanded that steps 
be taken under the ANC Constitution…[08.28.05 – 08.41.10 
no audio] 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, it appears we have lost Dr 
10 
Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And we understand that there is a 
power outage in KwaZulu Natal and perhaps also where 
you are in Johannesburg, I am not sure about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I am not quite sure how you think 
we should proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let us see, do you need, must I 
adjourn? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair I believe that that might be 
prudent but perhaps before we adjourn if I could just ask 
for guidance on an issue.  It has been suggested to me 
that if this is done without video picture but purely word 
with voice, that the connections would be better and we 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 64 of 211 
 
could proceed. Now, I do not know whether you would want 
to do that or whether you would want to wait until we can 
be comfortable that we can have video as well as audio. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would prefer to have both unless we 
got to a point where the delay was too long.  I am 
wondering, we are at twenty to one, the technicians do you 
have an idea that you might need five, ten minutes or 
longer or you have no idea?  Five minutes.  Okay, I am told 
that five minutes might be fine.  So I was tempted to say, 
maybe we may as well just adjourn for lunch but I think let 
10 
us just adjourn for ten minutes, we might go beyond 1 
o'clock in order to make up for some time.  So let us 
adjourn for ten minutes but if they are ready before, in five 
minutes, then we'll come back. We are adjourned. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV FREUND SC:   We did loose connectivity again.  What 
she told me on the telephone, was that …[no audio]  Can 
you hear us Dr Khoza? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, I am. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright do you think there is a 
reasonable likelihood that this connection will remain 
adequate? 
DR KHOZA:   No, it is now going to be fine.  I am using my 
other laptop, this other one I think it is the battery because 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 65 of 211 
 
the battery died.  So it is going to take longer before it has 
enough power for streaming live. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But the device you on now you think 
probably will work fine? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, definitely.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright. 
DR KHOZA:   It has 90 it is on 95% and it is a Mac. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Then I think that we can advise the 
DCJ as soon as it is possible in Johannesburg.  
REGISTRAR:   Okay, alright.  Thank you Dr Khoza, can 
10 
you hear me, clearly from this side?  
DR KHOZA:   Yes, I can hear you. 
REGISTRAR:   Thank you so much.  We are about to 
begin. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understand the technical issues have 
been resolved, let us continue Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Dr Khoza when we 
took a break, we had been referring to the Presidents 
response on the 14 t h of August 2017.  I do not think that 
we got properly on record what the President demanded on 
20 
that occasion. 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, he did say that those that would not be 
upholding the unity of the organisation will have to be 
acted upon and especially those obviously that will would 
vote with their conscience. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 66 of 211 
 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC:   Again 
on the 
15 t h of August 
2017…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second Mr Freund, oh no 
okay I think continue to that point before I ask a question. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair on the 15 t h of August 
2017, which was the next day you say Mr Mantashe made 
an announcement.  What was that announcement? 
DR KHOZA:   He made an announcement that the ANC 
National 
Working 
Group 
had 
decided 
to 
commence 
disciplinary proceedings against the four ANC MP’s and 
10 
amongst those four ANC MP’s that had voted against the 
President Zuma, in the vote of no confidence was myself. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Dr Khoza I just want to make sure 
whether you have any doubts about this evidence, because 
it is quite important, let us go back to paragraph 10.5.  You 
say there: 
“On 14 August 2017, President Zuma said that ANC 
unity was paramount, that ANC MP’s could not vote 
according to their conscience and he demanded that 
20 
steps be taken under the ANC Constitution against 
those who had voted according to their conscience, 
in the vote of no confidence.” 
Are you quite clear in your mind that your recollection of 
what he said is correctly captured there Dr Khoza? 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 67 of 211 
 
DR KHOZA:   I am very clear Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and then you say in paragraph 
10.6:  
“The following day, namely 15 August 2017, Mr 
Mantashe announced that the ANC National Working 
Committee had decided to commence disciplinary 
proceedings against the four ANC MP’s, including 
me, who admitted voting against President Zuma in 
the vote of no confidence.” 
Are you quite clear also that what Mr Mantashe said on 
10 
that occasion, is correctly and accurately captured there? 
DR KHOZA:   Absolutely, Chairperson and it was well 
published.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR KHOZA:   It was broadcasted even in mainstream 
media on SABC or ENCA and even our photographs, the 
four of us of those MP’s were actually put up on screen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I have not gone back to the so 
called secret ballot judgment and refreshed my memory 
other than what I have read the excerpts that you may 
20 
have put up in your affidavit.  But my recollection, is that 
that judgment of the Constitutional Court was quite clear 
and that it was saying any member of Parliament would be 
entitled to vote the way they wanted to vote.  I am just 
putting it in my own words.  What was your understanding? 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 68 of 211 
 
DR 
KHOZA: 
 
 
Chairperson 
it 
is 
not 
just 
only 
the 
Constitutional 
Court 
judgment, 
but 
even 
Speaker 
Ms 
Baleka Mbete is on record, even saying there will be no 
harm that will happen to members who would have voted 
otherwise, in other words, not voted according to the ANC 
position, but voted according to their conscience. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR KHOZA:   She did that undertaking publicly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Freund if you could assist me.  
Is it only the exert at paragraph 10.1 of Dr Khoza’s 
10 
affidavit that is in her affidavit from the Constitutional 
Court judgment in the secret ballot? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, there would be more than that if 
one goes to Annexure MK9. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, on what page? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Page 818 through to 820.  There is a 
document, it is an article in News 24 but it purports to 
report the full statement by the Speaker Mbete under the 
headline: 
“No member may suffer harm if they follow their 
20 
conscience.” 
And it is set up in considerable detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but I am first and foremost wanting 
to 
be 
accurate 
about 
what 
the 
Constitutional 
Court 
judgment said, then I can come to what the Speaker said. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 69 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Judge, the witness has already 
referred to paragraph 8.10 of the affidavit and that refers 
to the judgment and we have only included in the affidavit 
really two or three sentences from the judgment.   
But in my submission, the sentence quoted goes to 
the very heart of the matter because it says: 
“If 
there 
is 
a 
conflict 
between 
upholding 
constitutional values, and party loyalty then the 
interests 
of 
the 
public, 
in 
other 
words, 
the 
constitutional values must prevail.” 
10 
And then the passage in that paragraph that was quoted, I 
did not read the next sentence but the next sentence 
reads: 
“It is so not only because they were elected through 
their parties to represent the people, but also to 
enable the people to govern through them in terms 
of the constitution.” 
Now, I do not want to be absolutely categoric about this, 
but my impression is that the judgment did make clear that 
members of Parliament not only had a right to follow their 
20 
conscience, to the extent that that was required by their 
understanding of the constitution.  I think the court went 
further and said they had an obligation to do that, 
according to their best judgment as to what the constitution 
required. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 70 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, that is my recollection and of 
course, maybe I should remember much better, because I 
was party to that judgment.  But I was just concerned that I 
should 
not 
say 
anything 
inaccurate 
about 
what 
the 
judgment said but I think, based on what you are saying 
also and what I have just looked at here. 
It seems that it is accurate to say, the judgment of 
the Constitutional Court in the secret ballot matter, made it 
clear that at least in regard to that motion of no confidence 
that where there is conflict between the interests of the 
10 
party and the interests of the people of South Africa, 
members of Parliament were entitled, or even obliged to 
vote to advance the interests of the people.  Dr Khoza, are 
you still there?  
DR KHOZA:   Yes, I am Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the reason why I raised this is this, 
that, it seems to me that the statements that according to 
your evidence were made by the then President Zuma and 
the decision taken by the National Working Committee of 
the ANC, as articulated by Mr Mantashe were saying, in 
20 
effect, do not bother about what the Constitutional Court 
has said in his judgment.  
Namely, you as members of Parliament, if there is a 
conflict between your loyalty to the party and your loyalty 
to the people of South Africa, as to how you should vote, 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 71 of 211 
 
you are entitled, or you are obliged to vote in accordance 
with advancing the interests of the people of South Africa.  
These statements seem to say, do not bother about 
that you are a member of the ANC or to the extent that 
they may have been made after the voting had taken place, 
they were saying people, members of the ANC who 
followed, who acted in accordance with the constitution, as 
interpreted by the Constitutional Court, whose duty is to 
interpret the constitution were going to be disciplined for 
acting in accordance with the constitution, and in line with 
10 
the judgment of the highest court of the land.   
Is that your understanding of the effect of what 
these statements were saying or is your understanding 
different? 
DR KHOZA:   Chairperson that is exactly my understanding 
and my understanding flows from what Gwede Mantashe 
had already said at the ANC caucus meeting previously, 
where he was warning us about “judiocracy” replacing 
democracy.   
I am not going to be able to explain what he meant 
20 
by that, I think he will be in the best or in the best position 
to do so.  But my understanding was simply he was simply 
saying, forget what the constitutional judgment has said, 
this is what, how things ought to have happened in 
accordance with the party principles. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 72 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is quite important, because it 
may have been bad enough if it was said by any other 
party but when it is said by the ruling party, the majority 
party, it is even worse it seems to me.   
If the ruling party through the National Working 
Committee through its Secretary General at the time, if the 
Constitutional Court hands down a judgment on any issue 
that was very critical for the country, and the Constitutional 
Court, which in terms of our constitution is the final court 
on what the constitution means, says this is what the 
10 
constitution means and somebody, and especially the 
Secretary General of the ANC, or the President of the ANC, 
or the National Working Committee of the ANC, says in 
effect, anybody who has acted in accordance with what the 
judgment 
of 
the 
Constitutional 
Court 
said, 
will 
be 
disciplined by the party.  I cannot understand that, I cannot 
understand how that could be said in the light of the 
judgement.  I can understand prior to the judgment, the 
Constitutional 
Court 
clarifying 
the 
position. 
 
I 
can 
understand that there may have been interpretations, bona 
20 
fide interpretations.  
But once the highest court in the land, which in 
terms of the constitution is charged with interpreting what 
the 
constitution 
means, 
when 
there 
are 
different 
interpretations 
in 
the 
country 
in 
Parliament 
and 
the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 73 of 211 
 
executive, that is the court that has been given the power 
to say, tell us what the constitution means and the 
Constitution Court tells Parliament, tells the executive, 
tells everybody this is what the constitution means.  
And then the ruling party says, anyone who has 
acted in accordance with the constitution, who has acted in 
accordance with the judgment of the Constitutional Court 
will be disciplined, it is just difficult to understand.  I mean, 
what kind of message does that give?  
Not just to the members of the ANC but to the 
10 
members of the ANC in general, and to the public.  What is 
it supposed to say about respect for the constitution?  
What is it supposed to say about respect for decisions of 
the courts of the country?  What is it supposed to say 
about a judgment of the highest court in the land?  And 
when you as members of the ANC, at the time, go back to 
your constituencies and people ask you the question, why 
are you being disciplined when you acted in accordance 
with what the Constitutional Court said, what are you 
supposed to say?  
20 
If people say, in the light of what you were told, is it 
fine for us as members of the ANC or is the public to 
disregard what the constitution say, to disregard what the 
Constitutional Court says, to disregard what the courts 
say? What do you say, as a member of the ANC, who have 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 74 of 211 
 
been told by the Secretary General of the ANC, and the 
President of the ANC, what you say you were told?  
I accept that you, you might have nothing to say 
about what, I am just trying to indicate my difficulty to 
understand how the ruling party and how the Secretary 
General of the ruling party at the time, Mr Mantashe the 
President of the party, and the President of the country 
who had taken an oath to uphold the constitution, because 
Mr Zuma was still President at the time, he had taken an 
oath to uphold and defend the constitution, how he could 
10 
make a statement like that. 
But those of them who will come before the 
Commission may be able to explain and maybe they will 
make me understand.  I accept that you might have nothing 
to say about this. 
You can still hear me Dr Khoza?   
DR KHOZA:   Yes, I can still hear you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright okay no that is fine, Mr 
Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
20 
DR KHOZA:   Before you come in, I wanted to comment on 
what the Judge was alluding to.  The truth is, the situation 
within the ANC was such that anyone who sought to uphold 
the rule of law will be severely punished and I am a living 
example of that, because Gwede Mantashe did not only 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 75 of 211 
 
make that statement, but he went further and acted on it 
and he fired me.  
And in fact that is exactly what made me to resign 
from the ANC because it became very clear to me that if 
this is what we do with the Constitutional Court, and if this 
is what we do with another very important organ of State, 
therefore I am no longer, I can no longer justify my 
membership with that organisation and we have seen how 
there is a lot of confusion within the ANC.  And by the way 
in the ANC to be a Chair of a committee, sometimes it is a 
10 
form of demotion.  
So there is no – I am not sure if they do it 
deliberately, not to respect that three organs of State, I 
mean, and the legislature - I do not think they even value 
the legislature.  It is not only the judiciary, that was my 
own impression because of what they would do, like even 
with the Ministers were accused of corruption, or whatever, 
they will never be treated as harshly as I was, I have never 
stolen a cent from government.  I have always tried to 
represent the interests of the people but I was the one that 
20 
had to be punished severely.  In that case, even Jacob 
Zuma was never punished for breaking almost every other 
clause of the constitution in terms of Rule 25.17. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who were the members of the National 
Working Committee of the ANC that would have been party 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 76 of 211 
 
to this decision that you say, Mr Mantashe talked about, 
namely the decision that members of Parliament who were 
members of the ANC who voted in favour of the motion of 
no confidence in Mr President Zuma, should be disciplined. 
Who were those people? 
DR KHOZA:   Those that I know of as per the ANC 
Constitution which obviously be the top seats which is the 
President, the Deputy President, the Chairperson and the 
Treasurer General, the Secretary and Deputy Secretary 
General of the ANC, as well as the President of the ANC 
10 
Women's League and the President of the ANC Youth 
League, those will be essentially part of the Working 
Committee of the ANC.  That is your top leadership level of 
the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that would have been President Zuma 
was President of the ANC at the time.  That would have 
been Deputy President at the time of the ANC 
Mr 
Ramaphosa, that would have been Mr Gwede Mantashe 
and that would have been his deputy Ms Jesse Duarte, is 
that right? 
20 
DR KHOZA:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   In 2017?  
DR KHOZA:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And that would have been the Treasurer, 
General, Dr Zweli Mkhize and then there would have been 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 77 of 211 
 
others.  
DR KHOZA:   Zweli Mkhize he was the Treasurer of the 
ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you say the top six are part of 
the National Working Committee.  So unless…[intervene] 
DR KHOZA:   And the Speaker of Parliament at the time 
was the Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And the speaker of Parliament at the 
time, yes but she would have been there in her capacity as 
Chairperson of the ANC.  
10 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That would have been Ms Baleka Mbete. 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and so if indeed, Mr Mantashe if 
indeed the National Working Committee took this decision 
then all of those people, unless somebody disagreed they 
were party to that that decision, or unless somebody was 
not present on that occasion.  Okay, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  I just want to clarify 
something that you referred to some minutes ago, when 
20 
you said Mr Mantashe had I think you said fired you and 
that in response to that, amongst other things you had 
resigned.  I just want clarity about the fired.  Is that a 
reference to the events that are dealt with in paragraph 11 
of your affidavit, which pertains to your removal as Chair of 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 78 of 211 
 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Public 
Service 
and 
Administration? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, I am referring to that as the 
Chairperson of the Public Service and Administration, you 
will recall that I had, I think I covered it somewhere where 
the ANC Study Group had convened a meeting, and were 
even Faith Muthambi was present and the Study Group of 
the ANC is like a brainstorming. It is not a constitutional 
structure necessarily of the ANC.  
That is where I was charged, disciplined, and even 
10 
Fired because of following my vote of - following my 
conscience, they were saying they cannot be led by 
conscience.  So subsequently to that, that matter then, 
Gwede Mantashe then subsequently concurred because he 
subsequently said, I can no longer work with that Working 
Group, with those members of the committee, and therefore 
I am released from my position as the Chair of the Public 
Service and Administration with immediate effect. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I would like to go through what 
you have just told us in a little more detail, which you do in 
20 
paragraph 11 of your affidavit. 
DR KHOZA:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Because you say in you say it in 
paragraph 11.1…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 79 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   …on the same day…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund.    
ADV FREUND SC:   …of course it is the day of Mr 
Mantashe’s announcement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund I think we will take the lunch 
break in five minutes’ time, quarter past, so I am just 
warning you so that whatever you deal with, you can tailor 
it to finish within five minutes. for us to stop at that time.  
ADV FREUND SC:   I will.  Yes, I will endeavour Chair to 
actually complete this witness's evidence in that time.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV FREUND SC:   You - what you say in the affidavit Is 
that you, on the very same day, went into the meeting of 
your Study Group for the Portfolio Committee, which you 
Chaired. And when you got to that meeting, you were 
confronted by the ANC caucus for that study group, 
together with the Minister Ms Muthambi.  Just explain very 
briefly, what you were confronted with at that meeting and 
why was Ms Muthambi there at all? 
DR KHOZA:   Well, Minister Muthambi, in her capacity as 
20 
the Minister of Public Service and Administration has the 
right to attend Study Group meetings, as an ordinary 
member of the ANC who is part of that committee, is part 
of the Study Group.  That is where we process issues that 
are going to be dealt within the committee.  
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 80 of 211 
 
However, what was strange about this meeting is 
that somebody who was actually serving in the Committee 
of Intelligence, and is somebody who had for lack of a 
better word, which is public knowledge, who had romantic 
at some stage, romantic relations with the President Zuma.  
She happened to be the cluster Chairperson.  
On that day Ms Mina Lesoma who is supposed to be 
the Chair of the Study Group was not present at the 
meeting. 
So 
this 
particular 
person 
Sizani 
Dlamini-
Dubazana is the one that was Chairing that meeting, and is 
10 
the one that was leading the charge.  As a matter of fact, 
as soon after that, I even went to the former President 
Kgalema Motlanthe, I went to his house after they charged 
me because they took the constitution of the ANC and they 
were charging me for ill-discipline.  
And they were saying in this constitution pointing to 
the Constitution of the ANC, there is nothing about 
conscience but there is something about unity.  There is 
something about leading the ANC according to the ANC 
Constitution and I went to Kgalema Motlanthe and when I 
20 
asked him because I was confused at that stage and I said 
this is what had happened.  Kgalema Motlanthe agreed 
with me and said, the Study Group has no powers 
whatsoever of instituting any disciplinary action, taking any 
disciplinary action against a member.  
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 81 of 211 
 
So he concurred with me and I was confused 
because, you know, the tone, even of Jackson Mthembu 
who had earlier on was against the study - had a problem 
with the Study Group for taking a decision to boycott the 
meeting that I was going to be Chairing.  In fact, they had 
the Study Group of the ANC decided to call off the Portfolio 
Committee meeting of Parliament as a Study Group.  
But the EFF, I think, Ndlozi, Dr Ndlozi was there at 
that meeting, they all decided to attend that meeting, there 
were a number of members of the EFF that attended the 
10 
meeting because the Study Group did not only end up with 
telling on the ANC members, but they went further to even 
instructing officials of government like the CEO of the 
School of Governance, Professor Levin. 
And they went to an extent of telling some of those 
people from the different departments, the only people that 
attended that did not adhere to that call was the Public 
Service Commission Chaired by Sizani, I cannot remember 
the surname but he decided not to follow that instruction.  
But he attended that meeting, which was ours, not 
20 
according to the Study Group I was not supposed to 
continue with that meeting because they had already fired 
me.  
But as the Chair of the part of the Committee of the 
Public Service and Administration Committee, so but 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 82 of 211 
 
Jackson Mthembu had given me the green light to proceed 
with the meeting because subsequently to being fired, I 
contacted Cedric Frolick as well, who was the Chair of 
Chairs.  He was the Chair of the Chairpersons and I 
contacted him and I said, this is what had happened and 
he said, no, that is wrong.  
The Study Group has no right to call off the meeting 
of Parliament, and I also spoke to Jackson Mthembu, he 
also concurred with Frolic and said, I must go ahead with 
the meeting.  So I had the blessing of Cedric Frolick and 
10 
Jackson Mthembu to go ahead with the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Freund I think unfortunately, 
unfortunately we…[intervene] 
ADV FREUND SC:   In the five minutes, I think there is 
more to be covered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair we can adjourn for lunch, then 
we can continue with Dr Khoza thereafter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us continue with Dr Khoza after 
the lunch break.  Let us take the lunch break now, we will 
20 
resume at quarter past two.  We are adjourned. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 83 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understand there was some technical 
issues Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes I am sorry for that Chair but they do 
seem to have been resolved at least for the moment so we 
are ready to proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Dr Khoza can you hear me? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes I can. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  I just want to deal as briefly 
as we can with your paragraph 11.  And you say in paragraph 
10 
11.1 that on the same day the 15t h August there was a 
meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and 
Administration 
scheduled 
to 
take 
place 
and 
you 
had 
arranged for Faith Muthambi who was by that time the 
Minister of Public Service and Administration to present a 
report to the committee on that – at that meeting, is that 
correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Very briefly what – what was the issue 
on which she was required by you to come and present a 
20 
report to the committee? 
DR KHOZA:  There was an allegation that Minister Muthambi 
who at the time was the Minister of Public Service and 
Administration 
she 
was 
no 
longer 
the 
Minister 
of 
Communications that she had flown her relatives and people 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 84 of 211 
 
that are – that – her friends to her budget speech. 
 
Now what was – what was happening at the time was 
that we had issued an instruction as a committee that 
Ministers must be careful on how they spend because we 
were facing a contracting economy and South Africa was go 
– and the – generally National Treasury had reported to ask 
that the situation was not looking good in terms of the public 
finances. 
 
So 
we 
were 
going 
to 
hold 
Minister 
Muthambi 
accountable for that.  We wanted to get clarity from her.  In 
10 
fact we were even – we were not even expecting a written 
report we were expecting an oral report from her because we 
wanted to hear her side of the story.  The matter was 
reported in the media and we wanted her to verify those 
allegations. 
 
And as a person who was from the ruling party I had 
heard other members of the opposition complaining about 
that they came to me to say, there is this allegation about 
Minister Faith Muthambi what is going to happen about that? 
 
So we were meeting – we were going to have a 
20 
meeting on the 15t h August 2017 as a Study Group.  The 
meeting if I am not mistaken was scheduled for ten o’clock 
because Minister Faith Muthambi was going to appear at two 
o’clock. 
 
Now on that day I was surprised when I got to the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 85 of 211 
 
meeting at ten o’clock – in fact I got there a few minutes 
before ten o’clock which is what I always did; I always 
arrived early.  And I knew that Mina Lesoma was not going to 
be present at that meeting because she had issues – had her 
own personal issues.  She was the Whip of the committee. 
 
So I was expecting to chair that meeting because she 
had asked me that I would chair that meeting because she 
will be gone.  So to my surprise I found that there was a 
Minister Faith Muthambi at this meeting.  By the way who 
was not attending meetings of the Study Group.  I was 
10 
expecting her to attend later on that day so 00:03:49 before 
the committee but on this particular day Minister Faith 
Muthambi was there together with Sizani  Dlamini who was 
not even though she was the Chair of the Governance 
Cluster she was not attending any of our Public Service and 
Administration Committee meetings. 
 
So I found it odd that she was there and there were 
other members such as 00:04:19 the former Deputy Mayor of 
Pietermaritzburg that was recalled at some stage by the ANC 
and subsequently promoted to go to National Parliament. 
20 
 
There was also MP Adine Thombela.  There was also 
MP Velmar New 00:04:37 and the other person that was 
there was obviously the secretariat of the Study Group. 
 
And to my surprise I was shocked when Sizani then 
said 
MP’s 
honourable 
members 
Sizani 
took 
the ANC 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 86 of 211 
 
constitution and she started wielding it and told me that the 
meeting is about to commence and she is going to be the 
chair of the meeting.   
 
And at the meeting together with all of them Thembe 
and then they were accusing me of following – of following 
conscience 
and 
they 
were 
even 
pointing 
out 
to 
the 
constitution that there was nothing called conscience in the 
ANC constitution.  
 
They went through a series of charges, of the rules 
that I had broken I am not going to go through that but what 
10 
was strange to me was that at that meeting I was charged 
and I was also even fired by the Study Group and they were 
telling me that from this – from that day I am no longer going 
to be the chair of the Study Group.  It is then that I then – 
and 
they 
were 
saying 
all 
meetings 
of 
the 
Portfolio 
Committees, 
Parliamentary 
Portfolio 
Committees 
are 
suspended. 
 
Now I tried to tell them that that was not relevant but 
they said to me well they as a Study Group they have their 
power.  So it is then that I actually contacted Cedric Frolick 
20 
to advise on what had been. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I would just like to interrupt you there 
and I would just like to take you to part of what happened in 
that meeting.  It is referred to in your affidavit at paragraph 
11.8 and 11.9.  You have already told the Chair part of the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 87 of 211 
 
00:06:29 was this question of conscience.  But if you could 
just take us through what was – what you dealt with in 
paragraphs 11.8 and 11.9 of your affidavit please? 
DR KHOZA:  Well I was told that I had brought the name of 
the ANC into disrepute by my questioning of Ms Dudu Myeni 
and in my capacity as the then member of the Standing 
Committee on Finance and by my remarks in the SABC 
inquiry about Dr Ben Ngubane and I also had written which is 
true about the recycling of failure and so there were 
accusing me that I had also done that.  I had accused the 
10 
ANC of recycling failure. Basically what I was referring to 
there 
was 
that 
Faith 
Muthambi 
was 
the 
Minister 
of 
Communications and we had as a committee, as the SABC 
inquiry – I mean the ad-hoc committee on SABC we had 
recommended to the President to review to look to – to 
review the position of Faith Muthambi basically we were 
simply saying to the President in short, President this person 
is incompetent and with the manner in which he has – she 
has managed SABC but subsequently she was promoted.  So 
there were accusing me of that. They also even alluded to 
20 
issues that were – had to do with SABC and Hlaudi 
Motsoeneng and they also spoke about the vote of no 
confidence and conscience.  So basically that is what had 
happened and from that I was never given an opportunity to 
respond.  I was then told that they can no longer be led by 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 88 of 211 
 
the conscience. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So you say in your affidavit that they all 
criticised you and you say in your affidavit Ms Muthambi is of 
these who criticised you for the fact that you had raised 
these criticisms of comrades in the various oversight 
committees about which you have already referred, is that 
correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And what is more your committee 
according to your affidavit also criticised you for having 
10 
called Ms Muthambi to account to your committee as you 
have just described, is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you say that Ms Muthambi nodded 
her approval of this criticism, is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you deal in your affidavit and I am 
not going to deal with it in any detail now but how you took 
this up in structures within the leadership of the ANC and 
Parliament.  But I do want to draw attention to paragraph 
20 
11.20. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am sorry Mr Freund.  I think 
seeing that you are moving to that far can I just ask Dr 
Khoza about some of the evidence she has just given? Dr 
Khoza. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 89 of 211 
 
DR KHOZA:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you saying that the – the meeting… 
DR KHOZA:  I cannot hear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot hear.   
DR KHOZA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let me bring the microphone closer, 
is that better? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes it is much better Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay you must just say whenever I am 
talking too soft.  I am too used to people saying my voice is 
10 
loud so – so I try not to be loud.  Who was saying you should 
not have called Minister Muthambi to account about what you 
had read in the media namely that she had flown or whatever 
a 
number 
of 
her 
friends 
and 
relatives 
to 
Parliament 
inappropriately as I understand the matter.  Who was saying 
that?  Was that the committee of Parliament that you were 
chairing but on that day you were not chairing?  Was that a 
Study Group of the party? 
DR KHOZA:  That complaint – that complaint arose because 
the members of the opposition who are members of the 
20 
committee had brought to our attention that there was – wide 
media coverage on Minister Muthambi having flown her 
relatives to her budget speech.  So basically we simply 
wanted her to give us her side of the story and it was the 
committee decided because that matter had been discussed 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 90 of 211 
 
previously and at a previous Portfolio Committee meeting but 
we then said no we needed to afford the Minister an 
opportunity to come and give her oral report at the following 
meeting.  So it was essentially a decision of the committee 
that she should be invited to come and account on that.  To 
give us clarity; give us her side of the story. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but you – you have testified about a 
meeting I think that Mr Sizani chaired which was also 
attended by Ms Muthambi.  Was that a meeting of the Study 
Group for the ANC as opposed to a meeting of a structure of 
10 
Parliament? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes.  It was a meeting of the Study – it was the 
ANC Study Group Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. And they said… 
DR KHOZA:  It was not the Parliamentary Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And among other things you say they 
said you or your committee should not have called Minister 
Muthambi to account about what you – what had been seen 
in the media. 
DR KHOZA:  Pardon Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did they say – I just want to clarify that I 
understood you correctly.  Did the Study Group of the ANC 
that  you are talking about at that meeting say that you 
should not have called Minister Muthambi to come and 
account or provide clarification about the allegations in the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 91 of 211 
 
media against her? 
DR KHOZA:  No the committee was not concerned about 
that.  The way it happened I just got in and I was kind of 
ambushed 
you 
know 
because I got into the 
meeting 
expecting us to discuss the strategy of how we wished to 
handle that matter of Faith Muthambi but to my surprise 
Faith Muthambi was also at that meeting and it looked like 
they had already had a pre-meeting and they were not 
concerned about what the meeting I the afternoon.  Because 
they had – it seemed as though they had already discussed 
10 
and concluded that the Parliamentary Committee meeting 
which was scheduled for two o’clock that same day will not 
be taking place because they were asking the Secretary 
General Gwede Mantashe to give them the name of the new 
00:14:28.   
 
So 
they 
were 
talking 
basically 
about 
all 
the 
accusations.  It became like a disciplinary hearing except 
that I was never advised in advance that there was going to 
be some kind of disciplinary hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But was the discussion confined or your 
20 
criticism by them confined to the Muthambi issue or were 
they going over a number of matters in which you – they 
disapproved of what – how you may have handled them? 
DR KHOZA:  Chairperson as I said the person who was 
chairing 
that 
meeting 
was 
Honourable 
Member 
Sizani 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 92 of 211 
 
Dlamini-Dubazana and she made it very clear even during 
that meeting that there is only one item and that item 
confirmed myself.  My ill-discipline and it was not about 
Muthambi.  Muthambi was just part of that meeting and I was 
not – we were not – I was not in control of what was 
discussed.  So it is only discussed the issues or allegations 
relating to my ill-discipline. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay thank you.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  I understand what you 
have just said Dr Khoza but I think what the Chair is trying to 
10 
get at is the question of what was the ill-discipline that you 
were accused of?  And if we look at paragraph 11.8 and 11.9 
you seem there to describe what it was that they were 
accusing you of.  So I would like you just to maybe read into 
the record those paragraphs and then tell the Judge whether 
you stand by that or whether you wish to change that in any 
way. 
DR KHOZA:  Chairperson what is written there is absolutely 
correct.  I am standing by what I have submitted. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So what you said there is this that you 
20 
were told that you had brought the name of the ANC into 
disrepute by questioning – by your questioning of Ms Dudu 
Myeni in the SCOF.  By your remark in the SABC inquiry 
about Dr Ben Ngubane and recycling failure.  By your 
criticisms in the SABC inquiry of Ms Faith Muthambi and Mr 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 93 of 211 
 
Hlaudi Motsoeneng and you were told you should not have 
attacked comrades like these.  Is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you also… 
DR KHOZA:  Save to say that there was also something they 
had – they said something specifically on the vote of no 
confidence that I was being disciplined on that. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes that you dealt with earlier in the 
same affidavit. 
DR KHOZA:  Ja. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  And be – that was part of what they said.  
But another part of what they said you deal within paragraph 
11.9.  You say: 
“I 
was 
also 
criticised 
for 
requiring 
Ms 
Muthambi to come to account to the Portfolio 
Committee 
about 
the 
recent 
allegations 
against her.  It was alleged that it was 
unacceptable for me to call and I quote ‘our 
own ANC Minister’ to account in this way and 
Ms Muthambi nodded her approval of this 
20 
criticism.” 
Do you stand by that? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes I stand by that Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then you say in paragraph… 
DR KHOZA:  At the meeting Muthambi even said ended up 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 94 of 211 
 
not even attending the meeting, that meeting at two o’clock 
she did not attend.  She actually I suppose implemented the 
decision of the Study Group that said I was no longer the 
Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I would also like to refer you to 
paragraph 11.10 of your affidavit because there you say the 
following: 
“It was made clear to me by those present 
including Ms Muthambi that they agreed with 
what was being conveyed to me.  They were 
10 
given turns to speak and they all endorsed or 
added to what is set out above.” 
Do you stand by that? 
DR KHOZA:  Absolutely Chairperson I was alone in that 
meeting basically.  In fact I am just saying there was no 
other person that was on my side.  Because Honourable 
Lesoma had decided not to attend that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then if we can move on to paragraph 
11… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Freund.  I am sorry Mr 
Freund.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – I take it that the Study Group consisted 
of ANC – consisted of MP’s only obviously ANC MP’s did not 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 95 of 211 
 
include anybody who was not an ANC person – ANC MP is 
that correct? 
DR KHOZA:  The Study Group Chairperson consisted of 
myself as the chairperson of the Public Service and 
Administration Committee also an MP and Mr Dombela who 
was also a member of the committee – the Portfolio 
Committee – the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on the 
Public Service and Administration.  Mr 00:19:55 who was 
also a MP and Ms Velmar 00:20:05 who was also a member 
of Parliament as well as a vote the Minister of – the Minister 
10 
of Department of Public Service and Administration and he 
had 00:20:22 Duba those were the members of the Study 
Group of the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So those are the people who according to 
your paragraph 11.10 all endorsed the decisions that were 
taken in that committee – in that meeting? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes it is important – it is to – important to note 
that Ms Sizani Dubazana was the ANC Cluster chairperson.  
She is also a member of Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
DR KHOZA:  But was not necessarily a member of the ANC – 
was not one of those ANC members who were part of the 
Parliamentary Study Group. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
DR KHOZA:  However she was the chairperson of the ANC 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 96 of 211 
 
Governance 
Cluster 
to 
which 
the 
Public 
Service 
and 
Administration belonged. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay 
DR KHOZA:  So she was using her powers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR KHOZA:  As the Chair of the ANC Cluster – Governance 
Cluster to direct the meeting and to assist members in terms 
of making sure that a decision was taken on my discipline. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H'm.  Otherwise normally who would chair 
that Study Group’s meetings? 
10 
DR KHOZA:   That Study Group meeting ordinarily will be 
chaired by Ms Mina Lesoma as the Whip of the ANC 
Committee Study Group. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  Thank you.  Mr Freund you 
may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now what you explain 
in your affidavit is that apart from what you have already told 
the Chair about what you were accused of you also explain 
that at that same meeting the Study Group purported to 
make a decision that the Portfolio Committee meeting 
20 
scheduled for that very afternoon would simply not happen 
and you told the Chair before the lunch adjournment that 
they not only decreed that they then directed for example I 
think you said the Director General not to attend the 
Portfolio Committee that afternoon, is that correct? 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 97 of 211 
 
DR KHOZA:  Yes that is correct they directed all the different 
departments that accounted to the committee.  Only the 
Public Service and Public Service Commission attended the 
meeting at two o’clock but otherwise everyone else did not 
attend. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you say in your affidavit that you 
sought clarity for example I think you spoke to Mr Frolick if I 
am not mistaken and you were told… 
DR KHOZA:  Yes I did. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You were told no they do not have that 
10 
power you must continue to go to the meeting and you went 
to the meeting, is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes that is correct.  In fact even Jackson 
Mthembu spoke to me – I spoke to Jackson Mthembu about it 
as the Whip and he directed me to go ahead.  He was so 
furious.  Jackson Mthembu was so furious about what the 
ANC Study Group the decision that was taken by the ANC 
Study Group.  Because he felt that they had no jurisdiction in 
the matter in directing the business of Parliament in saying a 
Parliamentary program must continue or must stop. 
20 
 
So he then instructed – he instructed Mina Lesonma 
who was not present that day to tell all the members of the 
ANC to go to attend the meeting at two o’clock and instead 
what actually happened is that none of them attended.  The 
only person that attended that meeting was 00:24:22 Boy I 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 98 of 211 
 
am sorry I forgot to mention his name earlier on he was also 
a member of the Portfolio Committee.  He is the only one 
that responded to – to the Chief Whip’s call that all members 
of the Study Group must attend no program of Parliament 
can be stopped by a Study Group of the ANC. 
 
But Minister Muthambi did not attend that meeting 
and that made the EFF and the DA extremely angry at that 
meeting because they had seen her in the Parliamentary 
prescript they could not understand why she was not at the 
meeting. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now one of the members of the Study 
Group who you have mentioned several times already was 
Mr Melvin Dirks who you refer to in paragraph 11.20 is that 
correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And notwithstanding what you have 
already told us – well it was one of those who did not attend 
the Portfolio Committee meeting that afternoon, is that 
correct? 
DR KHOZA:  Who is that?  Sorry. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Mr Melvin Dirks did not attend the 
meeting? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Melvin Dirks was actually – was at the 
meeting.  The person that was not at the meeting was Mina 
Lesoma.  Melvin Dirks was one of those people who was 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 99 of 211 
 
00:25:45.  And he had a serious bone to chew with me. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I think you may have misunderstood my 
question.  I am now not talking about the – the Study Group 
meeting I am talking about the Portfolio Committee meeting 
in the afternoon and I am asking you whether Mr Melvin 
Dirks attended the Portfolio Committee meeting in the 
afternoon. 
DR KHOZA:  No none of the members of the Study Group of 
the ANC attended except for Nymi Boy. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right now in paragraph 11.20 of your 
10 
affidavit you quote ‘a social media posting by Mr Dirks’ and 
you say that he said amongst other things and I now quote: 
“All of us must submit to the ANC position 
before 
we 
can 
attend 
any 
Portfolio 
Committee meeting as ANC mem – MP’s.  We 
cannot have an ANC Study Group position 
called 
conscience 
when 
we 
go 
to 
the 
Portfolio meeting. The ANC Study Group 
called off the Portfolio Committee meeting 
but Dr Makhozi is above the ANC and defied 
20 
the Study Group’s decision.” 
And he goes on.  Is that correct?  Is that part of what he said 
in his post? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you then deal on the – in the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 100 of 211 
 
paragraphs that follow with the fallout that came from what 
had happened at the Study Group meeting and the Portfolio 
Committee meeting and you say that initially Mr Mthembu 
was supportive of you or so it seemed but then in paragraph 
11.22 you explain what happened next.  Now you say Mr 
Mthembu adopted a different position.  What was his 
different position as you deal with it in paragraph 11.22? 
DR KHOZA:  Minister Mthembu instead what had actually 
happened and I do recall that there was a strategy meeting 
that I was called to.  The current Minister Tegodi Diza [?] 
10 
was also present at that meeting where Mr Mthembu was 
very furious and even in fact called for the members of the 
ANC Study Group to face disci – to be disciplined.  However 
subsequent to that Mthembu adopted a different position.  
He was then – he started accusing me of ill-discipline and 
that there will no organisation if people were allowed to vote 
with their conscience.  And I could not understand because 
all along I thought that Mthembu and myself were in sync 
and after all I attended the meeting.  I went ahead with the 
meeting at two o’clock because of his alignment with what I 
20 
thought was correct that a Study Group of the ANC cannot 
be dictate the program of Parliament.  But Mthembu had 
actually changed and when I went to – I think I was on – I 
was – I just landed at OR Tambo airport and I was going to 
deliver a letter on route first when Jackson Mthembu phoned 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 101 of 211 
 
me as soon as I landed to advise me that the organisation 
has 
decided 
to 
recall 
me 
because 
there 
will 
be 
no 
organisation if we follow this thing called a conscience.  And 
he said by instruction that he got from the Secretary General 
and he had the letter I did not have the letter he read the 
letter to me I never received the letter.  So he then told me 
that I was immediately released from my position as the 
Chair of the Committee on Public Service and Administration. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the Secretary-General to whom 
you are referring to, at that time would be Gwede 
10 
Mantashe.  Is that correct? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, it is Gwede Mantashe. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you referred a little earlier, a 
couple of minutes ago to what happened at a Strategy 
Meeting and that is a structure that has not yet been 
referred to in these proceedings.  If you could just 
describe, what is this Strategy Meeting and how senior 
would the people involved in that would be? 
DR KHOZA:   Well, the Strategy Meeting of the ANC is very 
senior and it is where we get with the ministers and really 
20 
discuss where certain members of the ANC that are going – 
leadership of the ANC.   
 
It is not – they have somebody who was the 
Committee of Chairs.  You will have the Chief Whip, the 
Deputy Chief Whip who are members.  And you will also – 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 102 of 211 
 
and they had the powers of summoning any member whether 
it is the Minister, the Chair of the Portfolio Committee.   
 
Maybe just to hear us out on what – where the 
issues that we are going to be dealing with in the committee.  
And most of the times we will be called to that Strategy 
Meeting when an issue was controversial or it was an issue 
that is probably confirmed or was confirmed to the Anc. 
 
But the on the whole, the Strategy Committee was 
really ensuring that Parliament was – the ANC component of 
Parliament was doing what it is supposed to do.   
10 
 
On the whole, they were doing that because it is 
that Strategy Committee that took the decision together with 
Jackson Mthembu that those members that he had instructed 
Parliamentary programme to be disrupted and not to cancel 
the meeting of the Portfolio Meeting. 
 
They said those members must be disciplined.  So 
that was the decision of that Strategy Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So the Strategy Committee Meeting 
really came out on your side but thereafter. 
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 
 
You 
say 
in 
paragraph 
11.22, 
Mr Mthembu told you that he had now been instructed by 
the Secretary General, Mr Gwede Mantashe that you were 
to be relieved of your duties because the committee cannot 
be led by someone who has voted according to her 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 103 of 211 
 
conscience.  Is that your evidence? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes.  Yes, that is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So...  I am sorry Mr Freund.  So Dr Khoza, 
you have said that the people who would attend the Strategy 
Meeting would be senior people in the party.  But would that 
be a Strategy Meeting of the ANC in Parliament?   
 
In other words, it would be consist of senior ANC 
people within Parliament or would it have been Strategy 
Meeting of the party, of the party outside of Parliament but 
could cover work relating to Parliament? 
10 
DR KHOZA:   No, it was senior people of the ANC that are 
senior leadership of the ANC within Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
DR KHOZA:   That were members of the committee.  They 
had the powers even to call on the President.  Maybe there 
is an issues.  Like for example, in my case, I was called 
before the committee to come and clarify to the committee 
what had transpired the previous day when they started to 
take the decision to suspend all Parliamentary Committees 
of the Public Service and Administration. 
20 
 
So it was a crisis issue that they were trying to 
resolve, which is why they called me in.  I was not a member 
of that committee.  I was called in as the leader of the 
Portfolio Committee and a senior member of the ANC within 
that committee, that Parliamentary Committee to clarify the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 104 of 211 
 
issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Those senior ANC MP’s who were in that 
Strategy Meeting thought that what the Study Group had 
done to you was wrong and unacceptable but subsequently, 
Mr Mthembu said to you – is it the following day or shortly 
thereafter – that the Secretary General of the party namely 
Mr Mantashe had spoken to him and said that you – a 
decision had been taken to recall you as chairperson of the 
committee? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, it was the intervention of Gwede 
10 
Mantashe because he had written a letter which was 
supposed to be given to me by the Chief Whip.  And the 
Chief Whip, unfortunately, I had already left and the Chief 
Whip phoned me to read me the letter that he had received 
from the Secretary General. 
 
In fact, at some stage when I said to him:  Oh, well 
that is fine.  He thought I did not understand that I had been 
recalled with immediate effect.  And he had to remind me 
that:  Do you understand that you are no longer the 
Chairperson of the Public Service and Administration?  So I 
20 
said:  I understood you Chief Whip.  I understand.  And ja, 
that is how it happened.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  Mr Freund, continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I just want to go 
back to the Strategy Committee because a witness yet to 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 105 of 211 
 
testify has consulted with me in his – he had led me to 
understand that ordinarily the Strategy Committee Meeting 
is chaired by the leader of Government Business who 
ordinarily is the Deputy President and in that particular 
Parliament 
was 
the 
then 
Deputy 
President, 
Cyril 
Ramaphosa.  Now is that ordinarily correct? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes, absolutely.  I am so sorry.  I forgot to 
mention that.  Ja.  It is very – it is really – it seeks to play 
like a harmony as well between Parliament and the Executive 
so that, most of the times where there are real serious 
10 
issues like if maybe there is a Minister who is not throwing 
the line, the leader of Government Business is because he is 
actually the leader in that committee and he also plays his 
role in ensuring that members of the Executives adhere to 
the rule of law. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But you were not a member of that 
Strategy Committee but you were called to a meeting on 
that particular day of the Strategy Committee.  Is that 
correct? 
DR KHOZA:   Absolutely correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And do you remember whether or not 
on that particular occasion the then leader of Government 
Business was at that meeting? 
DR KHOZA:   President – the Deputy President, Cyril 
Ramaphosa was not there.  I do not think he was at that 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 106 of 211 
 
meeting.  He was not at that meeting.  But there was almost 
unanimity except maybe Doris Dlakude who was not very 
happy with the tone of the meeting but generally, everyone 
else was dismayed by the manner in which the ANC Study 
Group behaved.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  I want to finally deal...  Well, 
two final questions.  The one we have not referred to thus 
far.  That you deal with some detail in your paragraph 12.  
Maybe you can just briefly summarise what it was that 
finally pushed you to tender your resignation. 
10 
DR KHOZA:   What actually happened.  I wrote a long letter 
to the Secretary General, Gwede Mantashe concerning my 
own experiences in Parliament and basically I was at pain in 
terms of explaining to him how, you know, the ANC is even 
interfering in a negative way in how we executive our roles 
as members of Parliament who are supposed to play the 
oversight function over the Executive. 
 
I also objected about the disciplinary steps that 
were pending against me that were taken by the KZN 
Disciplinary Structure.  Mind you, I come from Kwazulu-
20 
Natal.  So not only was I facing a disciplinary process in 
Parliament but also the ANC in KZN was also – had started 
its own process of disciplining me. 
 
And they also pointed out that they were going to 
ensure that the ANC deals with me.  That was the Kwazulu-
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 107 of 211 
 
Natal ANC.  So you had those parallel things.  And it then – I 
then pointed out to him that I have a problem because right 
now I am at national level. 
 
You must remember that the ANC structures, the 
way that they are arranged, they are arranged as such that 
they are in harmony with the structures at government level. 
 
So my – I was expecting that because I was at 
national level and what I was accused of was that which was 
about a national issue, a national government issue, if you 
like because it confirmed the vote of no confidence on the 
10 
President. 
 
I complaint to him about that because now there was 
this KZN structure which was also charging me on the issue 
– on a national issue.   
 
I received no reply from Gwede Mantashe.  I also 
even eluded to Gwede Mantashe to the fact that I feel as if 
my right, my constitutional right as per Section 15 of the 
Constitution to the right of conscience is being violated. 
 
I reminded him of even of the court’s ruling.  I did 
remind him about that but unfortunately he did not respond 
20 
to me. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And having not received a response 
from him, what then did you decide? 
DR KHOZA:   It was at a stage where I was dealing with so 
many issues at the same time.  My life was being threatened.  
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 108 of 211 
 
In fact, even the then Deputy President during one of the 
National Assemble meetings, sittings he saw me outside and 
he was going – he was leaving and he saw me.  I was sitting 
outside on the bench, outside the chamber and he said to 
me:  Be safe.   
 
I mean, because everybody knew that my life was 
being threatened because of my stand on the vote of no 
confidence.  So Cyril Ramaphosa said that to me. 
 
But what I found very difficult was that I was being 
hauled to the disciplinary process in KZN.  I was handling 
10 
death threats.  I was having water being discharged into my 
property.  I was dealing with so many issues.  It was 
becoming so unbearable. 
 
And the Speaker of Parliament who had said – who 
had undertaken that no member of Parliament will be 
harmed, was silent.  I tried several times to secure a 
meeting with her but she was just not there for me. 
 
And ultimately, I decided that I could no longer – I 
no longer belong to this organisation.  To me it was clear 
that the ANC had adopted corruption as its new policy.  It 
20 
was an official policy because the only thing I was guilty of 
was to stand for that which was right. 
 
I was not – I did not do anything wrong in terms of 
my role as a member Parliament.  I do not believe that I 
brought the name of the ANC into disrepute but it appeared 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 109 of 211 
 
as though I was the one that was guilty of having done 
something wrong and not those that had done something 
wrong.  So I resigned.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Dr Khoza.  I have no further 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Dr Khoza it may well be that if 
certain evidence that I have heard from different witnesses 
and from you about how the ANC handled the issue of its 
members of Parliament performing their oversight functions 
is true.   
10 
 
It may well be that the ruling party may be 
responsible for quite some share of members of the 
Parliament not having performed its oversight functions over 
the Executive effectively and properly to the extent that I 
may find in the end that that is the case. 
 
So if I find that over the years Parliament did not 
perform its oversight functions the way it should have or 
effectively, obviously I have got to say:  Why was that so? 
 
And it may well be that if part of the evidence that 
you have given and the other witnesses have given is true, 
20 
that the ruling party itself may have been responsible for a 
certain share of blame as to why its own members of 
Parliament might have felt that they were limited in a very 
serious way in properly discharging their oversight functions. 
 
Would you like to comment on that or not really 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 110 of 211 
 
Dr Khoza? 
DR KHOZA:   Your observation Chairperson is absolutely 
correct except that I would qualify.  I would not say the ANC 
played some part.  In fact, the ruling party the instrument are 
crippling in weakening the Parliamentary oversight.   
 
I just want to give you an example of three women in 
Parliament that happened to leave in the same Parliamentary 
that were engaging from time to time.  And that is Daphne 
Zukiswa Rantho, Fezeka Loliwe and myself.  The three of us 
were very instrumental, I would say, in – you know we were 
10 
trying to do our best because we were members within the 
Parliament.   
 
And we would talk about then we cannot allow this 
to go on, you know.  And independently we took the decision 
that we took that we are no longer to be silenced.  We are 
going to try and do what is right. 
 
What actually happened to those three members is 
tragic because I was removed as the Chair of the Public 
Service and Administration.  Sis Fezeka Loliwe died from a 
car accident and she was one of the women that was very, 
20 
very smart.  I respected her a lot because she sat in the 
SABC Board Inquiry and she was as critical as I was.   
 
I subsequently also learnt that Rantho, Daphne 
Zukiswa Rantho was also not retained as a member of 
Parliament.  Basically, the ruling party, if you are doing your 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 111 of 211 
 
job, they find a way – I am not suggesting that they are 
responsible for Sis Loliwe’s death but I am saying it is 
something to note that all those that were in the forefront 
that had no skeletons that Minister Bathabile Dlamini, former 
Minister Bathabile Dlamini spoke of.   
 
It was very easy to strangulate their voices and 
discard them.  And that is the unfortunate situation.  So 
other members of Parliament if they wanted to do it, we are 
always – even on social media as we speak, I mean, you will 
hear people telling you that it is very cold outside the ANC. 
10 
 
If you are not going to follow the ANC’s directives – 
look at what happened to Makhozi.  And they would side with 
most of us because it also happened at local government 
level, at provincial level.   
 
People who try to keep on a prudential oversight 
function they are punished severely.  Even their careers are 
destroyed.  And I am speaking from experience.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the ANC will come appear before the 
Commission.  They are cooperating with the Commission and 
filing affidavits as I understand.  They – I did say – it is in 
20 
the public domain already in 2019 – that I have said that the 
ANC 
as 
the 
ruling 
party 
would 
need 
to 
appear 
the 
Commission before the Commission can finish its job 
because it seems to me that it was bound to have to do with 
certain matters relating to state capture.   
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 112 of 211 
 
 
When did it start suspecting that there was state 
capture happening or allegedly happening?  And what did 
they do?  What could they have done?  Did they act at all?  
Did they not act?  And what about the levels of corruption in 
the country?   
 
They had been raising for quite some time.  What 
did they do?  They were the ruling party in Parliament.  They 
were – they had - the Executive was – their Executive, so to 
speak.   
 
And it was the President of the country was the 
10 
President of the ANC and there were all kinds of allegations 
concerning him and the Gupta family and state capture and 
corruption.  What did they do about all of these things?  
Particularly if they 
were giving instructions that their 
members of Parliament should not perform their oversight 
functions properly.   
 
Were they giving those instructions because there 
was something defective they were doing within the party?  
Or was the position that they were given those instructions 
but within the party they were also not doing anything.  And 
20 
therefore, allowing state capture and corruption to happen.   
 
So they will come here.  They will put their side of 
the story.  But it is quite concerning because if the ruling 
party was giving instructions or conducting itself towards its 
members of Parliament in a manner that was sending the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 113 of 211 
 
message to its members of Parliament that it is wrong to 
perform your oversight functions the way you are supposed 
to do.   
 
It is wrong to perform your oversight functions 
properly.  You should not call an ANC Minister to account.  
You should not criticise a member of the Executive who was 
not doing their job or against who there were serious 
allegations of corruption and other things.   
 
Because then the message was, as long as you 
were a Minister in the ANC, ANC Minister you should not 
10 
really take the committees of Parliament seriously because 
the majority would always be ANC members and you would 
always know that in terms of the instruction of the party or in 
terms of various pronouncements by leaders of the ruling 
party, you would, you know members of the party in the 
committee that you had to deal with are not supposed to be 
vigorous in performing their oversight functions against you 
because you are an ANC Minister.   
 
And therefore, if Parliamentary oversight failed to 
stop corruption rising to the levels to which it has arisen, if 
20 
Parliamentary oversight failed to stop various acts of alleged 
state capture happening, it may well be that in part – and 
you might say not in part, you might say hundred percent – it 
is because members of the majority party were hindered or 
impeded from doing their function properly.   
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 114 of 211 
 
 
And if they had not been hindered because of the 
instructions and the attitude approach taken by the ANC 
leadership, maybe they could have stopped some of the 
things that this Commission is looking at.  Maybe they would 
not have had happened at the level at which they seemed to 
have happened.   
 
Maybe the billions of rands of taxpayers’ monies 
that this Commission has heard about that were taken away 
through corruption from government departments and SOE’s 
maybe would not have been so many billions if the members 
10 
of Parliament who are in the majority party were allowed to 
perform their oversight functions against the Executive 
properly and were not hindered.   
 
You might want to say something or you have said 
enough? 
DR KHOZA:   Well, there is just one thing that I would like to 
recommend if I may.  You know, I really do think that 
Parliament is such an important institution in terms of having 
the rampant culture of corruption that we see in the country.   
 
And I honestly do think that if we had some of the 
20 
committees of Parliament, like whether it is finance, the 
Standing Committee of Public Accounts, the committee, the 
integrated committee chaired probably by the opposition as 
opposed to being chaired by the ruling party.   
 
I think Parliament will be functioning better and it 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 115 of 211 
 
will be performing its role.  I am selecting those specific 
departments, 
those 
specific 
committees 
of 
Parliament 
because they are close cutting.   
 
And if you have those as a standard that they should 
be chaired by the opposition, it is not necessarily to take 
away the responsibility of the ruling party but it is very – our 
experience in South Africa is that the ruling party, whether it 
is the ANC or another ruling party for that matter, it cannot 
be the player and the referee at the same time.   
 
And we need to find mechanisms of ensuring that 
10 
there are those mechanisms.  And you start to remember, 
myself and other members of Parliament of the ANC who 
wish to do right and they cannot do right.   
 
They need to be able to go to the Integrity 
Committee of Parliament but the problem is that the Integrity 
Committee of Parliament is also a committee – I mean, it is 
the ANC that decides who becomes the Chair of that 
committee.  So you cannot go to anyone.  You are basically 
helpless as a member of Parliament.  You want to do good 
but unfortunately you are constraint.   
20 
 
And maybe that is something that we might have to 
consider going forward so that the ruling party does not have 
absolute power or absolute control because we can see, 
obviously from the evidence that all these things would not 
have happened, all these billions of rands would not have 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 116 of 211 
 
been stolen had Parliament been empowered to do its role 
and had the ANC not have absolute power over the 
Executive and over the legislature.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I guess the one thing that would be 
clear is that if the ruling party was really intolerant of 
corruption and wanted proper oversight to be performed by 
members 
of 
parliament, 
effective 
oversight, 
they 
– 
parliament could have stopped a lot of things that have 
happened that are wrong and anyone in the executive, 
including the President, if the ANC came to the conclusion 
10 
that these ministers and this president are not doing right, 
the ANC could have either recalled them in terms of their 
internal processes outside of parliament or if they had 
allowed their members of parliament, ANC members of 
parliament, to really perform their functions of oversight 
over the executive using their own judgment it may well be 
that they could have done much more or they could have 
done a lot and members of the executive would know, even 
members of the ANC will support a vote of no confidence if 
I do not change or if I do a, b, c, d.   
20 
But 
if 
those 
in 
the 
executive, 
including 
the 
president, knew that I cannot be touched as long as the 
ANC is with me, it will give instructions to members of 
parliament to say you cannot vote in favour – you cannot 
vote with the opposition even if you think that the motion of 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 117 of 211 
 
no confidence is in accordance with the interests of the 
people of South Africa that you represent as a member of 
parliament then ministers and the president will feel 
comfortable to say well, all these motions of no confidence 
are just a waste of time because the ANC members of 
parliament who are in the majority will be told, you cannot 
vote with your position even if in your own judgment voting 
in favour of the motion would serve the interest of the 
people of South Africa better than voting against it but 
because the party says you are not allowed to vote for 
10 
what you believe is right in terms of the interest of the 
people then you do not vote and you vote against it but 
actually you are being unfaithful to our oath of office as a 
member of parliament when you do that because the oath 
of office, in the oaths of office for members of parliament, 
when you take that oath you say you promise to be faithful 
to the Republic of South Africa.  So how are you faithful to 
the Republic of South Africa when in your view the right 
thing for the Republic of South Africa is to vote in support 
of the motion of no confidence in the president but your 
20 
party instructs you to vote against it, your party instructs 
you to actually act in breach of your oath of office because 
you have looked at the situation and you believe that if you 
are to act in accordance with your oath of office, you must 
vote in favour of this motion of no confidence but your 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 118 of 211 
 
party says forget about what you think, you did not bring 
yourself to parliament but they allowed you to take this 
oath, they were in support of you taking that oath to say in 
performing your functions as a member of parliament you 
will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa.   
And, as the Constitutional Court said, in the secret 
ballot judgment, the oath does not talk about being faithful 
to the party, it talks about being faithful to the Republic of 
South Africa and I guess the framers of the constitution 
knew that at the core of your function – of your role as a 
10 
member of parliament lies the interests of the Republic. 
Yes, your party might have brought you there but 
your oath says you must be faithful to the Republic of 
South Africa but if you are instructed to vote in a way that 
does not accord with what you believe is in accordance 
with the interests of the Republic of South Africa then it 
seems it is problematic.   
But the ruling party will come and maybe they will 
explain their perspective and maybe one will understand 
something that one might be understanding now but what 
20 
do we do, Dr Khoza, about this problem because on the 
one hand there is the issue that you are brought to 
parliament by your party and in terms of the current 
electoral system, when you campaign, you campaign not 
for yourself as a member of the party, you campaign for the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 119 of 211 
 
people to vote for your party.  It is the party that gets 
elected.  When does one say let us leave it to the 
electorate to decide how to punish the party if they do 
something that the electorate does not support?  Are you 
able to deal with that? 
DR KHOZA:   Yes.  I think there is already a Constitutional 
Court judgment on that matter especially regarding the 
electoral system that we have in South Africa.  All that has 
to happen is for the ruling party primarily to ensure that it 
is implemented.  At the moment when you are – when you 
10 
become a member of parliament there is only way of 
becoming a member of parliament, is it is through a 
proportional representation system, there is no directly 
elected members of parliament by their constituencies. 
 
We need to make – this thing is very important 
because even though we have a state of paralysis at local 
government level and as a local government practitioner 
myself, I know for a fact that ward councillors have more 
power 
over 
the 
party 
because 
they 
represent 
their 
constituencies.  Hence if they resign from the party there 
20 
has to be – if they resign from the municipal council, there 
has to be by-elections but at national level you are really 
constrained because you come through the party ticket, 
they 
can 
fire 
you 
at 
any 
time 
and 
there 
are 
no 
consequences.   
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 120 of 211 
 
 
So I am saying the Constitutional Court judgment on 
the electoral reform, I think it has got to be something that 
has to be implemented because it will go a long way in 
ensuring 
that 
at 
least 
the 
half 
of 
the 
members 
of 
parliament will be accountable to their own constituencies 
if we are follow the recommendations of Van Zyl Slabbert 
report because they are already there.  In fact even 
[indistinct] 10.15 Commission did a lot of work insofar as 
that is concerned and I think it will help a great deal 
because then members – members of parliament will be 
10 
able to vote with their conscience or they will be able to 
vote in accordance with the mandates that they are getting 
from 
their 
constituencies 
as 
opposed 
to 
getting 
an 
instruction 
from 
Gwede 
Mantashe, 
sometimes 
even 
unlawful instructions and you are forced to go for that kind 
of instruction.  I think that will help a great deal.  To me, 
that will be my submission, Chairperson.  I thank you for 
giving me the opportunity  to speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR KHOZA:   And I think it was good that I came forward. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, you did a very good thing.  
I just want to make one point arising from what you have 
said.  I think it may well be that – I have not refreshed my 
memory on the judgment of the Constitutional Court about 
allowing independent candidates or people to stand for 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 121 of 211 
 
parliament but what is – what seems to be important, 
among other things, is that members, in order for members 
of parliament particularly of the ruling party, but it would 
apply to any members of parliament, actually, any members 
of parliament, to really play proper and effective oversight 
role to exercise their functions of oversight without fear, is 
that they must know there is no threat to remove them from 
parliament.   
 
So if, for example, in terms of the constituency 
system, I know that even though I am a member of a 
10 
particular political party, so let us say ANC in this case, I 
know that when I – I know that members of my constituency 
are happy with my work, with my job, with how I perform 
my oversight functions in parliament and they will always – 
they will vote for me as long as they are happy for me.   
DR KHOZA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even if I defy the instruction of the 
Secretary General of the ANC to say in that no confidence 
vote, do not support the no confidence vote.  If I know on 
my reading of the views of the people in my constituency 
20 
that actually they would like me to vote in favour of that 
motion, I can vote in favour because as long – my being in 
parliament is not just dependent on the Secretary General 
of the ANC, I can always get voted by the people in my 
constituency.  So in that way I would know that if I go 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 122 of 211 
 
against this instruction that I think that is not in the 
interests of the people of South Africa, it does not mean 
the end of my parliamentary career, you know, as long as I 
act in accordance and satisfy my constituency that I am 
doing a fine job, they will elect me next time, even if the 
party were to fire me now maybe, the next time the people 
will elect me if there is a by-election, they will elect me 
and I will come back.   
Or, maybe they cannot fire me for it, they can do 
whatever but when it comes to who will represent that 
10 
constituency in parliament, as long as my constituency is 
happy I will be able to go to parliament, so – but at the 
moment, members of parliament have to really weigh quote 
a lot.   
You were saying that they always said it is very cold 
outside the ANC, so you think if they fire you or next time 
when there are elections you are put very much down, in 
the least you will not get elected.  So you have to think 
about all of those things.  It makes it difficult.  You say it 
seems better to just comply with instruction and then in 
20 
that way I do not take too much of a risk but in the process 
then the proper performance of oversight functions is not 
done and because it is not done, the levels of corruptions 
that we have seen happen and then we know all the 
evidence that has been heard by the Commission about 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 123 of 211 
 
looting and so on.  Okay. 
Thank you very much, Dr Khoza, for coming to give 
evidence, we appreciate it very much, I know that it was 
not easy but we really appreciate it very much.  Thank you 
very much, you are now excused. 
DR KHOZA:   Thank you very much, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Okay, Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I have a witness who I believe 
is probably immediately available and another witness after 
that but I think we will be lucky to get through one more 
10 
witness if we possibly can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am able to sit beyond four o’clock.  
How is your situation and do you know what the witness’ 
situation is? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I cannot say as to the witness but my 
own situation, I can go all night. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  And what is your 
estimate of how much time we need for the witness? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Judge, it is extremely difficult to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will not hold you to it. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   I would imagine an hour and a half, 
something of that order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   An hour or hour and a half? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, that is at best. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine, then we will get 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 124 of 211 
 
through, we will get through.  As long as the witness is 
available we can finish.  But I would like us to take a short 
adjournment before we start with the new witness.  Ten 
minutes adjournment.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, you may proceed.  You may 
call your next witness. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair, the next witness, Mr 
Manny de Freitas. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr de Freitas are you there? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes I am, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you are not on the screen yet.  I 
understood that when you speak you come on the screen 
but this is not happening this time.  I do not know whether 
it means you must speak – okay, you speak up.  Good 
afternoon to you. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Good afternoon, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you for coming to assist the 
Commission, thank you very much for availing yourself, we 
20 
appreciate it very much. 
MR DE FREITAS:   only a pleasure, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Registrar, please administer 
the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 125 of 211 
 
MR DE FREITAS:   Manuel Simão Franca de Freitas.   
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR DE FREITAS:   I have no objection. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR DE FREITAS:   I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth the whole truth and nothing 
else but the truth.  If so, please raise your right hand and 
10 
say so help me God 
MANUEL SIMǍO FRANCA DE FREITAS:   So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Freund, you may 
proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, this witness 
has 
presented 
voluminous 
written 
material 
to 
the 
Commission which in due course I will seek to have 
admitted as annexure ZZ12.  It starts in volume 3 at page 
306, it goes through from 306 to 836 and then it also 
comprises a substantial portion of volume 4.  Mr de 
20 
Freitas, is that correct…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Freund, you said it starts 
at volume 3 at page 306. I guess you mean bundle 3, is 
that correct, or not really? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Bundle 3, I will just check again.  I 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 126 of 211 
 
believe that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have got his affidavit starting at 317. 
ADV FREUND SC:   317, yes.  The page before that is just 
sort of cover page indicating the exhibit number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If I may, Chair, just take the witness to 
this brief confirmatory affidavit and it will all become a 
little clearer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but we – just for the record do you 
confirm that it is not 306 but 317 where his affidavit starts. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is absolutely correct, that is 
where the affidavit starts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, you may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Mr de Freitas, you will 
have heard that exchange and have you received from the 
technician a hard copy of your own submission paginated 
in accordance with the Commission’s pagination system? 
ADV FREUND SC:    
MR DE FREITAS:   I have that bit, I hope. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So you will know that what we tend to 
20 
do is to refer to the pagination on the top left.  We are in 
bundle 3, then page 317 will be the first page of your 
confirmatory affidavit.  Do you have that?   
MR DE FREITAS:   I do indeed, thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And can you confirm that that brief 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 127 of 211 
 
affidavit is your affidavit and that that is your signature at 
page 320? 
MR DE FREITAS:   I confirm. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And have you had an opportunity to 
check that affidavit and you are comfortable with the 
contents of the affidavit? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  There may be some grammatical 
mistakes and so forth but nothing substantial. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Now what we see when we 
look at that affidavit is that you annex – and this is at page 
10 
317, you annex marked A copy of your curriculum vitae and 
is that what we see at page 322? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, a brief one, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   We will come back to that.  And then 
what we see in paragraph 4 is you say: 
“I annex hereto marked B a copy of a report that I 
prepared for submission to the Commission” 
And is that the report that starts at page 323? 
MR DE FREITAS:   It is indeed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that report its main text goes 
20 
through to page 456 in bundle 3, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes it is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then in addition to that you have 
furnished a substantial volume of annexures that are 
referred to in the main text of your submission document, 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 128 of 211 
 
the bundle B document, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That comprises the rest of volume 3 
and a substantial part of volume 4 of the papers before the 
Commission at the moment. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, against that background I 
request that we admit into evidence EXHIBIT ZZ12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Manuel Simão Franca 
de Freitas which starts at page 317 is together with its 
10 
annexures admitted as an exhibit and will be marked as 
EXHIBIT ZZ12. 
AFFIDAVIT 
AND 
ANNEXURES 
OF 
MANUEL 
SIMǍO 
FRANCA DE FREITAS HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT ZZ12 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now, Mr de Freitas, 
is it correct as appears in paragraph 1 of your confirmatory 
affidavit that you are a member of parliament? 
MR DE FREITAS:   I am indeed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you represent in parliament the 
Democratic Alliance, is that correct?   
20 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you have furnished to the 
Commission a very brief what we call a political curriculum 
vitae which we see at page 322.  Would you turn to that 
please? 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 129 of 211 
 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And can you confirm that that is a fair 
summary of your public …[intervenes] 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what it shows in short if I may 
draw particular attention to it, is that you were a member 
of the fourth parliament from 2009 to 2014 during which 
period you served as shadow Deputy Minister of Transport 
and thereafter shadow Minister of Home Affairs, is that 
correct? 
10 
MR DE FREITAS:   Correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in the fifth parliament you were 
re-elected and you served during – for the duration of that 
fifth parliament from 2014 to 2019 as shadow Minister of 
Transport, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   [No audible reply] 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in the time that you served as 
shadow Minister of Transport is it correct that you served 
on the portfolio committee on Transport? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And is it correct that that portfolio 
committee is responsible for oversight of various entities 
but for present purposes those entities included PRASA. 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is correct, yes.  That is the 
…[intervenes] 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 130 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Perhaps …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, Mr Freund.  Mr de Freitas, if you 
could speak up a bit some of your answers to the questions 
were not audible. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Speak up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Try and speak up. 
MR DE FREITAS:   I apologise.  Advocate, I am just saying 
PRASA stands for the Passenger Rail Agency of South 
Africa. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you.  And then what you 
10 
explain in paragraph 4 of your affidavit is that you 
prepared this submission report which we are going to 
spend quite some time dealing with in due course and you 
say in paragraph 5 that the report is in the main based on 
your personal experience as a member of parliament 
particularly 
as 
a 
member 
of 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Transport, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, during the periods that I was a 
member 
of 
that 
committee, 
I 
am 
talking 
about 
my 
experiences during those periods.  So there was a break 
20 
between 2012 and 2014 when I was in a different 
committee, so – you know, so – but otherwise it is my 
experience, right. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you say in paragraph 6 that 
you have refreshed your memory by making extensive use 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 131 of 211 
 
of documents and hypertext links referred to in the report 
and that those include summaries of the meetings of the 
transport 
committee 
prepared 
by 
the 
parliamentary 
monitoring group and that to the extent that you have 
relied on either the PMG summaries or the hypertext links 
you believe them to be reliable sources, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is correct.  Over and above that I 
keep copious records of everything, so I did have an 
external hard drive that I refer to and that is where the 
various annexures come from.  That – ja, I kept record of 
10 
all these things, ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I just want to digress briefly to 
get 
your 
views 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
reports 
by 
the 
parliamentary monitoring group.  You say in paragraph 7 
that you regard them as the most reliable and extensive 
available 
records, 
the 
proceedings 
of 
the 
transport 
committee, is that correct?   
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, I do and if I may elaborate, is that 
if you look at the minutes prepared in parliament, not just 
for my committee but any of the committees, they really do 
20 
not serve much, it is almost like a tick box exercise to say 
there as a meeting, these things were discussed and that 
is it.   It does not dig into the substance of what happened 
in 
those 
committees. 
 
And 
so 
PMG, 
Parliamentary 
Monitoring Group, is a more reliable source because they 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 132 of 211 
 
actually, you know, note who said at what time and the 
debate is a lot deeper in those minutes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   No those minutes by the PMG do you 
not purport to be like Hansard, they do not purport to be 
verbatim records but in your experience are that they are 
generally a fair reflection or a fair summary of what takes 
place. 
MR DE FREITAS:   I think overwhelmingly they are a fair 
summary, I think the problem with – in parliament is that it 
suits the party with the majority for detail not to be there in 
10 
the official parliamentary minutes because much of the 
debate and the information could be quite damning and 
implicates a lot of people and so it is suitable for them to 
have kind of a summary, very summarised minutes and 
luckily we have organisations such as the PMG who come 
in and do detailed records and so when I was preparing 
this submission I had my own records but certainly PMG 
assisted me and reminding me and jolting my memory and 
so forth in things that happened in committees. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I think the PMG would be very keen for 
20 
me to stress, and I put this to you for your comment, that 
they endeavour to be nonpartisan, they are not – they are 
not a campaigning NGO type organisation, they are trying 
to produce a reliable objective set of records. 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is exactly why they are - you 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 133 of 211 
 
know, I value them and they are respected, you know, 
because they should be non-political and nonpartisan and 
that is why everyone can refer to them knowing that are no 
party political parties behind their work. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in paragraph 8 of your affidavit 
you refer to not just the PMG’s general reports as a 
resource but a very particular resource that has been made 
available to this Commissioner.  You say: 
“I have read and considered the report prepared by 
the 
PMG 
for 
submission 
to 
the 
Commissioner 
10 
entitled 
Parliamentary 
Oversight 
over 
the 
Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa.” 
That you call the PMG report.   
Chair, if I could indicate for your convenience that 
that report is or will be in due course, one hopes, EXHIBIT 
ZZ8.2.  It is to be found in bundle 2 from page 825 to 875.  
It will be introduced formally through the evidence of a 
representative of the PMG. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now Mr de Freitas, against that 
20 
background, if we can turn to what is strictly speaking 
annexure B1 to your affidavit but in substance is really 
your submission to this Commission and it starts at page 
324, am I correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Correct. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 134 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the – perhaps you could read into 
the record the title of the submission because it gives an 
oversight as to what you have tried to do.   
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes thanks, Advocate, it is quite a long 
one.  I will just read what I put in front because I – as you 
say, it is a good summary.  It is: 
“Submission 
by 
Manny 
de 
Freitas 
to 
the 
Commission of Inquiry into allegations of state 
capture, corruption and fraud in the public sector 
including organs of state.  The effectiveness of 
10 
otherwise of parliamentary oversight in respect of 
alleged state capture or corruption particularly as 
regards 
the 
manner 
in 
which 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Transport 
dealt 
with 
allegations 
pertaining to PRASA during the fourth and fifth 
parliaments.” 
ADV FREUND SC:   What you have endeavoured to do in 
this extensive report and even more voluminous annexures 
is to give quite a detailed overview over quite an extended 
period of that issue that we described in the title, is that 
20 
correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes and it is voluminous and I 
subsequently then summarised it before I finalised it and 
the reason why it is so voluminous is whatever I said and 
whatever the Chairperson will read in my submission, I 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 135 of 211 
 
want to be in a position totally backup.  I do not - you 
know, where it is my opinion, I state so and where certain 
things 
I 
claimed 
to 
have 
happened, 
I 
use 
backup 
information that are in the annexures.  So that why it is so 
voluminous, I do not want – and I wanted to mention 
specific examples of what took place throughout this period 
so that it is concrete and not kind of academic or anything 
else but is a real concrete, sequential, chronological, you 
know, series of events that took place that we can 
pinpoint. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, Mr de Freitas, I mean no 
disrespect to you and the extreme extent of the efforts you 
made but I am going to start at the fifth parliament and for 
present purposes and because of questions of time before 
this Commission, I am going to omit in your oral testimony 
reference to the fourth parliament and I would like you to 
start please at page 369 which is at the foot of the page, 
page 46 of your report. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   We are truly pressed for time, so I ask 
20 
you as far as possible to be crisp and brief in your answers 
but what you do in this page and the page that follows is 
you refer to an issue which arose about the so-called Class 
Afro 4000 locomotives and concerns that arose in respect 
of procurement at very great public cost of a set of 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 136 of 211 
 
locomotives.  Could you just in one paragraph summarise 
what was the gist of the issue here? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Well, let just say that before this 
information  was made public I had a whistle blower who 
had warned me of this and the information  was so – it 
sounded so ridiculous that I half did not believe and every 
time I have worked with whistle blowers I have always 
made sure that I get information first, that I do not make 
accusations and so what I did is, I submitted questions 
about it and the whistle blower had said to me that the 
10 
incorrect height train, incorrect locomotives had been 
ordered and they had – and they were not suitable for our 
rail environment in South Africa and so I merely submitted 
official questions to backup this claim.  This person could 
not give me it in writing, all they – they just knew, the 
information was given to me verbally.   
 
So it was the gist of it and obviously the story 
before I got the reply and, you know, it broke into the 
newspapers and that, I was then in a position to then really 
kind of push the issue after that because then it was public 
20 
news and, you know, then it was more than just me 
perhaps making the claim unsubstantiated, there was 
something in the media that I needed to follow up from. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  And before we move further 
with that issue, I would like to refer you to the foot of page 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 137 of 211 
 
370 because there was another issue at about the same 
time which you referred to, on Mr Daniel Mthimkhulu and 
his qualifications which you say had found to be fake.  If 
you could just crisply summarise what the issue was. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Well, the story broke about the 
incorrect height of trains, you know, at the beginning of 
July and literally a few days later, another story broke that 
an official, his name is Daniel Mthimkhulu, who was the 
head engineer effectively in PRASA who was the person 
who would have signed off on the actual dimensions and 
10 
actual engineering of these locomotives was actually not 
an engineer and was not qualified to have done this work. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then if I can refer you to page 371 
towards the middle of the page under the date 14 July 
2015, you refer to two letters that you wrote to the 
Chairperson of the portfolio committee, that was the 
Portfolio Committee on Transport, am I right? 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You have already told us that is the 
portfolio committee of which you were a member and which 
20 
had responsibility for oversight in respect of PRASA. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The Chairperson was one D Magadzi, 
is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is right. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 138 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in those two letters – you say the 
first letter was a request to summon Minister Peters before 
the portfolio committee to explain this matter and you refer 
there to a particular annexure.  That is the issue about the 
locos that you have just described, is it? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  Yes, I had asked for her to 
appear.  I cannot remember the sequence but the replies to 
questions I had asked then came back and I am not sure if 
was before or after this letter, but I think it might have 
been after, and she, at that stage said the dimensions of 
10 
the locomotives were correct and then later – and then - 
you know, it is a side story, she stuck to the fact that it 
was the incorrect (sic) dimensions and so I have asked the 
chairperson of the portfolio committee to call on the 
minister to explain this matter. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And then you write a second 
letter and you give the reference, it is in the bundle, the 
request that Mr Mthimkhulu be summoned to appear before 
committee to discuss the same matter which is really the 
matter of the loco orders and their size specifications and 
20 
the like, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say in your report that in both 
instances receipt of your correspondence to Magadzi, this 
is the chair of the portfolio committee, was confirmed and 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 139 of 211 
 
was covered extensively in the media but you say that you 
have received no acknowledgement, no response of any 
description from Magadzi, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Sorry, just for the record, do you know 
the first names of the Chairperson Magadzi? 
MR DE FREITAS:   It is Dikeledi. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Sorry, I did not hear that clearly. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Dikeledi Magadzi. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Dikeledi? 
10 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is right. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you very much.  And then you 
say in addition these matters were never tabled at any 
meeting of the portfolio committee despite your approaches 
to the portfolio committee chair and the portfolio committee 
secretary about them, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  In fact, you know, these issues 
throughout the whole of parliament, you know, the Rail and 
PRASA and the whole – the rail infrastructure was 
imploding, all sorts of things were going in and it was as if 
20 
the portfolio committee was in a bubble as if these things 
were not happened and they were completely being ignored 
as if we would come to portfolio committees and kind of 
follow a programme that had been set and all the news of 
the day were kind of ignored. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 140 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then at page 372 under the 
heading 30 July 2015 you deal with what I think you were 
alluding to a moment ago the responses that you received 
or the response that you received from the then Minister 
Dupuo Peters to written questions about these locos and 
you were told that the dimensions were correct and so 
forth.  You say, with the benefit of hindsight, although that 
is what she said, she was wrong.  
MR DE FREITAS:   Well, by then I knew that that was the 
case.  It was extensively covered in the media and, you 
10 
know, new developments happening on a daily basis and 
so I then tabled a motion in parliament saying that the 
house – that the minister be referred to the Powers 
Privileges Committee because essentially she had lied 
which is a very, very grave transgression of anybody, let 
alone a minister and of course that motion was not - you 
know, it was not passed, the ANC blocked that. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, you say of course as though we 
should all know that such things would never happen.  
Perhaps you could just elaborate on that a little. 
20 
MR DE FREITAS:   Well yes, that is a good point.  I mean, 
in an ordinary parliament and in a functioning democracy, 
you know, correspondence would responded to from no 
matter who they are, whether it is the opposition or 
whatever the case is and these kind of requests will be 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 141 of 211 
 
considered very seriously.  The culture that developed – 
and I know you are mentioning, you are not referring to the 
fourth parliament but if you look at my entire statement, I 
start off on the fourth parliament very naively believing 
that correspondence will be responded to, that if there 
were any transgressions that are identified that they would 
– you know, the government would look at and pursue.  I 
very quickly realised that that is not the case and in fact 
they spend most of the time trying to, you know, prevent 
any exposure of any transgressions, they tried to block the 
10 
information that was available and any actions that I tried 
to undertake was simply ignored and so that became the 
culture, letters or correspondence would just be ignored 
and to a point where I would actually ask the Chairperson 
in 
the 
corridors 
informally 
and 
she 
said 
she 
would 
acknowledge that she got it and that she would respond in 
due course, which of course she never did. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So I hope I was not unfair to you 
because you now understand the pressure the Commission 
is under on time grounds.  You have summarised, as it 
20 
were, 
the 
impressions 
you 
formed 
during 
the 
fourth 
parliament.  Is there anything in particular that you think 
we should be drawing the attention of the Commission to, 
as to the events in the fourth parliament or you are content 
that we should move on in the fifth parliament? 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 142 of 211 
 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes – well, I mean, the fourth 
parliament you can see the – the very quick, not slow, very 
quick destruction of Rail and PRASA as an entity and it 
starts off in a much better position and year by year the 
auditor general and all sorts of other organisations confirm 
that it is collapsing and nothing was done about it, you 
know, the warning signs were there.  And no – whether it 
was the board and anybody else, did nothing and I kind of 
times felt kind of the only person shouting in the middle of 
a desert and nobody seemed to be listening and we are 
10 
now at a stage it is completely disseminated.  So that is 
really the story of fourth parliament and I then started to 
look at other ways of trying to bring attention to and try 
and fix this institute. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you have referred to the 
deteriorating 
financial 
position 
of 
PRASA, 
there 
has 
already been evidence before the Commission through the 
evidence of Mr Themba Godi but alluding to an unsigned 
affidavit by the late auditor general Mr Kimi Makwetu and 
you have had an opportunity in preparation for your 
20 
evidence to go through that affidavit, that draft affidavit, 
fairly carefully, as I understand it, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, I have, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the auditor general, the former 
auditor general  paints, in my view, a disturbing picture of 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 143 of 211 
 
progressive 
financial 
deterioration 
and 
progressive 
deterioration in controls and progressive deterioration in 
adherence to the core prescripts that govern procurement.  
Would you concur or just agree with the picture painted in 
that draft affidavit? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Well, his – I concur complete and 
everything that he said is backed up in auditor general’s 
reports which were tabled in parliament year after year, 
you know, and it was available.  In fact we would every 
year on an annual basis call in the auditor general and 
10 
have these voluminous financial records in front of us that 
just showed a constant continued destruction of PRASA.  
So 
there 
was 
nothing 
hidden 
away, 
it 
was 
public 
knowledge, very - you know, very difficult to kind of keep 
monitoring.  I, you know, was able to on a constant basis 
keep careful records of where the entity was because I 
believed particularly quite strongly in Rail and I believe 
that Rail should be the backbone of any public transport 
system anywhere in the world and in countries that is so 
being done, they have got the best transport systems that 
20 
they are able to move around.  And so it was there in black 
and white, there were no secrets.  There were no – this is 
not news and if members of the portfolio committee did not 
know about it, it because quite frankly they did not read 
this material. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 144 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I am going to come back later in 
your evidence to this very topic of the auditor general’s 
report and the effectiveness of the portfolio committee’s 
oversight but it is helpful that you just give us that brief 
introduction because it puts in context the bigger picture 
when we look at the points of detail that I am going to be 
taking you to.  And the first point of detail that I now wish 
to take you to is referred to at page 372, I think we were at 
that page, and you will see under the heading 11 August 
2015 that on that date the Public Protector at the time, 
10 
Advocate Madonsela, issued her report into PRASA called 
Derailed.  This over 390 page report revealed details of a 
total failure of delivery in governance – I think that is your 
wording – tender contracts have been improperly awarded 
and extended to the tune of hundreds of millions.  Now I 
take it that you became quite familiar with the content of 
that report. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And would you like to elaborate just 
very briefly on what you think the main takeaway is from 
20 
that report as you read it then in August of 2015? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Well, I mean, it was unbelievable 
information, again public information issued by the Public 
Protector at the time and detail, you know, with absolute 
detail mentioning dates and times and names, specific 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 145 of 211 
 
names of companies and individuals.   
So there was no – it was not an ambiguous report, 
it was an incredibly detailed report which a lot of research 
had put into and in fact the – at the end of that report the 
Public Protector at the time said that they would be 
releasing a second Derailed report, which never happened, 
I am not sure why.  Certainly I would imagine you could 
easily prepare a series of derailed reports and essentially 
those – the report talks about mass looting, about how you 
know people were taking an opportunity to self-enrich and 
10 
rob the State, in this case PRASA, in whatever way they 
can through and making sure the tenders were issued to 
certain people, that prices were inflated, that procedures 
were not followed, so in order for this – it was clear, in the 
report which is what I’ve been saying before the report 
that, is that in order for all this corruptions, looting taking 
place there would have had to have been a network of 
corruption.   
It would have been a network of – a hierarchy of 
people to be able for this to happen because if you are – in 
20 
order for you to be corrupt you’d need other people to help 
you fulfil these corruption activities.  So, that was the gist 
of what the Public Protector was talking about.  A lot of the 
work had been done, Parliament could have just taken that 
information and moved on with that? 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 146 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, thank you for that but I do want 
to refer you to the top of page 374 where there’s just one 
point of detail that I think, is perhaps, significant, is that, 
although this report was issued in – it was issued, as we 
said, in August of 2015, the report itself makes clear that it 
arises from 37 complaints made to the Public Protector by 
the South African Transport and Allied Workers Union, this 
was  union complaint about PRASA and the allegations 
were made in 2012 and so by August of 2015 those 
allegations made in 2012 are investigated and reported on.  
10 
The point being that this indicates that the rot goes back a 
long way. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, and that’s exactly the point that I 
mentioned earlier is that in the Fourth Parliament I could 
see as a newcomer and not knowing the Departments – the 
way I got to know the Departments, it was clear that 
something was underfoot.  Numbers weren’t adding up, 
strange practices, it was clear, were taking place and very 
quickly I realised there was a network of corruption, of 
people allowing this to happen and would have to come all 
20 
the way from the top for, you know, all sorts of …[indistinct 
- interference] worth millions to be able to have been 
passed were not suitable tenders for example.  So, I very 
quickly caught on that this is what was going on, so it did 
take a while to realise what was going on and also as more 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 147 of 211 
 
and more people got to read stuff that I’d – in the media, I 
started getting – being approached by whistle blowers, 
people who wanted to talk to me quietly and in dark alleys 
and so forth, to give me information and that helped a lot 
and started putting the pieces of the puzzle together very 
quickly. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I don’t need you, really to repeat what 
you’ve said but I’ll just draw attention to the fact, a lot of 
what you’ve just said appears at page 374 of your report 
and I’d like you now to go to page 378 and perhaps if you 
10 
could just read into the record under the date 23 February 
2016, just what happened on that occasion?  
MR DE FREITAS:   I, on that day tabled – we had a pre-
…[indistinct] National Assembly and so I tabled a motion, 
you know, requesting that we debate what I described as 
shambolic state of PRASA and what the causes of this 
stage was and what needed to be done to change this, to 
get fixed.  I think this might have been – well this was one 
of many similar motions, I’m not sure if this is the first, I’d 
have to check my records, but I made a similar motion 
20 
throughout the two Parliaments, similar motions requesting 
that this be debated. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And this occasion…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second Mr Freund, Mr De Freitas, 
to the extent that your report might not reflect all the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 148 of 211 
 
motions that you are talking about that you made, I’d be 
interested in knowing the various dates for the motions 
because it may well be that members of Parliament ought 
to have taken your motions seriously and maybe they didn’t 
and that’s why the motions did not succeed because one of 
the things we are looking at is, in regard to what matters 
was 
Parliament 
supposed 
to 
act 
because 
they 
had 
knowledge 
or 
reasonable 
suspicion 
that 
there 
was 
something wrong happening but they did not act.  So, in 
those circumstances where a member of Parliament did put 
10 
a motion that was aimed at addressing some of the 
problems, but Parliament might have not given that motion 
the attention it deserves, that might be important.  So, to 
the extent that your report might not cover all of those 
attempts, those motions I’d be interested in you giving Mr 
Freund more information about when and what the motion 
was about and what happened to it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair, I attempted to list 
every time I tabled a motion in the house, in my affidavit 
but I will just double check that, that is – that in fact I have 
20 
covered every motion, I may have missed one or two 
because  there were quite a few. I tried to table the 
motions, at least every few months because the state of 
PRASA was getting from bad to worse but may I just say, 
Chair, you were talking about, you know, to the extent that 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 149 of 211 
 
people or other members of Parliament were not aware of 
the state of PRASA or rail, all they had to do was to go to 
any train station anywhere in the country and they would 
just see for themselves which I have, by the way, talked 
about later on in the affidavit.  So, they didn’t have to look 
for anything academic or anything complicated they just 
needed to go and visit train stations, be there at four in the 
morning as hard working, ordinary South Africans who were 
trying to catch a train and talk to them and they would tell 
you how they suffer on a daily basis and how many of them 
10 
lost their jobs because of the train system that wasn’t 
working and how they would have to get there early in the 
morning so that hopefully two hours later, they may well 
get – catch a train or they may not.  So, this was 
happening on the ground, this is no secret, this is not 
hidden away, this is not stuff that wasn’t around it certainly 
was happening on a daily basis and continues to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no the – I mean the point you make 
is fine but the fact that you put before the National 
Assembly, motions is important in another respect, namely 
20 
those who may not have taken the trouble to go to train 
stations and see what was happening.  When you put in 
those motions they would have seen that you were calling 
for certain things to be done and if they did not support or 
did not take those motions seriously and they hadn’t 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 150 of 211 
 
bothered to go to train stations to inform themselves then 
they – then the situation is quite serious because at least 
if you didn’t go to the train station but once a motion is put 
you give it proper attention, you take it seriously and you 
take steps to inform yourself before you decide whether to 
support it or not to support it, that’s important because 
now, it is put in front of you to say, there’s a problem so if 
you reject it without doing the homework that you should 
have done, then it’s even more serious but thank you, Mr 
Freund? 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair. Mr De Freitas, 
maybe if I could add to the Chair ’s question.  It is true that 
there’s a great deal of detail in this submission, that it 
would be extremely helpful to the Commission if you could 
furnish a relatively short additional document which just 
focuses, in particular, on motions put to the House and 
particular to why, if you think that is the case, the members 
of Parliament ought, by then, by the time of the various 
particular motions ought to have been aware that there 
were issues worthy of the attention of the House, that 
20 
would be extremely helpful, would that be in order? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you. Now, can I take you now to 
page 381 and I’d like to focus, firstly on the date, I’m 
interested on the 8 t h of July 2016. Now, let’s try and put 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 151 of 211 
 
that in context.  Ms Mazzone has testified, earlier this 
week about a whole series of matters that were in the 
public domain which prompted her to request the Portfolio 
Committee on Public Enterprises in March of 2016 to 
pursue an inquiry which she was unable to procure and 
then she talks about – and Ms Rantho whose testified has 
talked about events going back to 2011 and further – not 
further but from 2011 onwards and – so there was a climate 
by March of 2016, according to the evidence of some 
considerable concern about what you might broadly call the 
10 
State Capture issue and allegations relating, amongst 
others, to the Gupta family.  All of that had happened 
before the 8 t h of July 2016 and you would have been 
familiar with that I imagine? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, in that context, you refer, at 
page 381 in the second paragraph to a Sunday Times story 
that was published on the 19 t h of June 2016 with details of 
the 
R51billion 
tender 
for 
the 
purchase 
of 
20 
new 
locomotives by PRASA which involved the Gupta family and 
20 
Mr Duduzane Zuma and the allegations included – this is 
the allegations in the Sunday Times report that the Gupta 
family had attempted to rig the tender process so that they 
would benefit and other allegations included statements 
made in the media by the previous PRASA GCEO, Mr Lucky  
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 152 of 211 
 
Montana about who alleged – who claimed that he was 
introduced to the Gupta family and associated by previous 
Transport Minister, Mr Ben Martins and that the Gupta 
family wanted their associates to sit on the PRASA Board.  
So, that’s what has appeared in the press.  In the context 
of that, in the first paragraph, that you wrote a letter to the 
Chair of the Committee, Ms Mogotsi, you see it’s Annexure 
C010, would you please turn to Bundle 3 page 485.  Is that 
the letter to which you are referring in this paragraph of 
your report, the letter of the 8 t h of July 2016 from yourself 
10 
to Mrs Mogotsi? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, 485? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Bundle 3 page 485. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, that’s correct yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Sir, I can’t see you on screen have you 
had a chance to find that page? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, I have, I found it yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, can I just check that you have 
also been able to find it, I don’t see you on my screen? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
20 
MR DE FREITAS:   Just checking that you’ve managed to 
find the reference, page 485 in Bundle 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I did find it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you and in that letter, Mr 
De Freitas you request that the Portfolio Committee on 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 153 of 211 
 
transport launch an inquiry into this R51billion PRASA 
tender process, is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is correct yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you assert that the – that 
Parliament acting through the Committee has a duty to act 
under Section 55(2) of the Constitution and say that, 
“Parliament must use its power to launch and 
inquiry in this matter immediately and you say the 
Gupta brothers and Duduzane Zuma should appear 
before 
Parliament 
to 
account 
for 
this 
highly 
10 
irregular conduct for which they stand accused.  
Should 
Parliament 
determine 
that 
there 
were 
irregularities in this regard, Parliament is duty 
bound to refer these transgressions for criminal 
prosecution. 
I 
look 
forward 
to 
your 
soonest 
response in this regard”, 
 
 
Now did you get a response from Ms Mogotsi. 
MR DE FREITAS:   I got no response, I must just say that I 
wrote the letter in context of, as you said, it was big news 
at the time of how a family was influencing the State quite 
20 
considerably but also this contract tender was worth 
R51billion, it’s a lot of money and so yes, I wrote to the 
Chairperson and received no response. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say, in the third last 
paragraph on page 381 that you, again, enquire about your 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 154 of 211 
 
letter with the PC Chair to acknowledge the letter and said 
she would address it, she never did, do you stand by that? 
MR DE FREITAS:   I do and throughout the time my 
experience was that she would, in your presence, kind of 
say, she’d address a matter, or she would respond to it and 
fob me off and that I describe, as you know, a little bit later 
in the other inquiry attempts.  Now, if you – just to get your 
bearings, would you turn to page 387 and you will see that 
there is a description of a meeting that started on the 7 t h of 
March, you’ll see that in the middle of page 387 and you’ll 
10 
see that, that meeting, really continued on the 8 t h of 
March, that you will see at page 66 and it goes right 
through to about 390. Now we don’t have time to go 
through all of this but perhaps you could describe to us the 
first day of this two day meeting, the 7 t h of March which 
was a meeting with PRASA about the state of PRASA and 
the – just give us the highlights. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, this meeting turned into a two day 
meeting because there was so much to discuss and so 
much to do that it turned into a two day meeting.  During 
20 
that time big news, again, the media had exposed or 
released the fact that the acting Group CEO Colins 
Letsoalo had got himself a 350% salary increase and so 
that matter was discussed and matters to do with PRASA in 
general and the state of PRASA and that went on for two 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 155 of 211 
 
days and by the end of those two days it was so obvious to 
everybody that some kind of investigation was required, 
some kind of inquiry and for something that I’d been 
fighting for, for quite a while, by the end of the second day, 
I was surprised – pleasantly surprised when one of the 
ANC members made a proposal that an inquiry was 
necessary and I could hardly believe my ears and in fact I 
asked the Chairperson to confirm that this was, in fact, the 
case and she said yes we need an inquiry into PRASA at 
the end of the second day.  
10 
MR DE FREITAS:   Let’s just go through that, focusing on 
certain aspects in particular.  Can I take you to page 388, 
second paragraph, it starts with…[intervenes]? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Freund let me have a two 
minutes adjournment, nobody must go anywhere it will 
really be two minutes, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV FREUND SC:  I am here Mr Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Mr De Freitas can you come back on 
video? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay we can proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I just want to check Mr De Freitas are 
you hearing me?  No I think Mr De Freitas is perhaps not 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 156 of 211 
 
back with us yet.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sure he is going to. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I am sure he will be back with us shortly 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.   
MR DE FREITAS:  I am sorry are you waiting for me? Sorry I 
took a body break as well.  Sorry about that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh well I was about to say you might have 
thought that two minutes would be five minutes.  Okay alright 
let us proceed. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Mr De Freitas at page 388 
the second paragraph it says that Mr Mulaudzi of the EFF 
and Mr G Radebe of the ANC called for the suspension of 
the ‘corrupt’ board and a comprehensive inquiry into PRASA.  
Now I want to pause there and just to place this in context 
because the commission has heard evidence quite some time 
ago about the preceding board, the resignation of the 
preceding Group Chief Executive Officer Mr Lucky Montana.  
The appointment of a new board chaired by Mr Popo Molefe 
and when we read here about a call by Mr Radebe for the 
20 
suspension of the corrupt board by that time we are referring 
are we not to the board chaired by Mr Popo Molefe? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Yes. So there was clear – there was clear 
shenanigans going on behind the scenes and I realised very 
quickly that the reason why they wanted an inquiry were 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 157 of 211 
 
different reasons to the – to what I – why I would wanted an 
inquiry.  But I felt it was an opportunity anyway because 
once you start an inquiry you going to hide anything that 
needs to be exposed.  And what they wanted to do is they 
wanted to get rid of Popo Molefe that is the bottom line 
because he started – he started exposing the rot that was 
going on in PRASA.  He appointed investigators to start 
investigating and information started coming out which left 
many people uncomfortable and you would see throughout 
this time there were two big villains that had been – that 
10 
ANC were trying to create.  The first was Popo Molefe and 
then they started holding onto the company that was doing 
investigations Werksmans Attorneys who – that – they – that 
became the other enemy and so they tried to divert attention 
from real issues into how much is Werksmans being paid you 
know that kind of thing.  So that was the context and that 
was clearly in my view the agenda that the ANC members 
had to launch this inquiry. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I understand that there has been 
evidence before the commission that there is room for 
20 
argument about whether proper processes were followed in 
the appointment of Werksmans I am not expressing a view 
one way or the other but there is room for debate.  That is 
not my – my question – yes carry on. 
MR DE FREITAS:  What I was going to say is that – that – 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 158 of 211 
 
they may well have a case you know the way that 
Werksmans was appointed and that should be a subject on 
its own.  But as a – I believe it is a convenient argument 
because it diverts away from the real issues.  Because the 
reality is that those – that Werksmans was exposing all sorts 
of corruption and dirty laundry.  They were – and they were 
not just – they were not just allegations there were proper 
investigations with real backup behind that.  And that made 
certain people very uncomfortable.  So that may well be the 
case and maybe Popo Molefe did appoint them incorrectly 
10 
and that was – should be addressed.  But what about all the 
information that Werksmans was exposing?   And at not one 
stage at any of the meetings whenever I brought that up I 
said well let us deal with that but let us then look at what 
Werksmans is exposing?  And at no stage did they want that 
exposed which was interesting and I obviously it was a way 
of hiding the information that was being exposed.  Sorry. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well that was merely the point that I was 
going to move towards and let me ask the question 
generally.   Did the Portfolio Committee in your judgment at 
20 
any stage show appropriate interest in whatever it is that 
Werksmans claimed to have exposed? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Well let me answer directly by saying I 
unambiguously said let us look at what Werksmans have 
exposed.  Let us get them in.  Let us get them to provide us 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 159 of 211 
 
some kind of a report which I happen to know they would 
have been very happy to do.  But at the – there was no 
interest at all in getting a Werksmans or anybody else that 
was investigating – I do not hold the brief for Werksmans I 
hold – you know I am interested in exposing the corruption 
and bringing out the truth.  But at no stage was there ever 
any attempt even when I requested so to bring anybody to 
come and explain to the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I want to take you to page 390 the 
third last paragraph before the heading, Peters fires across 
10 
the board and I will just read that into the record. 
“At the end of the second day of hearings – 
that is the two days you have been referring 
to the committee unanimously agreed that it 
undertake an investigation into PRASA and 
the 
problems 
that 
it 
was 
currently 
confronting.  The Terms of Reference and 
other 
details 
would 
be 
discussed 
in 
subsequent meetings the motion to initiate 
an inquiry into PRASA was reconfirmed by 
20 
myself at that meeting.  The Parliamentary 
communication service issued a statement 
echoing this and you give a reference to the 
official statement was issued coming out of 
that 
meeting 
that 
there 
was 
to 
be 
an 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 160 of 211 
 
investigation – an inquiry into PRASA.” 
Is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Yes in fact you remember I just a minute 
ago explained at the end of the two days I could not believe 
my ears and so I asked the chairperson, are you saying you 
want an inquiry?  I want to understand this is correct.  So I 
made it – you know I clarified it absolutely.  So it was not a 
misunderstanding I specifically asked the question and it 
was confirmed that they – we will launch an inquiry after you 
know many attempts from my side for it happen and I was 
10 
very hopefully that day. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So if we look at the next paragraph on 
the same page – page 390  
“Before 
the 
end 
of 
the 
meeting 
the 
Department 
of 
Transport 
acting 
Director 
General Nothabata [?] Mokonyama read out a 
letter that had been sent to the committee 
from Minister Dipuo Peters in which he 
dissolved the board of PRASA.” 
I take it that was a dramatic moment? 
20 
MR DE FREITAS:  That was and I felt like I was in a 
Hollywood movie I must tell you.  Because you know we 
confirmed that there is an inquiry and then suddenly this 
official out of the blue wants to speak and essentially fires 
the board and it leaves me completely confused and – but 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 161 of 211 
 
immediately I am sensing there is something going on behind 
the scenes.  So there was this – it really was very dramatic 
and so the meeting ended, it was not discussed, the letter 
was not discussed.  Certainly it took wind out of my sails and 
ja it was quite – quite amazing – quite an amazing day ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And to take you now to the next page 
391 there is a paragraph that deals with the date the 14t h 
March 2017.  Perhaps you could tell us with reference to that 
first or second paragraph under that date what happened on 
that occasion? 
10 
MR DE FREITAS:  So the very next week we have our 
Portfolio meeting again this – these two days happened and 
then there is the weekend.  So the next Tuesday we were 
meeting and suddenly the room and the atmosphere was 
completely different.  It is as if I am in a room with 
completely different people and in fact I say so in the 
meeting.  Suddenly in this meeting the ANC say there is no 
need for an inquiry.  It is not necessary.  The Minister has 
now fired the board and therefore there is nothing to 
discuss.  That was the argument line and I literally took the 
20 
wind out of my sails.  And my colleague and I who is on the 
committee – was on the committee with me you know 
expressed to them how it was as if they were not there the 
previous week and they acted you know as if it is fine we 
must just move on and no inquiry is necessary and I was 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 162 of 211 
 
completely gobsmacked that this was the case and I said as 
well that it is clear that Luthili House has got to eat with the 
ANC members and they have been instructed not to continue 
this inquiry it was clear and obviously it happened over the 
weekend. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now reading the documentation one gets 
the 
impression 
that 
the 
reason 
relied 
upon 
for 
not 
proceeding with the inquiry was precisely the fact that the 
board chaired by Mr Popo Molefe had been replaced as 
though that removed all need for any further inquiry.  If that 
10 
is the excuse proffered what is your comment on that 
excuse? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Well that is exactly the excuse they used 
and I – I said but you know it is irrelevant quite frankly 
whose at the helm of this thing?  The problem is it does not 
take away what is going on.  It does not take away the 
destruction of our rail system, the looting is clearly going on.  
All this is happening anyway.  So again it was not a clever 
way but I would imagine the ANC thought it was a clever way 
of trying to muddy the waters by putting in a new board and 
20 
making – creating a perception that things were going to 
change and things were fixed.  Because they had created 
this enemy in the publics’ minds anyway that Popo Molefe 
was the root of all the problems and so that was a clever 
way of – or so they thought of getting rid of him and 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 163 of 211 
 
suddenly PRASA is clean.  And I said to them this is 
absolute nonsense these issues are still continuing.  The 
looting and the corruption is still going on and nothing has 
changed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Let me turn to the next page please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Freund.  Mr De Freitas just 
articulate their reasons quite clearly for reversing their 
stance on the institution of an inquiry.  I would have thought 
10 
that the – the disbandment of the board by the Minister 
would actually be an additional reason why there should be 
an inquiry in the way it was done.  It seems that you know 
one would have been justified to say, well all the more 
reasons why we should have an inquiry so that we can 
understand exactly what is going on at PRASA.  So what 
were the reasons that were articulated?  Was it just that the 
board – the Minister had disbanded the board therefore there 
is no need for an inquiry?  Why – what was – what was the – 
or was the position that there is going to be a new inquiry let 
20 
us leave it to it or what – what was the position? 
MR DE FREITAS:  There was no indication of there being 
any new inquiry.  The explanation was that now that the 
Minister had fired the board things were going to be resolved 
– things were going to be fixed and PRASA was going to be 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 164 of 211 
 
on – in the right track.  And – and we kind of expected just to 
believe that.  But the real truth is that they were not – they 
wanted to get rid of Molefe because he was working very 
hard to expose what was going on and the lot – and it now 
became almost a weekly event usual in a Sunday newspaper 
where you would see a new scandal after another involving 
rail or PRASA.  And so it left the – certain people in the ANC 
very uncomfortable and so the members in the Portfolio 
Committee of the ANC were instructed I have no doubt – I 
have no proof of this but looking and reading the room the 
10 
very next week when suddenly it was as if I was talking to 
different people.  It was clear that they have been instructed 
and told that they are to tow the line and to stop this inquiry.  
And you know I said this in as many words I did tell them 
that and I said it was absolutely shocking that they putting 
party ahead of the country.  And so they just – they had 
obviously planned this discussion – they did not argue or 
debate with me they just kept very calm and collected and 
left it at that.  So they anticipated I am guessing that I – 
myself and my colleague would have created some kind of 
20 
outcry and so the – and so that is what happened on that 
day. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I guess that – I guess that maybe then 
your evidence that your reasons for wanting an inquiry and 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 165 of 211 
 
their reasons for wanting an inquiry were different? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With them once – if their – if the reasons 
for the inquiry or the objective was to get rid of Mr Popo 
Molefe or his board then their need for the inquiry had fallen 
away but your need for an inquiry was – or related to finding 
out what was causing the problems that were being talked 
about in regard to PRASA. 
MR DE FREITAS:  Chair you are quite right in that in that 
unofficially being closed doors they wanted to get rid of 
10 
Molefe and anybody who was exposing any mal-doing but the 
point is that in the meeting – the two day meeting the 
previous week the reasons that were given by the ANC were 
the same reasons that I was supporting.  So even if – you 
know that was a meeting what they were saying and so I am 
not sure if it was all a pretence, it was part of a grander 
scheme to then just stop an inquiry but then my question is, 
why even propose such an inquiry because the proposal for 
an inquiry in this instance came from the ANC.  I did not 
even think that on the day to you know ask for an inquiry 
20 
because I had tried before and I just – I just wanted – I was 
quite happy for the – the rot to be exposed so that it would 
add more credence to any future inquiries that I may 
request.  So it came from the ANC and my reading – my 
suspicion is that some of the ANC members tried to do the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 166 of 211 
 
right thing and over the weekend they were very quickly told 
to stop it and that would explain a complete different 
demeanour the very next week. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes thank you.  Can I take you back to 
page 388 please?   
MR DE FREITAS:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  In the fourth paragraph that starts with 
the words ‘although I agreed’ there is a sentence in the 
fourth line that reads as follows: 
10 
“They which is a reference to the ANC 
members of the Portfolio Committee were 
angry with Popo Molefe for speaking out 
about allegations of payments to ANC coffers 
a cardinal sin I think that should be it is a 
typo for the ANC.” 
Would you just elaborate on that please? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Well … 
ADV FREUND SC:  And at part of it you say that they were 
concerned about that and how important an issue was that in 
20 
their desire to push Mr Molefe’s board out of office. 
MR DE FREITAS:  One of the things – the many things would 
have been – were coming out that Molefe was exposing with 
allegations of pay outs into the ANC and so forth and in fact 
there was a newspaper article again one of the famous 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 167 of 211 
 
Sunday Times articles the very previous week if I am not 
mistaken exposing this kind of stuff.  And so they – they – 
and that according to the ANC is a cardinal sin.  You do not 
go and you know dirty and muddy the organisation – 
organisation always is a head of the country that is always 
the case.  And so that – Molefe had committed the most 
cardinal of sins and so in their eyes they needed to get rid of 
him because he was now persona non grata and if I am not 
mistaken when Dr Molefe addressed this commission a while 
back he alluded to similar things if you may remember.  So 
10 
certainly he had become an enemy of the ANC according to 
them because he had as I say in here he had betrayed the 
ANC and that is something you never do in their eyes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I want to take you to page 397 
please?  And that the material you deal with dated the 15 t h 
August 2017.  And you refer there to the fact that you had 
been alerted by your then Chief Whip Mr John Steenhuizen 
about 
a 
letter 
that 
had 
been 
written 
by 
the 
House 
Chairperson Mr Cedric Frolick and I would like to take you if 
you could stay at that page but also have a look at Bundle 3 
20 
page 518. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I did not hear the first page Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Bundle 3 page 518 – 518. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The first page. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes page 518 in Bundle 3. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 168 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got it. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now there it is a letter not to the chair of 
your own committee it is a letter to the chair of the Portfolio 
Committee on Mineral Resources but it is a letter to the chair 
of that committee requesting an investigation into allegations 
of state capture.  Now is that the letter to which you are 
referring here at page 397 that Mr Steenhuizen told you 
about the letter to the chairperson of the Mineral Resources 
10 
Portfolio Committee? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Yes.  My Chief Whip at the time told me 
that a letter had been written to a number of committees 
including the Transport Committee requesting that you know 
state 
– 
investigations 
be 
– 
be 
undertaken 
by 
these 
committees.  My Chief Whip did not have the letter the 
specific letter addressed to the Transport Committee but the 
one that I put in the file here is the one he had and I said to 
him these are – this is to someone else and he said the 
contents of the letter is exactly the same it is just that it was 
20 
sent to the different you know committee chairs.  And in fact 
I informally at one stage much later on did confirm with the 
chairperson of the committee that she had received such a 
letter and in fact I am correcting myself because in your – 
unofficial but then I did mention it when we were discussing 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 169 of 211 
 
an inquiry later on that year.  So I am – so she certainly did 
receive the letter but I never had the letter addressed to her 
and this is the copy that I have had and my Chief Whip had 
confirmed that it was the same throughout ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes if I can just pause you there because 
we rather run ahead of ourselves. 
MR DE FREITAS:  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So Mr – Mr Steenhuizen told you that he 
believed there was an existence a similar letter to the chair 
of your own committee the Transport Committee, is that 
10 
correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:  He was advised by Cedric Frolick. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right. 
MR DE FREITAS:  That Mr Frolick had written to all these 
chairpersons. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now that letter that was alleged to have 
existed I do not believe is annexed to your presentation but 
Chair may I refer you to Bundle 2 – Bundle 2 I stress page 
488 that is an annexure to Ms Mazzoni’s affidavit.  You may 
not have this Mr De Freitas.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Registrar bring the file.  Yes I have got it 
Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now Ms Mazzoni 
testified and I may say that this evidence will be confirmed in 
due course by Mr Frolick that Mr Frolick wrote the letter we 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 170 of 211 
 
see at page 488 on the 15t h June to Ms Magadzi the 
Chairperson of your committee and it asks her on behalf of 
the committee of which she was chair to investigate 
allegations of state capture in organs of state in relation to 
PRASA and it is similar to letters sent to three other 
committees.  Now my question to you Mr De Freitas is 
whether Ms Magadzi ever revealed to the committee that she 
had received that letter? 
MR DE FREITAS:  She did not.  No she never – she never 
did and I was the one who then asked her about – did she 
10 
get any communication from anyone about looking into this 
matter and not at this stage it was later on when we were 
looking at Terms of Reference when we were going to do an 
inquiry which never happened. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You are talking about a period we yet 
have to come to. 
MR DE FREITAS:  Yet to come to yes. But I can also say [not 
audible]. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Third attempt at an inquiry. 
MR DE FREITAS:  Yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Let us be clear about the chronology that 
you talk about.  You have already testified about the 
attempts that were made in mid-2017 referring to the R51 
million – R51 billion contract and the refusal to enquire on 
that occasion.  You have already testified and that is what 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 171 of 211 
 
you call the first occasion.  You have already testified about 
a second occasion in which there was agreement to have an 
inquiry but then that was not pursued for the reasons you 
have referred to.  Now after that so called second attempt 
we have not yet come to the so called third attempt and we 
are dealing with something that happened in the interim.   
And in the interim is there is evidence from other sources 
that this letter was sent by Mr Frolick to Ms Magadzi and 
your evidence if I understand correctly is at that time she did 
not reveal to the committee that she had received such a 
10 
request.  Do I understand that correctly? 
MR DE FREITAS:  That is correct.  She did not reveal 
anything. I did informally in a diplomatic way because I had 
not – that letter is not – was not addressed to me and I – you 
know I was not – ja it was not addressed to me so I did not 
want to appear as if I was reading her mail to put it bluntly 
and I just – I said to her informally I – in a roundabout way 
asked her about it and there was nothing forthcoming.  So 
the short answer is no that letter was never tabled at the 
committee. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you do say this at page 397 the last 
paragraph under the date 15 August. 
“As I was officially not aware of such a letter 
I raised the subject as diplomatically as 
possible.  I explained that I had heard of a 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 172 of 211 
 
letter requesting us as a PC – that is the 
Portfolio Committee to initiate an inquiry into 
PRASA. 
 
The 
chairperson 
of 
the 
PC 
explained that PRASA itself was undertaking 
their own inquiry and that other agencies 
such as the Hawks were also involved.  Her 
argument was that essentially this protruded 
us from launching an inquiry.  I argued that 
this was not the case and that we are at 
liberty to investigate PRASA as Parliament 
10 
has oversight on government.” 
Can you confirm that that is correct what I have read into the 
record? 
MR DE FREITAS:  Yes and in fact the – you will see later on 
that in one of the replies to official – to one of my questions 
the Minister at the time says that PRASA has a problem with 
the information exposed in an external investigation and so 
the information had to go back to satisfy PRASA.  And my 
argument is you do not check with PRASA they are an 
interested party, they are part of the problem.  You do not go 
20 
and confirm the so – it was – a similar argue – argument 
here in that there were other inquiries turning in place and 
therefore we should not worry and I am – ja I – you put the 
case exactly right I said to her that that should not preclude 
us from investigating and exposing this information. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 173 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  And let us be clear – no let me – I will 
not ask that question.  Can I now refer you to page 401 of 
Bundle [?]. 
MR DE FREITAS:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So there is a debate that takes place – a 
committee meeting to discuss implementation of the derailed 
report requirements.  The derailed report is the Public 
Protector’s 2015 report.  It required various things to be 
done.  It resulted in the board under Mr Molefe appointing 
Werksmans to do certain forensic investigations.  It had 
10 
resulted in the Hawks doing certain investigations.  It 
resulted in National Treasury doing certain investigations 
and by this time – by November of 2017 the Minister of 
Transport is the one Mr Joe Masangane is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is correct yes.  He was a previous 
member of the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So that was the point I wanted to come 
to.  So – so a member of your committee who had sat with 
you in the committee and had been party to the events that 
you have just described is now wearing a different cap.  He 
20 
had recently been elevated to the position of Minister of 
Transport, is that right? 
MR DE FREITAS:  I must tell you the corridor talk it is not in 
my affidavit but the talk amongst other ANC members were 
with me surprise that he would have been picked to be the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 174 of 211 
 
Minister and secondly that he was not the obvious choice to 
have been picked and there were members in the ANC who 
could not understand it because there were better options.  
So that was the corridor talk but my sense is that he was in 
the fraction that was in control and so he was needed there. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now if we go to the next page 402 again 
in the time I am going to try to avoid dealing with too much 
detail but we see there from the middle of the page onwards 
Mr Radebe comments, Mr Ramafikane’s [?] comments and so 
forth.  We see that this concern continues to be expressed 
10 
by the ANC MP’s on the committee about the fact that 
Werksmans is pursuing an inquiry and the impression one 
gets reading the PMG Report is that as far as the Portfolio 
Committee was concerned, the majority of the members of 
the committee, there was really only one concern.  It was 
that money was being spent on Werksmans and very little 
interest in what, if anything, Werksmans was coming up with.  
Did that remain the case as it appears November of 2017? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, it remained the case and in fact it 
intensified 
the 
campaign 
if 
you 
like, 
developed 
by 
20 
Werksmans and the amount of money they had been paid 
and how they were appointed and so forth.  It intensified.   
 
And 
at 
every 
opportunity 
in 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee, the ANC spoke on about it and I tried to smear 
or bring back the conversation into what is the state of 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 175 of 211 
 
PRASA and let us look at what Werksmans is actually 
producing.  And they, you know, cut us off every time. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Let me then move to page 409.   
MR DE FREITAS:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you will see, there is a section 
that starts in the middle of the page but that follows on 
from what we see at the preceding page jus to get our date 
pairing.  That is the 12 t h of January 2018.  I am not 
interested in the first letter referred to.  I am interested in 
what we see at the middle of page 409.   
10 
 
And you say – I use the letter which is the same 
letter that you have been referring to earlier in this report. 
“To also note that the committee should also 
scrutinise the recent appointments at PRASA, 
both the acting Group CEO of PRASA, Cromet 
Molepo 
and 
the 
acting 
CEO 
of 
Rail, 
Mthuthuzeli Swarts had multiple allegations of 
corruption and bad administration that had 
been lodged against them.” 
 
But 
then 
you 
say 
at 
page 
410, 
the 
second 
20 
paragraph: 
“Despite confirmation by the PC Chair ’s Office 
at receipt of my letter I received no response 
to it. 
While attempting to discuss my letter with the 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 176 of 211 
 
PC Chair, I was shrugged off.” 
 
Could you please elaborate on this incident? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  So I had in fact before even 
writing this letter, I received a call from a whistle-blower 
and telling me about these two appointments.  These 
appointments have a long history in local government, in 
government entities and so forth.   
 
And the long and short of it is that they had been 
involved in all sorts of scandals of you know incorrect 
misconduct and so forth.  That is the gist of it. 
10 
 
So these are not fellows that who you should 
appoint to a failing entity.  And so I requested to the PC – 
actually the Portfolio Committee chair that we should look 
into it.  And you know again, no response. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Can you turn now please to page 414? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   There is reference there to a Transport 
Portfolio Committee meeting on the 13 t h of February 2018.  
And when you read you will see that this was the occasion 
on which an NGO going by the name of Unite Behind was 
20 
afforded an opportunity to make a presentation to the 
Portfolio Committee.  Do you remember that occasion? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, I do.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And there has been evidence before 
this Commission already about the stance taken by Unite 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 177 of 211 
 
Behind that apart from complaints that they made about 
what you might call service delivery and operational 
problems, they also made allegations of state capture and 
corruption.   
 
And when they appeared before the committee on 
the 13 t h of February 2018, there was a case pending before 
the court, before the High Court a few days later than that 
between United Behind and PRASA.   
 
And it says here in the second last paragraph at 
this page: 
10 
“Although the United Behind brief included 
state capture, governance and an emergency 
safety 
plan, 
the 
acting 
Chairperson, 
Mr Ramatlakane 
of 
the 
ANC 
said 
the 
committee 
would 
not 
deal 
with 
the 
state 
capture matter because it was not part of the 
agenda for this meeting.” 
 
So can you confirm that although they permitted 
Unite Behind to make a presentation, they simply were not 
willing to listen to anything what Unite Behind had to say 
20 
about the allegations of state capture and corruption? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  They allowed Unite Behind to talk 
about the state and it’s you know the infrastructure that 
was failing and so forth but as soon as it has anything to 
do with state capture or certainly to looting and corruption 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 178 of 211 
 
they were cut off.   
 
And that is a comment tactic that was used 
throughout the period in various committees.  You know, if 
it was no actually explicit on the agenda, it was a 
convenient way of not discussing the matter.   
 
And 
so 
as 
I 
mentioned 
earlier, 
you 
would 
remember that the committee was as if it were in a bubble 
where all these things were happing at PRASA and we 
seemed to have been disconnected as a committee.   
 
And here is an example where really pertinent 
10 
issues of the day, important issues that need to be 
discussed and exposed were kind of cut off.  And so that is 
a kind of a specific bubble I described earlier. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in many of the presentations and 
affidavits submitted to the Commission about Parliamentary 
oversight issues, some of it had not yet been lead in 
overall evidence, there is an ongoing theme that emerges 
about the questions of the matter of a subjudice.   
 
In other words, something to do with the matter is 
before someone called somewhere.  Would you just 
20 
comment generally on whether that presented in your 
experience a problem in attempting to regard this? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, all the time.  There were always 
matters before court especially when it came to PRASA.  
And so at every opportunity when a debate needs to be 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 179 of 211 
 
discussed, they use this subjudice war which was applied 
incorrectly by the way.  But it was always conveniently 
applied, you know, to suit their means.  So.  And that 
happened more times than I can remember.  And that was a 
way of just preventing discussion and taking matters 
further. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I would like to take you now to page 
415.  And really, I am going to try and cover very briefly 
what you deal with at quite some length between page 415 
and page 424 or 423.  But this is what you call the third 
10 
attempt into a Parliamentary Inquiry and you commence 
this story on the 20 t h of February 2018. 
 
Now could you maybe just summarise and give us 
the highlight of this attempt and as I understand it the 
decision to pursue and inquiry into the affairs of PRASA? 
MR DE FREITAS:   So by that stage, the financial reports 
which had to be submitted to Parliament by end of 
September of PRASA, the financial reports of PRASA had 
not been submitted. 
 
And so as you rightly said in February this 
20 
information was still not being submitted which is a big 
problem.  And so that is kind of what lead to the eventually 
the committee agreeing that an inquiry is required and that 
it must conduct an investigation. 
 
I am just trying to remind myself of the dates here 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 180 of 211 
 
but we said ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   If I can take you to page 415 the third 
last paragraph starting with Mr Kekana. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  So you know I cannot explain the 
change of heart but certainly it was very big you know in 
the news.  It was spoken about much because there was 
total failure of PRASA happening all around.   
 
And so I am hoping that that would have been the 
reason but the long and short of it is that PRASA needed to 
be investigated and it was an agreement and I was very 
10 
hopeful and very excited that this was going to take place.  
So 
a 
sub-committee 
was 
formed, 
comprising 
of 
Ramatlakane and Mr Hanzinger(?) to at, you know, the 
changing of reference inquiry and so forth and to report 
back to the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, before you proceed.  If I can 
take you to top of page 416? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I know that you have said that often 
minutes are too brief to be helpful but this is an extract 
20 
that you have provided here from the official minutes.  Is 
that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, I put in here.  It is unusually 
inaccurate. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes.  So it PRASA Investigation: 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 181 of 211 
 
“The committee took a resolution to launch an 
investigation into the alleged maleficent at 
PRASA in terms of National Assembly Rule 
227(1)(c).” 
 
And then it says as you have just alluded to the 
terms of reference would be drafted and those terms of 
reference 
had 
to 
be 
completed 
by 
the 
22 n d  of February 2018.   
 
And there was, as I read it, an unequivocal 
absolutely clear absolutely unambiguous decision there is 
10 
now going to be an inquiry into alleged maleficent at 
PRASA.  Is that correct. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, and in fact, at this stage, when I 
saw that actually there was it was in black and white, it 
was that the terms of reference are going to be drawn up.  
We never go this far.  We always, you know, as you have 
heard earlier, we got to a point and then suddenly all would 
collapse.   
 
So I was quite confident that at last something is 
going to happen because we got to this stage.  So yes, this 
20 
is correct and this is an exact extract from the official 
records. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now let us just trying to get out sense 
of time once again.   
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 182 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   By this time the present Commission 
of Inquiry into allegations of State Capture had already 
been appointed. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That was known to you and to 
everybody who participated in taking this decision to 
proceed with this particular inquiry.  Is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, yes.  It is good news.  And we 
often – often I would refer to the existing inquiry and so 
you know we should be doing something similar as well 
10 
because nobody is looking at PRASA.  You know, these 
other inquiries are looking elsewhere. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  Now if I can take you to page 
420.  First let me take you to page 419.   
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The official Portfolio Committee 
minutes of the meeting confirm that the terms of reference 
of the inquiry were proposed by Mr Ramatlakane and 
seconded by myself and it follows: 
1. The 
inquiry 
will 
investigate 
governance, 
20 
procurement and the financial sustainability of 
PRASA. 
2. The inquiry will look into, amongst others: 
2.1 
appointment 
of 
permanent 
board 
members and executive management.” 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 183 of 211 
 
 
I just want to address to say that you deal in 
length in this report with the problem of the appointment of 
the so-called Interim Board and the litigation that followed 
on Mr Molefe’s board’s removal and then reinstatement.   
 
That is part of what you were concerned about but 
we have not touched on that in your oral evidence today. 
3. Alleged 
procurement 
irregularities 
as 
indicated 
in 
the 
Public 
Protector 
Report, 
Derail.” 
 
That is the 2015 report, finally now in 2018 in 
10 
February this committee wants to get to grips with that.   
“...as well as allegations made of procurement 
irregularities with regard to modernisation as 
to well as relevant stock products dating back 
to 2012. 
4.   Allegations 
of 
impropriety 
regarding 
PRASA’s current acting Group CEO as well as 
past Group CEO’s dating back to 2012.” 
 
And then on it goes.  Item 7:  Consider Werksmans 
appointment process and scope legality and then other 
20 
related matters.  I have not read all of it into the record but 
I have highlighted those that seemed most pertinent for 
present purposes.   
 
And if I can then – so I take it you can confirm that 
were – I read from an extract from the official terms of 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 184 of 211 
 
reference. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  Yes, this was tabled at our 
committee.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then if we go to page 421.  You 
have, at this stage and at later pages of your report, you 
have created the – inserted in colour various extracts to 
show an official programme and schedule. 
 
And you make the point in the middle of page 421: 
“An inquiry planner scheduled was agreed to 
unanimously. 
10 
The inquiry planner provided the inquiry or 
investigation to five stages starting with page 
1.” 
 
And this is the point: 
“...on 16 May 2018 and concluding with phase 
5 on 26 October 2018 as follows.” 
 
And 
this 
not 
just 
something 
that 
you 
were 
dreaming up.  This is the decision of the committee as I 
understand it.  Is that correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   It is not the committee.  What I have 
20 
done is to describe quite creatively – I had nothing to do 
with the creativity.  This was literally cut and paste, taken 
from the official records and I have inserted in here.  And I 
have done this on purpose again.   
 
The reason why my affidavit is so long is because I 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 185 of 211 
 
wanted anybody – I did not want any space open for 
anybody to say that I am not telling the truth.   
 
And so I, for convenience and ease of reference, I 
have inserted all this information.  So this was not my 
work.  This was one of the officials that had tabled this 
programme.   
 
You know, and all I have done is I have put it in 
here to prove that we got to a point where approved the 
terms of reference and now we have a planner who clearly 
how we – were saying we can only do it later on that year 
10 
because they have a whole lot of different things in the 
legislative programme which they have to deal with in 
Parliament.  And so it only happened at that stage from 
mid-May. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So let us just look at – you can go to 
page 422.  It is the written submission. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
“Although the terms of reference ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Mr Freund, you say we got to 
20 
4.22? 
ADV FREUND SC:   422. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, 422, the next page.  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And Chair, immediately below the 
coloured calendars, the third written paragraph. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 186 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
“Although 
the 
terms 
of 
reference 
for 
the 
inquiry 
into 
PRASA 
was 
finalised 
at 
the 
13 March 2018 
PC 
meeting, 
the 
PC 
was 
advised that it was not made available to the 
public as the terms of reference had to be 
firstly submitted to the chair of the committee, 
Mr Frolick of the ANC. 
However, 
my 
understanding 
was 
that 
the 
10 
inquiry would proceed as advising Mr Frolic 
was 
simply 
to 
keep 
abreast 
of 
the 
developments.” 
 
Is that correct. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  My impression was and certainly 
the impression of given was this was a mere formality to 
advise Mr Frolick as the Chair of Chairs.  And I at that 
stage thought nothing of it.  You know, I thought well you 
have got to follow processes.  And he is a responsible 
officer in Parliament when it comes to these kind of things. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then at page 423 under the 
heading 20 March 2018 there is a reference to a revised 
time schedule.   
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It says – you say in your report in this 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 187 of 211 
 
meeting and you give a reference to the PMG minutes: 
“A revised inquiry schedule with an additional 
oversight in May 2018 included in the planner 
was provided to the members of the PC which 
indicated 
that 
phase 
1 
will 
start 
on 
22 May 2018 instead of the initial 16 May 2018 
and 
still 
concluding 
phase 
5 
on 
the 
26 t h of October 2018.” 
 
That is correct, is it? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, yes.  And I again insert in the 
10 
affidavit an exact copy of what was tabled with the debate. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now if I can take you to page 428. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If I may so with respect, a bit of an 
omission in this particular submission because you see you 
deal with the 8 t h of May and you deal with 30 t h of May but 
we have just seen that the inquiry had been scheduled to 
start on the 16 t h of May.  That is at page 100. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But that did not happen, did it? 
20 
MR DE FREITAS:   It did not happen.  And in fact, in my 
affidavit somewhere I started realising that excuses are 
starting to be made because I kept on asking as the date is 
approaching what are the arrangements, you know, what 
are we doing to actually get this inquiry going.   
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 188 of 211 
 
 
And you know, are we calling any witnesses and so 
forth.  And I could see the appetite was losing very quickly.  
And my reading was something is going on behind the 
scenes and someone is trying to either you know prevent 
this from happening or delaying it or something.   
 
I could sense that something was not coming right.  
Why I did not do it on that page that I mentioned it but I do 
mention it somewhere else. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I can take you there. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   So if you go to the foot of page 429. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It is the meeting that took place on the 
5 t h of June 2018.  Are you with me? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if you turn over the page, the third 
paragraph you say: 
“I reminded the committee that it had agreed 
to undertake an inquiry into PRASA. 
The 
chairperson 
replied 
that 
PRASA 
was 
20 
aware that the PC would be undertaking a 
parliamentary inquiry into PRASA. 
Although the PC had planned to start to work 
in July 2018 (which is of course later than 
what we have just read) the parliamentary 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 189 of 211 
 
programme 
had 
been 
adjusted 
due 
to 
Parliament extended recess. 
The PC chairperson said that the PC would 
want to engage with the other boards within 
PRASA such as the inter sight and all boards 
should advise that the PC would communicate 
with PRASA Board as to when the inquiry 
would 
commence 
and 
what 
the 
terms 
of 
reference should be.” 
 
Well, I thought we already had terms of reference, 
10 
did we not? 
MR DE FREITAS:   It is exactly so.  It was at that meeting 
that I realised – the penny dropped if you like.  I realised 
that something is afoot.  They are, you know, keep on 
pushing.  I, you know, throughout the whole time because 
it was supposed to start in May.  I kept on asking about 
this inquiry.   
 
And eventually, you know, I think, you know, this is 
what came out.  And I started to smell fish.  It did not – it 
was not right.  And then you know again as if – you know 
20 
we make decisions and then you know they pretend that 
these things have not happened.  What is bad for them is 
that I am completely obsessed of keeping records of 
everything.   
 
And I suspect they may not even have half these 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 190 of 211 
 
records that I have got because there is nothing I throw 
away.  So I keep every single record that I have.  So I 
know for a fact that the terms of reference were agreed to 
and suddenly they are changing their story.   
 
And I do not talk about it in here but certainly I 
expressed 
my 
displeasure 
about 
how 
this 
has 
been 
manipulated and been pushed away because suddenly a 
piece of legislation would – which we had been waiting for 
ten years, is suddenly very urgent.  And you know 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   If I can just interrupt you.  I want to go 
to the point you now make. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Like you say in the paragraph on page 
450.  You say: 
“No commitment was ever subsequently made 
by the PC Chair about a commencement for an 
inquiry.  
Excuses continued to be made as to why an 
inquiry could not take place.   
20 
The main excuse being the lack of time to 
undertake such an inquiry and the need to 
pass “urgent” legislation.   
In both instances, you say, this was not true 
as the committee programme could have been 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 191 of 211 
 
amended to accommodate in an inquiry in the 
same manner that the PC of Public Enterprises 
have done or their inquiry as in reality, there 
was no urgent legislation pending.” 
 
Now I would like you to talk about that in a little 
more detail, please. 
MR DE FREITAS:   So it became very clear that they were 
- again something must have happened, I am guessing.  
Something must have happened behind the scenes and 
they were told to delay or - because I am guessing they 
10 
realised they have no committed.   
 
It is in black and white to undertake such an 
inquiry.  And so they had to find a way of it not happening 
and so they delayed and delayed.   
 
Suddenly a piece of legislation which is not urgent.  
It has been sitting for over ten years and in fact it is 
legislation that we do not need, called the Road Accident 
Benefit Scheme to replace the Road Accident Fund.  
Suddenly became very urgent.  Suddenly it had to be 
passed in Parliament.   
20 
 
And 
so 
the 
whole 
programme 
of 
public 
participation when we would travel the entire country was 
tabled where they said we need to go to every province 
and we need to go to a number of cities and so forth to 
undertake public participation programme sessions about 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 192 of 211 
 
the Road Accident Benefit Scheme.   
 
And I immediately knew that at that stage this was 
to crowd out the calendar and to ensure there would be no 
time.  Conveniently they then said there is no time but they 
created that situation to make sure that there was not time 
to initiate an inquiry. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you make the point at page 430 at 
the end of the second last paragraph.  Your point was that 
the RAFS was not urgent, has been confirmed that this 
Parliament has agreed to completely scrap it.  Is that 
10 
correct? 
MR DE FREITAS:   In fact it is one of the first – obviously I 
am not part of the Transport Committee anymore but my 
colleague you know remained on the Portfolio Committee, 
Chris Hanzinger.   
 
And very successfully and very early in this 
Parliament was able to convince the rest of the committee 
that this was a bad piece of legislation and was not 
required.   
 
And luckily – I think he is a good – he can be very 
20 
convincing and some sense prevailed and they completely 
scrapped this bill completely.  So which proves the point.  
It is not even needed but they needed an excuse to crowd 
out the agenda. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now there is a piece I want to deal 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 193 of 211 
 
with you on this sort of chronological following of your 
report.  But I would now like to take you back if I may to 
pages 339 through to 345.  And again, I am aware that time 
is against us.   
 
But you deal with some important issues there.  
You deal with some problems that experience has taught 
you that characterised the Portfolio Committee oversight in 
practice.   
 
And then you deal with either techniques that can 
be used as either the Portfolio Committees themselves.  
10 
And then you make certain proposals.   
 
Now the Chair will no doubt have an opportunity in 
due course to read all of this but I think this is your 
opportunity to try and highlight those that you think is most 
pertinent.   
 
So let us start with your points about portfolio 
committees in practise and if you could just highlight.  If 
you think of the main points in the sequence in which they 
appear here and where necessary if you can briefly but 
only briefly elaborate on it. 
20 
MR DE FREITAS:   I have just mentioned it that I find it 
interesting that Dr Khoza the previous witness to me 
mentioned something similar and that is where we got a 
situation where in Parliament all the chairpersons of the 
committees are from the party that is majority party except 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 194 of 211 
 
for SCOPA.   
 
And so that is one of the problems in that you have 
one party who is – who dominates and runs all committees 
and so there is a lack of accountability and transparency.  
And 
simply 
my 
proposal 
is 
that 
we 
perhaps 
on 
a 
proportional basis based on the strength of the party that 
there 
be 
chairpersonships 
given 
to 
different 
political 
parties so that there is a balance.  And it would certainly I 
think 
increase 
and 
improve 
accountability 
and 
transparency.   
10 
 
And then also, you know, I mean there is a lot that 
I do talk about but certainly for example the debates and 
the way that they are designed is designed in such a way 
that the minority parties and the opposition parties have 
minimal speaking time and can only participate in a limited 
way.  And so that should be looked at.   
 
And it keeps on being mentioned by the ANC to 
accommodate them.  I think that is a very dangerous 
president.  Yes, certainly there are a whole lot of rules and 
so forth that gets you know ignored and circumvented and 
20 
so forth.   
 
And you know we mentioned the Road Accident 
Benefit Scheme and when we wanted to table our final 
report, the rules state quite clearly that you are entitled to 
include a minority report but yet the committee fought very 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 195 of 211 
 
hard and then deny that and tried to kind of pretend it was 
not in the rules.   
 
Then one of the other – I mean there are so many 
but the other point that I do want to talk about is.  
Certainly the minutes and the actual administration in 
Parliament are not the greatest and that should be beefed 
up and certainly support for MP’s.  There are so much 
going on that it is very difficult to keep abreast of portfolio 
times.   
 
And so, you know, I was lucky enough to have a 
10 
partner, a portfolio partner and so we split the portfolio 
between the two of us.  But even so, it is very, very 
difficult you know to really keep abreast and make sure 
there is accountability.   
 
I must just say that I found in my experience, is 
that particularly members of the ANC.  Many of them are – 
do not come prepared to meetings.  They do not – they 
arrive in many case I have seen them open their envelopes 
and documents for the first time and have not read the 
information that has been provided to them.   
20 
 
And I know that because the questions they ask 
would not be asked had they read their material, had they 
prepared for the meetings, had they done research and 
come prepared.   
 
So really what the ANC does is, they just have 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 196 of 211 
 
some talking heads, people would just do the bidding and 
that is what you have in Parliament.  And it is very sad 
because Parliament has been of any real challenge that 
can make a big difference.   
 
Then it has been mentioned earlier as Dr Khoza 
has also mentioned.  I think the electoral system needs to 
be changed.  Van Zyl Slabbert has some good points.  We 
have got some proposals also included in the documents 
which I feel would assist in making sure that there is more 
accountability with real people on the ground.   
10 
 
As far as I know I was the only member in the 
Portfolio Committee at the time that actually went and 
visited trains on my own and went to talk to people to 
passengers and so forth.   
 
And certainly the Minister cannot claim that he or 
she at the time, I do not know which Minister was on, do 
know about these things.  Because what I am saying is, 
why are they ministers then.  They have to know about this 
stuff and certainly our President knows, he himself was 
stuck in a train during the campaign in the last – during the 
20 
election campaign, in the last election campaign.   
One of the things that I have done, I have learnt, is 
that there are many tools at the disposal of MPs that can 
be used very effectively and I have able to use them quite 
effectively in the work in then leading up to laying charges, 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 197 of 211 
 
for example, and so forth and that is the very famous 
written questions where you can – a member of parliament 
may write written questions for written reply by a minister.  
The fact the rules say that you have got to respond within 
ten days is a different matter, it never happens.  The 
ministers have no respect for these rules.  But certainly I 
eventually do get replies and I also learnt to circumvent 
some rules, the rules in parliament, for example, so commit 
to the maximum of three questions a week.  It is illogical, it 
is completely arbitrary, I do not know why that is the case.  
10 
So what I have done is, I have asked colleagues 
who would not be submitting questions that week, if I may 
use their name.  And so that explains why you will see in 
annexures some questions are asked by someone else, 
they are actually my questions but I have used someone 
else’s name, a colleague, with permission, to use so that I 
am able to put in more than three questions because I had 
so many going on every time.  If I had to keep it to three it 
would not go anywhere.  But the problem to that is, you 
may find a situation, I had it often, when ministers would 
20 
not respond, you know, entirely, correctly, fully and so I 
would have to do follow-up questions and kind of zone in, 
laser in even deeper to make sure that I get the answer 
that I am looking for because they would – it was a 
constant cat and mouse game, it still continues to be.  I 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 198 of 211 
 
will not – I mean, there is a whole list here but you say I 
have got to concern myself with time. 
I did use opportunities for oral questions which 
provides an opportunity for direct interaction with the 
minister in the house and to put him or her, you know, at a 
situation where they have got to respond.  However, 
usually the Speaker would try and curtail debate, there was 
– replies usually are very bad and pointless and the 
Speaker at the time or the house chair at the time would 
defend those members which defeats the whole point of 
10 
what questions are about.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr de Freitas, when you say they were 
very bad, pointless, what are you trying to convey? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Well, you know, when you want to ask – 
you know, you are asking a question so you want a real 
answer, you know, and they would answer in a very general 
way with committing, for example, any particular answer, 
without giving the detail that you are looking for.  I am not 
– I mean the rules talk about, you know, you cannot ask a 
question about, you know, detailed stuff that you would for 
20 
example require on a table but certainly the detailed 
information about, you know, what is going on in an entity 
and what is she doing about it or he doing about it, it 
would lead to very general replies which really you could 
not do anything with and so it continues to be a cat and 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 199 of 211 
 
mouse game but I have also, as mentioned earlier, I have 
used motions in the house where you are able to actually 
table a motion, and statements as well, and the great thing 
about that is even if they turn it down, even if they turn 
down your motion or your statement it is on record, it is in 
Hansard and it is there that I have asked the question.   
 
So if anybody in future that you may interview in 
this Commission denies any of that, it is all on record and 
that is very important, you know, the great thing about 
parliament is that these are official records.  I just want to 
10 
just – the other …[intervenes] 
ADV FREUND SC:   We will [indistinct] 3.56 to that but I 
think we are concerned about time and you have made 
proposals in writing.  I would just like one last thing and I 
want to deal with it extremely briefly. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The question of the affidavit of the late 
Mr Kimi Makwetu.  Now he paints, if I may say so, a 
devastating picture of progressive deterioration and I think 
you have already said that you concur with what he says 
20 
and you say is all backed up by the auditor general’s 
reports of the years that are covered by this affidavit, do I 
understand you correctly? 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes, yes, yes, all his records are 
[indistinct] 04.39 quite right. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 200 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   It is this point, he says he has no 
complaint about the willingness of portfolio committees 
including the portfolio committee on Transport, including in 
relation to PRASA, the willingness of the committees to 
invite and to listen to whatever the auditor general thinks 
should be brought to their attention.  He says they are to 
be commended for their willingness and he also says they 
had demonstrated a concern about, for example, hugely 
increasing progressively worsening irregular expenditure 
and the like but – and I am now referring to paragraph 249 
10 
of this affidavit.  You do not need to go there but it is in 
volume 4 at page 959 and I will read to you what he says.  
He says: 
“Although the PC’s interrogation of the audited 
results was visible from the records of the PCs 
recommendations or corrective action had been 
noted during the period under review.  Furthermore, 
there was evidence that the PC would request an 
action or initiative to be taken but the follow-up 
thereon was lacking.  One example is the audit 
20 
finding tracking register that the PC requested in 
the 2015/2016 financial year yet there was no 
evidence that the PC regularly followed up this 
action.” 
And so really what he says is they listen, they do not like 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 201 of 211 
 
what they hear but they do not do anything effective about 
it and, in particular, there is no mechanism or procedure to 
follow up.  I would like to know your comments on that 
please. 
MR DE FREITAS:   That is exactly right, they make – all 
the right noises are made in the committee, you know, 
shock is expressed at what the auditor general  presents to 
us and we are all in agreement, sure.  And I can only agree 
with Makwetu what he is saying, it is quite right, but there 
is no follow-up.  You know, whenever you try and press, 
10 
you know, let us really make some changes, it is as if they 
are hamstrung, there is a kind of culture to - you know, to 
kind of say we cannot really do anything about it, we have 
no powers.  I just believe they do not know how much can 
be achieved in parliament if they only allow themselves to 
do so, but I suspect it is because of the party bosses, they 
have been given specific, you know, instructions and so 
they are following and that is a very sad state of affairs 
which then is one of the reasons why I am saying there 
should be a system where political parties have various 
20 
chairpersonships in committees because that will certainly 
bring it down and certainly will assist in, you know, even 
though there are instructions from a particular party, the 
chairperson of a committee could certainly drive issues 
anyway if they are from a different party. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 202 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   I think you make the point in your 
submission, your written submission, when you are giving 
references 
to 
numerous 
parliaments 
in 
other 
foreign 
jurisdictions, one way or another do facilitate some degree 
of chairs being allocated of committees or their equivalents 
to members of opposition parties, this is not internationally 
unknown. 
MR DE FREITAS:   Yes.  No, in fact it is very common, 
actually, it is more common than one would expect and 
certainly it only strengthens democracy but the problem is, 
10 
the ANC do not really make democracy, this is my 
comments, they believe that the ANC comes first and 
everything else comes second including the country and so 
as long as they are protecting their organisation and 
making sure that is their cadres that are protected and 
come first.  That is all that matters.  It is a very sad state 
of affairs. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr de Freitas, I have no further 
questions, thank you very much. 
MR DE FREITAS:   May I make, Advocate, may I make just 
20 
one last comment before you let me go and that is the 
following.  I am no longer a member of this portfolio 
committee but I watch with interest because I have been on 
the committee for a long time and I watch with interest 
what is going on in PRASA and there is more looting now 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 203 of 211 
 
than ever before and in fact the Chairman of the board at 
the moment is a – he was a member of the committee and 
you have mentioned his name a few times throughout this 
interaction and his job is clear, it is to do the bidding of 
Luthuli House and to make sure that the looting continues.  
Only this week – and this is public knowledge in the 
newspapers – there were some officials that were fired by 
PRASA, the PRASA board, by the gentleman which I refer 
and those officials have saved PRASA billions.   
They 
were 
the 
good 
guys 
and 
they 
are 
10 
systematically purging all the good people and, you know, 
because these people were ensuring the right thing was 
being done, that the corruption was being exposed and, 
you know, PRASA was being fixed.  And those very people 
that are doing the right thing are being fired and only this 
week in fact this happened.   
So there is no doubt that the looting is continuing 
and I am hoping that through what has happened here at 
the Commission, that the information that the information 
that 
is 
exposed, 
will 
somehow 
start 
curtailing 
this 
20 
hollowing out of Rail in South Africa.  Thank you very 
much. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr de Freitas.  Certainly the 
last part you have told me, if really that is what is 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 204 of 211 
 
happening and I did hear about the dismissal of somebody 
who has testified before this Commission. I think, from 
what I have heard, and it concerns me and it concerns me 
at different levels, one of which is the Commission is still 
busy and has not finalised inquiring into and hearing 
evidence about allegations of corruption and capture at 
PRASA and if your information is correct, it is just 
continuing and, as you say, then it is getting worse.  
So there is the question of what it is that the 
Commission can do if the executive is not doing the right 
10 
thing?  So it may well be that from the Commission’s side it 
could take some steps to try and establish to what extent 
what you are saying may actually be the case but of course 
the Commission is nearing the end of its lifespan and a lot 
of its resources is directed at trying to complete the work. 
Would you have quite some information relating to 
what is happening right now?  I know that you said you are 
no longer involved, as such, but you still have that 
interest, would you have quite some information in terms of 
details in regard to what makes you say it is actually worse 
20 
now?  Do you have that kind of information? 
MR DE FREITAS:    Yes I do and I will gladly pass it on if 
you require me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, if you could do that, if you pass it 
on to Advocate Freund, he will share it with me and if need 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 205 of 211 
 
be it can be passed on to a member of the legal team who 
deals with PRASA together with another team in terms of 
the actual allegations of corruption and capture that may 
be happening there.  But thank you very much, Mr de 
Freitas, for availing yourself to come and assist the 
Commission, we appreciate it very much.  Thank you, you 
are now excused.  Thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I had another witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Who I had hoped to at least start and 
10 
possibly complete today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   He is still available but I am assuming 
that your view would be that we should adjourn around 
about now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it depends on a number of things.  
Tomorrow I know that in the morning or at some stage we 
should hear Mr Selfe in terms of the previous arrangement 
but he would not be long as far as I remember.  Who else 
or how many other witnesses are you lining up for 
20 
tomorrow? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, Judge, a number, Mr Matt 
Johnston of OUTA will be the next witness.  His affidavit is 
lengthy.  I will do my best to be selective about what we 
present orally.  After that I am expecting Mr Frolick 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 206 of 211 
 
probably to testify and after that there are at least two 
further chairs of portfolio committees who would want an 
opportunity to answer some of the allegations that have 
been made and beyond that there are further witnesses 
but, I mean, we certainly will not get beyond what I might 
call the fact witnesses tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  But in terms of fact witnesses, 
it is Mr Johnston, Johnson, Johnston?  Then Mr Frolick, 
then Mr Selfe will just finish with his evidence, complete 
his evidence. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes and then, in addition, we have Ms 
Magadzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Who had been referred to today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you will recall that Mr 
Vincent Smith also wishes to testify. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I had hoped that we would hear 
him in this current session. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   This week.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So there are a lot of witnesses but it is 
a question of what is manageable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I have no difficulty, Chair, if you 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 207 of 211 
 
are content to do so, start with Mr Johnston.  His evidence 
will be quite lengthy.  The difficulty with that is, that the 
arrangement is with Mr Selfe, that he will be the first 
witness tomorrow morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So if we started with Mr Johnston, we 
would then need to interpose Mr Selfe and then go back to 
Mr Johnston but would at least have made some progress. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But on the other hand, it is already six 
10 
o’clock, we have been going for long today, so I am 
entirely in your hands and I mention Mr Johnston is also 
amenable depending on how you wish to do things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think if you break up what your 
estimate is in terms of hours of the remaining fact 
witnesses, what is your estimate?  I am just thinking and 
obviously subject to your availability as well, I thinking 
whether there are some that we could hear in evening 
sessions next week on some of the days, those that we 
cannot get to by end of tomorrow, if we do not finish them. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  I obviously cannot speak for other 
persons’ availabilities but my expectation, Chair, is that in 
all probability it would probably be possible to arrange 
several evening sessions in the course of next week and if 
that is convenient to you I imagine it would be possible to 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 208 of 211 
 
fit in at least some of the fact witnesses.  You will recall, 
Chair, that we also have at least four what we might call 
expert and proposals witnesses.  We also have Ms 
Letsatsi-Dube who is a fact witness but who is not healthy 
at the moment.  There is also the – what we anticipate to 
be the final witness to really speak from the leadership of 
the African National Congress on the oversight issues.  So 
there is quite a bit more to be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I am entirely in your hands as to 
10 
how best you would prefer to deal with that and what hours 
you would want to operate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, just go back to the question of 
hours in terms of the fact witnesses again, what is your 
estimate of how long each one is likely to be? 
ADV FREUND SC:   These are obviously crude guesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. No, I accept, ja.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Selfe I would have thought no more 
than half an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Johnston I would have thought 
probably two hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is with Mr Johnston? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Johnston. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 209 of 211 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Because he covers so much terrain 
although I am only – I am going to focus on those parts of 
his affidavit that are not covered by other witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So two hours is fairly conservative in a 
sense that we should be able to make it in two hours, I 
would hope. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Frolick a minimum of an hour but I 
would have thought longer. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the reason why I say that is 
because in the absence of the late former Speaker – 
former Chief Whip, Mr Frolick really is currently the most 
senior ANC witness other than the final witness who 
participates in parliament and who understands how things 
are 
seen 
from 
the 
perspective 
of 
senior 
ANC 
representatives.  So I cannot see that we will be less than 
an hour, it may be two or three.  Ms Magadzi, I would 
imagine, relatively short, an hour should be enough. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And Mr Smith, likewise I would have 
thought an hour should be enough. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So those are my approximate 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 210 of 211 
 
estimates of what we are currently are calling the facts 
witnesses available for this session. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So apart from Mr Selfe it is Mr Johnston, 
Mr Frolick, Mr Smith, Ms Magadzi.  That is four. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Those are the ones, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think your estimates of how much time 
suggest to me that even making room for the fact that 
these are estimates, that if we were to start earlier than 
ten tomorrow and sit till like this time, we should – we have 
a good chance of finishing the fact witnesses.  What is 
10 
your sense?  That will give us about – let us say, for 
example, if we were to start at nine and go up to six, so 
that is ten, eleven, twelve one, I know there would be a tea 
break but that is four hours and then there is a lunch 
break.  Then it is from two to three, that is five.  From 
three to four, that is six hours and then if we go to six that 
is eight hours and we could go up to half past six and so 
on.  What do you think? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, Judge, I certainly think that it is 
possible that we may complete and that if we do not 
20 
complete 
that 
the 
remainder 
would 
be 
much 
more 
manageable if we have to simply find a couple of hours in 
the evening or another evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I certainly have no difficulty with your 
04 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 337 
 
Page 211 of 211 
 
proposals. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, that is fine, I think let us 
adjourn for now and let us start – or let us start at half 
past nine tomorrow but with a view that if need be we can 
go even up to seven in the evening.  I am saying up to, if 
we all still feel quite energetic and we have to go beyond, I 
think I should be able to do that.  Is that fine? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Certainly, Chair and obviously… 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the extent that there may be others, 
whether from these fact witnesses or others that need to 
10 
testify and they would be available on some evenings next 
week and they would not be too long, maybe two hours, 
three hours, we could look at next week to try and cover 
more evening sessions, ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is certainly in order with me, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, no, that is fine.  Okay, I 
think let us adjourn then now and then tomorrow we start 
at half past nine.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 5 FEBRUARY 2021  
20 
