 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
12 JANUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 326 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 244 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
12 JANUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 3 of 244 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 12 JANUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Seleka, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us start. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Dr Nteta good morning to you. 
DR NTETA:  Good morning Sir. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  The oath you took yesterday continues to 
apply today, you understand that? 
DR NTETA:  Yes I understand that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Proceed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Chairperson the – Dr Nteta was 
giving her apology from yesterday.  She can see us but we 
can see her.  So she is unable to see whether we have 
stopped talking.  So sometimes there was a overlap 
20 
between us talking and her talking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh why is that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I do not know Chair.  I do not know why 
it was not possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the technicians – have you asked 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 4 of 244 
 
the technicians? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I have asked the Reverend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why is that because we – we have never 
had that situation.  Let the Reverend tell you what is going 
on. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair the Reverend says the witness 
can – the witnesses can only see you if they have the 
laptop in front of you but once they have disconnected your 
laptop then the witnesses cannot see you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They can only see me if what? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  If your – if a laptop for you is 
connected to the – to the meeting link. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And why is it not connected because it is 
always connected on other occasions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair – ja should we address it at tea 
time Chairperson it is - he -–what the Reverend is 
explaining is the laptop was once there and on the 
Chairperson’s request it was removed but it could probably 
be connected somewhere else I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no I am going to – to adjourn and to 
20 
get this sorted out.  What should – what should have been 
done – what should not have happened. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that it should not have been removed 
without me being told that its removal would have this 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 5 of 244 
 
effect. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Nobody said if it was removed this would 
be the consequence.  And – and if I have been told that 
that is what would happen I would have said it should be 
kept. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So nobody said this is what would 
happen.  How long can it take for it to be connected 
because I do not like this idea that the witness cannot see 
10 
us. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  He is indicating about ten minutes 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja we are going to adjourn.  That must 
be sorted out quickly so that we can then continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can Dr Nteta see us now? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  She can see us Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Dr Nteta can you see me? 
DR NTETA:  Yes I can see you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the evidence leader you can see him 
as well? 
DR NTETA:  I think I will see him when he – now I can see 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 6 of 244 
 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh when he speaks. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Now – Reverend Stimela is 
this light the way it should be?  Okay.  You putting me in 
the dark – in darkness.  I think he is – maybe he is not 
happy that I said they must make sure the witness sees us 
so he is retaliating by putting me in darkness.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  There is vengeance to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay alright let us proceed 
10 
then. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Dr Nteta 
yesterday we were about to go into your second meeting 
with Mr Atol Gupta – Tony Gupta.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Seleka before we proceed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can we have an understanding of – a 
common understanding of how much time you need to 
finish with her evidence? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is your assessment? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let me see Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I think yesterday you may have gone to 
just before half of her statement I am not sure. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 7 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I was wondering – I was having in 
mind that you might need one and a half hours or so or at 
most two hours. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let us try two hours Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let us … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay but I think just up the pace as you 
ask questions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that we try and get as much done as 
10 
possible within the time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Dr Nteta we are about to go into 
your second meeting with Mr Tony Gupta.  Just before I do 
that just one thing I need to clear with you and that – that 
is going back to the reasons why you left Eskom.  We have 
seen from Mr Jabu Mabuza the former – was is the 
Chairperson or a CEO of Eskom?  Chairperson in 2018. 
DR NTETA:  Chairperson. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  That his evidence was to the 
effect that you – you resigned while there were disciplinary 
– there was a disciplinary action pending against you.  
Could you – could you comment on that quickly? 
DR NTETA:  Okay.  So – and I would take the liberty of 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 8 of 244 
 
relating from the beginning of my affidavit and I indicated 
in my affidavit that I had mainly two reasons for leaving 
Eskom. 
 
The first reason was to continue with my studies 
and the second reason was really because I felt that the 
incoming board and executives at the time I felt and it is 
my opinion that the continued undue interest in various 
transactions within the Primary Energy space this trend 
was going to continue. 
 
So having been requested to provide submission for 
10 
a transaction another transaction which was adjudicated in 
the evening of a Friday and some other discussions that I 
did have with some executives I felt that I wanted to leave 
Eskom because I did not want to continue to endure what 
was unpleasant. 
 
And I at the time my direct line manager was the 
CFO.  I had a conversation with the CFO in March of that 
year indicated to the CFO that I would like to exit my 
employment at Eskom and it was – to indicate what my 
notice period would be and having – wanting to have a 
20 
cordial discussion with him.  Of which we did in terms of 
when would I like leave.   He asked me when am I thinking 
about leaving etcetera.   
 
If I am going – if I am elaborating too much you will 
interrupt me. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 9 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay I will… 
DR NTETA:  So at – at that point we then – I indicated well 
I will then come through with a letter of resignation at the 
end of the month but I did want to have a discussion with 
him prior to that.  It was around about the middle of the 
month. 
 
I then was then later probably the next week I think 
it was I was then called in by the Group Executive for 
Generation.  At this point I want to note that I did not 
report to the Group Executive for Generation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:  And they then handed me… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Dr Nteta.  Just tell us who the 
CFO was?  You have just told us you had a discussion with 
the CFO tell us who he or she was? 
DR NTETA:  Mr Cassim – Ms Cassim. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Is it Calib Cassim? Calib Cassim. 
DR NTETA:  Calib, Calib sorry Calib Cassim. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Calib Cassim. 
20 
DR NTETA:  Yes I think his surname is Cassim but Calib – 
Calib. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay continue.  It is just 
important as you talk about positions to tell us who was 
occupying that position at that time so we .. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 10 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:  It was Calib. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.  Continue. 
DR NTETA:  Thank you.  It was Calib.  I then had later 
when we had – I then had a – I was called in by the acting 
Group Executive Generation which was Mr Willie Majola 
and for a meeting.  I entered the meeting and he had 
somebody from labour – from HR there and at that point 
they handed me a suspension letter.   
 
I indicated to Mr Majola that I have in the previous 
weeks had a discussion with my immediate manager 
10 
indicating that I did want to resign and I then asked – 
asked the HR person as well so what would be the process 
going forward with this. 
 
At the time they seemed surprised I must say.  And 
I – then they said well we are giving you – listen you are 
asked to vacate the premises with immediate effect of 
which I did.  I vacated the premises with immediate effect. 
 
So that is the – the letter of suspension.  Having 
done that I then wrote to – a few days later I think it was – 
I wrote to my immediate manager which is Mr Calib the 
20 
CFO and I indicated to him that – I actually indicated to 
him that you know our discussion and I then indicated to 
him that I subsequently from his colleague received a letter 
of suspension. 
 
However in light of our discussion that we had had I 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 11 of 244 
 
would like to still continue the process in terms of the – 
serving my notice even though I was asked to leave with 
immediate effect – suspension.  And that is quite – that 
letter is actually quite – is documented and I am sure they 
have it.  I can provide a copy. 
 
And – and so I then served my notice in terms of 
that Eskom it was a month’s notice that I was required to 
do. 
 
I think probably two weeks in that notice they 
indicated to me that they would be scheduling I think it was 
10 
a disciplinary.  Once again that was not coming from my 
immediate manager it was coming from his colleague and 
my limited understanding of HR is that it is your immediate 
manager who disciplines you and not colleagues within the 
organisation. 
 
And 
then 
I 
received 
documentation 
from 
my 
manager 
in 
terms 
of 
resignation 
– 
the 
normal 
documentation and they engaged with me – HR engaged 
with me and then I had my last day at Eskom that – April 
2018. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  So… 
DR NTETA:  The reasons for the suspension – sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so  
1. You had a discussion with your immediate manager 
where you indicated that you intended resigning and 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 12 of 244 
 
before you could submit your letter of resignation you 
were served with a suspension letter. 
Is that sequence correct? 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  I had agreed with my manager – sorry 
Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After you had been served with a letter of 
suspension you immediately left Eskom to comply with the 
suspension letter.  Is that correct? 
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How long after you had received your 
10 
suspension letter did you submit your letter of resignation?  
About a week? 
DR NTETA:  I am going to – I am going to say for about a 
week or so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja more or less.  More or less.  Okay. 
DR NTETA:  More or less ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.   And then they told you 
about scheduling a disciplinary hearing but that never 
happened because then your resignation took effect, is that 
correct? 
20 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  So during that – the period of my notice 
about two/three weeks into that they sent me the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And was the disciplinary hearing 
scheduled for a date within your notice period or outside of 
the notice period? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 13 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:  They did not give a date. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh as yet. 
DR NTETA:  It was – it was more – ja they did not give a 
date or a venue.  In fact I think it was more of just stating 
what the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The charges. 
DR NTETA:  Issues because the four days suspension they 
need to then tell you you know what… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The charges are. 
DR NTETA:  What the charges are. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh [speaking over one another]. 
DR NTETA:  Ja it was – it was more like charges. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They were telling you what the charges 
were going to be. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  So – but then your 
resignation took effect before there could be a hearing? 
DR NTETA:  Yes before they came back to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You said you served your notice. 
Does that mean that you came back and actually worked or 
20 
you – you served your notice on suspension? 
DR NTETA:  I served my notice on suspension.  I came in 
at the end of my – my notice at the request of the then 
chairman to attend to some – in the other investigations 
that were on-going to provide evidence for that. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 14 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright Mr Seleka. 
DR NTETA:  So I – I – ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did those investigations pertain to your 
conduct where you were called in to give … 
DR NTETA:  Which ones? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The ones you say you were called in to 
give  
DR NTETA:  No it was to do with – it was do with – it was 
10 
to do with – it was actually some of it was Tegeta related 
matters that to do with coal contracts not specifically my… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Your conduct. 
DR NTETA:  My conduct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I see.  Okay.  Did the charges relate – 
the charges against you they were – if you can recall did 
they relate to the Tegeta transaction? 
DR NTETA:  So the charge is correct.  They related to the 
Tegeta transaction.  It was quite specifically related to – as 
a – in my role as a senior primary energy – senior General 
20 
Manager Primary Energy.  There was a temporary relief 
that had provided to Optimum/Tegeta for coal coming 
through and it was relief in terms of the qualities for a said 
period.  So that is what they were.  And then they indicated 
that there is a breakdown of trust. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 15 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  I saw that you deal with that in 
your affidavit.  The temporary relief that had been given to 
Tegeta. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did they indicate what the factual basis 
was of the allegation that there was a breakdown of trust?  
In other words did they say… 
DR NTETA:  Oh. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is a breakdown of trust because 
you did ABCDE and that is why there is a breakdown of 
trust.  Did they indicate that? 
DR NTETA:  So the – they indicated that there was a 
breakdown of trust based on the providing of the temporary 
relief. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that was the sole basis as you 
understood it? 
DR NTETA:  Yes as I recall.  I am actually trying to see if I 
can find the – the actual letter. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Letter.  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  Because I am feeling that I may have … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might not recall everything. 
DR NTETA:  But – yes I might not recollect fully.  But it 
was based on the temporary relief and – and I – what I do 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 16 of 244 
 
recall is that it was indicated as a breakdown of trust. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Well if Mr Seleka have got the 
letter somewhere in their bundles or he indicates they do 
not have. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  So if and when you have 
found it you will let – you will let us know.  In the meantime 
you may continue Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes thank you Chair.   
DR NTETA:  Sorry Advocate Seleka if I may just interrupt 
10 
you? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  Do you want me to look for it now and send it 
during my time with you or do you want me to get it later?  
I can get it at tea time if it is going to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe she can – she can get it through 
during a break or something. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I think so Chairperson. 
DR NTETA:  Not a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How much time do you think you need to 
20 
get it or you are not sure? 
DR NTETA:  No I have it it is just looking on my computer 
but I do not want to do that whilst I am.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no, no that is fine. 
DR NTETA:  I am providing evidence. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 17 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay we will do it … 
DR NTETA:  So it will not take long. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will do it during some break.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  The aspect Ms 
– Dr Nteta regarding the temporary relief afforded to 
Tegeta is of importance to some extent in regard to the 
Tegeta 
issues 
and 
maybe 
you 
could 
explain 
to 
the 
Chairperson briefly on this temporary relief.  What does it 
10 
entail because you say it related to – or as I understand it 
it related to the quality and the quantity which is the 
volume of coal?  Correct? 
DR NTETA:  So with regards to the temporary relief the 
temporary relief that I signed was to do with coal quality 
and in terms of the volumes.  So in – and which are 
operational issues.  So the temporary relief that I signed 
was – is firstly an annex based on a previous temporary 
relief that was provided to them.  And it was for a limited 
period.  What tends to happen in terms of mining 
20 
operations is that as you mining through certain areas you 
might get to an area where you would experience what they 
would call a dyke or some aspects that affect the quality 
and the volume that you are able to provide through. 
 
So what is – what we allow for our suppliers is that 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 18 of 244 
 
in that particular aspect they would advise us that due to 
technical issues we are not able to provide you with the 
volumes 
and 
sometimes 
it 
is 
volumes 
and 
quality; 
sometimes it is both etcetera. 
 
And then we will then say for that period whilst you 
are mining through that dyke then you can then provide us 
with either reduced quantities if it is affecting your 
operations or we would then look in terms of the qualities if 
they would be still – we will still be able to use them. 
 
You can then reduce that quality.  It is normally one 
10 
particular aspect of the quality or two.  They mine through 
that particular area.  Once they have mined through that 
particular area then they would then revert back to you 
know the contractual volumes and qualities etcetera. 
 
So that relief was for three months to allow them to 
address their operation issues that they have which is what 
we do for – it is just how we would manage contracts 
because of the robustness of mining operations. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes not a – it is alright because what – 
what we – what I am trying to understand from you in 
20 
regard to the relief is not so much the reasons but what 
relief entailed.  So that relief if I understand you correctly 
when you give a relief in respect of quality that means you 
will then accept as Eskom quality – I mean coal that does 
not need the required quality. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 19 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  So – and why we call it temporary – ja it 
is relief in terms of that particular quality. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
DR NTETA:  Or the volume as well. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Or the volume. 
DR NTETA:  It can sometimes the volumes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes so if they are supposed to provide 
by way of example 10 000 tons of coal per – per – is it per 
month or per week?  You would compromise that and say 
okay I will accept 5 000 volumes of coal.  Is that what the 
10 
relief means? 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  As a – yes that type of relief. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice. 
DR NTETA:  For a period. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  And for the purposes 
for this aspect you deal with that in your affidavit on page 
69.  Chairperson that is Eskom Bundle 14. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just before that.  Dr Nteta when you 
grant the kind of relief that you are talking about to a 
service provider is the effect of the relief you grant to them 
namely is it that you condone what would otherwise have 
been a breach of the contract? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 20 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so you – you effectively say for the 
reasons that you have given us we understand that you are 
going to provide us with coal that does not meet the 
contractual standards either in terms of quality or in terms 
of volumes or both for this following period and we accept 
that.  That is the effect of the relief? 
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chair.  So insofar as 
10 
quality is concerned Dr Nteta we understand that these 
coal contracts have penalties clauses in them that if you 
do not – if you fail to provide coal of a specific quality 
penalties will be imposed.  Correct? 
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  In this case I see in – I referred 
you to the page number; page 69 of Eskom Bundle 14 
Chairperson paragraph 7.4.  Or we can actually start at 
7.3.  You are there Dr Nteta or you are moving? 
DR NTETA:  Yes I am. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  To there.  So that paragraph 7.3 says: 
“During April 2016 the ownership of OCM 
changed from Glencore to Tegeta as per 
sale of shares agreement.  April 2016.  
Subsequent to the cooperation agreement 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 21 of 244 
 
being signed Eskom issued the temporary 
relief agreement to OCM on 20 December 
2016 for the period of 1 September 2016 
until 31 July 2017.” 
So that relief on 20 December 2016 is in fact issued to 
Tegeta as the new owner of the mine. 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  Yes I do not know who it was issued to 
but yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja because Tegeta is not – well if you 
read that with your paragraph 7.3 because ownership 
10 
changes hands you say April and Glencore is no longer the 
owner Tegeta is the owner and on 20 December 2016 only 
Tegeta would be the owner at this stage.  Did you issue 
that relief? 
DR NTETA:  So the first relief I did not issue.  The first 
relief I think was – so the relief – sorry the relief that you 
are referring to in this statement I did not issue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes okay.   
DR NTETA:  It was issued by my predecessor. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Now I am taking you down… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say there is a first relief that you 
did not issue you issued a later one? 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  So the relief that Advocate Seleka is 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 22 of 244 
 
referring to in this paragraph 7.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR NTETA:  Is the relief that I did not issue it was issued 
by my predecessor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And who was your predecessor? 
DR NTETA:  That relief was issued by Mr Edwin Mabelane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair I see annexure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  AK – AKL08 – AKLN08 which is on page 
10 
187. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please speak up Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is annexure AKLN08 which is on 
page 187. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Indeed it is a relief issued by Mr 
Edwin Mabelane Chief – but he is the Chief Procurement 
Officer at the time Dr Nteta.  20 December 2016. 
DR NTETA:  Yes at some point within Eskom Mr Mabelane 
played the role both Chief Procurement Officer and senior 
20 
General Manager for Primary Energy. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  So it is possible that during that period he 
was – he had both portfolios. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And then there was subsequent 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 23 of 244 
 
reliefs granted to Tegeta you say further in your affidavit. 
DR NTETA:  Yes that is the one that I am referring to which 
is linked to the suspension. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just tell me these temporary reliefs that 
you granted and that Mr Edwin Mabelane also granted the 
power to grant that relief was it contained in the coal 
agreement or was it provided for in some other instrument 
within Eskom?  What was the source of that power? 
DR NTETA:  So the power and I am – and I am going to 
give you my interpretation of it.  The power to grant that 
10 
relief lies in the coal operations as it is an operational 
issue that we would have to look at and look at in terms of 
the merits. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Am I correct to understand you to say as 
far as you know it was not in the coal agreement? 
DR NTETA:  So in terms of the coal agreement that 
particular agreement is linked to a mine.  I would 
understand that it would be part of the coal agreement in 
terms of coal managing – the contract management and 
contract management which is indicated in the agreement 
20 
would then deal with issues of operations and how do you 
manage it.  Because the Department within Primary Energy 
that is called coal operations is delegated to manage and 
they would look at issues of volumes within – within the 
contract up – moving them up down.  If there are issues in 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 24 of 244 
 
terms of ramping up qualities etcetera as part of their 
function. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us take this step by step.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you saying that your understanding 
was that the coal agreement gave that power to those to 
whom the responsibility to manage the contract was – was 
given.  Is that what you are saying? 
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That it was your understanding. 
10 
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words you are saying the – the 
power to manage the contract you understood to include 
the power to grant this kind of relief? 
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Is there anything else other than 
the contract that you understood to be the source of this 
contract.   
DR NTETA:   It would be the contract.  It would also be the 
delegations that are granted to the contract managements 
20 
department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And those delegations, did you 
understand to have an express provision that talks about 
temporary relief or not necessarily anything express but you 
understood them to include the power to grant this relief? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 25 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   I understood that there would be – I understood 
it as such sir, that those powers that are delegated relate to 
be able to provide a temporary release. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But would I be correct in understanding 
you to say.  You are not saying, if we go to the delegation we 
will find an express wedding that said you could – you had 
this power but there might be no express wedding but your 
understanding was nevertheless that it was part of what was 
delegated, the power delegated in terms of delegations. 
DR NTETA:   So my understanding is that the delegation that 
10 
is provided to Primary Energy is to, one, is to negotiate and 
conclude contract as well as to manage the execution of 
those contracts which includes quality price and elements 
like that.  So that is my understanding of the delegation 
provided to Primary Energy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Other than granting this temporary 
relief to Tegeta on this occasion, had you had other 
occasions where you granted this type of relief to another 
supplier or other suppliers? 
DR NTETA:   Myself personally, no.  But within the Primary 
20 
Energy Division we would – so noting at the time that I was 
now the Senior General Manager for Primary Energy which 
oversaw various departments.  Before, I used to in terms of 
under sourcing as side of things.  So I would not have been 
involved with that personally before.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 26 of 244 
 
 
However, within the Coal Operations Department, they 
on a daily basis would manage and look in terms of those 
particular aspects.   
 
So I was aware that that is their role.  Hence the 
motivation to provide this temporary relief, came from the 
Coal Operations Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is the position that even though you 
might not yourself have had other occasions where you 
granted this type of relief to a supplier.  You were aware that 
this type of relief had been granted to other suppliers by the 
10 
relevant authorities within Eskom in the past. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I understood it as the practise.  Yes.  Not 
myself personally but correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you Chair.  That, obviously, 
will be – it be surprising if you were to be charged for doing 
something that is the practise at Eskom. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So then Eskom seems to have had a 
different view about whether or not you were authorised to 
20 
do or offer the temporary relief. 
DR NTETA:   Correct.  Which is why they would have 
charged me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you understand the basis of the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 27 of 244 
 
charges against you or the charge against you to be the 
mere the fact that you granted the relief?  Or did you 
understand the basis of the charge against you or the 
charges against you?   
 
Not to be the principle of granting relief but the 
circumstances under which you granted them, granted the 
relief, that made it, as far as Eskom was concerned, you 
granted relief in circumstances where you knew it should not 
be granted. 
 
Which one of these two was your understanding of the 
10 
basis of the charge? 
DR NTETA:   Okay.  My understanding and I did not get any 
engagement if I can put it that way with my principles on it.  
So I am reading – my understanding is based on the letter 
that I received.  My understanding is that Eskom believed 
that I did not have the delegation to grant that relief.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  But as far as you are 
concerned.  Obviously, you reflected on the charge and you 
had time to think about it.  As far as you are concerned, you 
did have the delegations? 
20 
DR NTETA:   As far as I am concerned, I did have the 
delegation.  It had 
been 
done before. There was a 
Corporation Agreement with Glencore for three years based 
on 
the 
same 
principles 
which 
was 
signed 
by 
my 
predecessors as well. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 28 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Dr Nteta, you 
do refer to a Corporation Agreement in paragraph 7.4 of the 
affidavit.  You say ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have actually also referred to it in 
paragraph 7.2, the Corporation Agreement with OCM.  But 
the Corporation Agreement of 2014 was terminated by 
Mr Brian Molefe after he seconded to Eskom in May or 
June 2015.  Are you aware of that? 
10 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  Now after that there was no 
Corporation Agreement between Eskom and Optimum.  So 
which corporation ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Sorry.  Which Corporation 
Agreement are you referring to in paragraph 7.2?  7.4, I beg 
your pardon.   
DR NTETA:   So there is Corporation Agreement in 7.4, 
would be that – would be the temporary – the first 
20 
temporary...  No, Corporation Agreement is the one that you 
are referring to in terms of the one that was terminated by 
Mr Molefe. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh.  So you – is it my understanding that 
you thought that it still the same agreement in place in 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 29 of 244 
 
2016? 
DR NTETA:   No, if I may? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes? 
DR NTETA:   My thought processing at the time and also in 
providing this affidavit, was to provide the – I refer to the 
Corporation 
Agreement 
because 
in 
that 
Corporation 
Agreement that was terminated by Mr Molefe ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   ...had spoke to issues of quality and it spoke to 
issues of volumes as well, where there was relief provided in 
10 
terms of that agreement for those two aspects, right.  So 
when I was then providing this particular narrative, I was 
referring to it based on the reasons of the information that is 
in that agreement.   
 
But the temporary relief, the first one, is the one that 
was then signed by Mr Mabelane which was for, I think, for 
six months or so.  I stand to be corrected.  Or more than 
that.  I stand to be corrected.   
 
So that is the second document that I am referring to.  
And then there is a third one, the one for which I did sign.   
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay.  So what I was just saying to 
you is.  By this time, there is no Corporation Agreement 
between Eskom and Tegeta, that we are aware of.  So what 
you see is a temporary ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 30 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, sorry.  I should give you a chance 
to respond, yes.  What we, however, see.  On the 20t h of 
December 2016 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Seleka.  I am sorry to 
interrupt you.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ys, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did earlier on mention on which page I 
will find this Annexure AKL and 08.  I want to go there as you 
ask those questions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 187, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it 187? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Then you may continue.  I 
am sorry I interrupted you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not a problem Chair.  So what we see 
then Dr Nteta, on 20 December 2016, is the temporary relief 
being granted to Tegeta on paragraph 7.4.  And the 
temporary 
relief 
applies 
retrospectively 
from 
the 
1s t of September.  Do you see that? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  It will apply retrospectively to over 
four months before it is issued.  And then it applies from 
December, January to July 2017 going forward.  So that is 
adding seven months into it because ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 31 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...it ends on the 31s t of July 2017.  So 
that is more than six months. 
DR NTETA:   Correct.  I did say approximately, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In 2017 alone is seven months.  In 2016 
alone it is five months.  Four or five months.  So that is, 
what, some ten months there.  But I want to ask you this in 
relation to this because...  Well, it does not end there 
because you also give a temporary relief on the next page.  
You give it on the 18t h of August 2017.  You give it for the 
period ...[intervenes]  
10 
DR NTETA:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  You give it for the period 
1 August 
2017. 
 
This 
is 
now 
immediately 
after 
the 
31s t  of July 2017.  1 August 2017 to 31s t October 2017.  
Correct. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  Now let us try and understand this.  
I heard you mention that the motivation for temporary relief 
would come from the Coal Operations Department. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that is the Coal Operations 
Department of Eskom? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Would the supplier itself make an 
approach to Eskom to ask for temporary relief? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 32 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And they would give reasons for that 
request? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And in this case, you were also given 
reason in order for you to grant a temporary relief. 
DR NTETA:   From our Corporations Department, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  So you did not receive the 
reasons directly from the supplier? 
DR NTETA:   No, I received from the Coal Operations. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Would...  Did Coal Operations say we 
received a request from the supplier for temporary relief of 
or the extension of the existing temporary relief?  And these 
are the reasons they have given.   
 
We support their request for the reasons that they give 
or here are our reasons for supporting the request.  Did they 
say anything along those lines? 
DR NTETA:   So.  Yes.  So the Coal Operations Department 
at Eskom manages the coal contracts.  So they are on a 
20 
daily basis engage with the supplier in terms of the running 
of the operations.  So they would receive the request from 
the supplier.   
 
There would also have been – they would understand 
the operations of the mine because their job is to manage in 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 33 of 244 
 
terms of those particular elements.   
 
So it should have been an engagement from them.  They 
then provided me a memo supporting, as you have indicated 
sir, the reasons for the temporary relief extension. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  So the picture 
that emerges is this – is like this and you can comment on 
this.  After Tegeta took over Optimum Mine, which is around 
April 2016, as you say in the affidavit.  Tegeta, a couple of 
months later, are granted this temporary relief with effect 
10 
from the 1s t of September 2016.  The temporary relief 
applies to the quality of coal and the volume of coal.  
Correct? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That applied for ten months until 
31s t July 2017.  The period of ten months from 1 September 
to 31 July.  Immediately thereafter, you also issued a 
temporary relief for three months from 1 August 2017 to 
October 2017.  In total it is 13-months, in October.  And we 
know from the evidence that in February 2018, Tegeta goes 
20 
into business rescue.  February 2018.  You know that? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  February 2018? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   Okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, on what page do I find 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 34 of 244 
 
Dr Nteta’s temporary relief to Tegeta? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, it is the next page Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   After the earlier or other one? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, correct, 188. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The next page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  So that 
business rescue Tegeta goes into after the temporary relief 
is three months thereafter, three months after the temporary 
10 
relief.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, before you proceed Mr Seleka.  Can 
I ask this question Dr Nteta? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see that your letter to Mr Jacques van 
der Merwe, COO of Optimum Coal Holdings where you 
granted the temporary relief, just like the one that had been 
done by Mr Mabelane previously.   
 
Although it allows Tegeta to deviate from its contract 
obligations but there seems nothing said on both occasions 
20 
about how the price of the coal would be affected by this, 
insofar as for example quality is concerned.   
 
I would imagine that if you are going to give me Grade A 
of coal, I am going to pay a price that is appropriate for 
Grade A.  If you are now going to give me Grade B of – in 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 35 of 244 
 
terms of quality, I cannot be paying for Grade A.   
 
But I do not see anything in the letter that deals with 
that.  Was that dealt with elsewhere or is there some 
explanation for why there seems to be nothing dealing with 
that? 
DR NTETA:   Chair, if I may?  If you allow me the indulgence 
to talk a little bit about the contract?  The contract, it was 
quite an old contract which was signed – it was made on a 
Rand per ton basis.  So coal would have been a certain coal 
quality.  So the – and the contract then talks to.   
10 
 
If, for example, you do not meet your obligations in 
terms of a certain range, a certain volume, et cetera, then 
that is when it begins to affect the price. 
 
So.  And I am going to provide the narrative to also try 
and answer mister – Advocate Seleka.  Apologies.  So the 
temporary relief which you talk to in terms of – is a ten 
months’ period.   
 
The issues that they had in terms of that mine, continues 
from even the temporary – the Corporation Agreement which 
in fact was a temporary released as signed previously.  So 
20 
which was for three years.  So those issues continued.   
 
Now the temporary relief that I then granted to them, 
spoke to the volume and the quality for a prescribed period.  
However, they needed to ensure that they have done certain 
things.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 36 of 244 
 
 
At the end of that period, of the temporary relief, which I 
think it was roundabout October.  In November, I then 
instructed the department to institute the penalties because 
they did not meet for the terms that I had for those three 
months, the obligation.  They did not meet those obligations.   
 
So in November of 2018 – of 2017, we then instituted 
the penalties and that resulted in us actually receiving coal 
for them for free.   
 
So from – and then they seem to supply – because they 
have indicated that they are unable to supply us anymore.  
10 
And that is then also what then led to them, I would say, 
going into business rescue.   
 
So the financial aspects were then attended within those 
mechanisms and that is what allowed me to be able to 
institute those penalties.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I take it that your answers means 
that, as a matter of principle, you accept that if they were 
going to provide coal of a lower quality, that should affect 
the price.  But you are saying that, although in the letter you 
did not address that, you say there was a mechanism in 
20 
terms of which it could be addressed.  Is that correct? 
DR NTETA:   Within the overall contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But ...[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   So the contract had the penalties, et cetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But the idea of temporary relief, is it 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 37 of 244 
 
not – is the idea of enforcing penalties for the provision to 
Eskom of coal that has been supplied of coal of a lower 
quality for example that has been supplied to Eskom during a 
period where Eskom has provided temporary relief to the 
supplier.   
 
That notion seems to be inconsistent with temporary – in 
relation of temporary relief.  You remember earlier on, I 
asked you whether granting temporary relief effectively 
meant you were condoning a breach or breaches of the 
contract.  And you said yes.  You remember that? 
10 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So what I am raising is that the idea 
that Eskom could later on impose penalties for – on a 
supplier for supplying coal that is of a lower quality than the 
coal provided for in the coal agreement, seems to me to be 
inconsistent with the whole notion of granting temporary 
relief.   
 
Because as I understand your evidence.  Granting 
temporary relief is actually giving permission to the supplier 
to act in breach of the agreement because of the reasons 
20 
given by the supplier which you as Eskom found to be sound.  
You understand what I mean? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what do you say to the proposition that 
when you grant temporary relief, you cannot be, at the same 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 38 of 244 
 
time, contemplating that you will impose penalties on the 
supplier later on for providing you with coal of a lower 
quality than what is specified in the agreement.   It cannot 
be.  You cannot be contemplating both.   
DR NTETA:   Yes, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept? 
DR NTETA:   I accept.  And I will agree with you that in 
terms of our negotiations with suppliers, they agree with 
your sentiment.  That you cannot allow me – you cannot say 
that I am going to – I can provide you with a relief in some 
10 
form and later on, you then penalise me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   Now the rationale and I will speak from 
Eskom’s perspective. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
DR NTETA:   Most of the times when we provide temporary 
relief – not most of the times, but a lot of the times – it is for 
the quality and for the volume.  The quality, it is an – I am 
going to say this and Eskom will have to deal with the 
suppliers to them in the sense that...   
20 
 
So the quality that they – that reduction that they have, 
in essence, is acceptable to us.  Sorry, to Eskom.  It is 
within a range that have the potential to be acceptable.  
Whether it means that we move this to another power station 
or the boilers can then be adjusted to receive that coal. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 39 of 244 
 
 
Because one of the big issues that we have is the 
security of coal supply.  We would rather say that we will 
receive the quality that we can burn for a period but we do 
want the volumes.   
 
So often times when they provide you with the supplier 
with the temporary relief, it will say that for this period – and 
because we are looking for monthly volumes.  Instead of 
providing us with ten thousand tons, you can provide us with 
eight thousand tons.   
 
However, on the end of it, you must go back to your 
10 
volumes that you require.  The contracts also allows us to 
catch up with volumes.  So sometimes we can then say, at 
the end of that, give us more volumes.   
 
And that is – because we are looking to secure the 
volume of the coal.  So in your analyses – you are correct, 
that the supplies do feel that you cannot say that it is fine 
and then you later want the coal but we need to secure coal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, as far as you or Eskom may 
provide temporary relief in respect of volumes.  I do not have 
any problem about that as far as the prices are concern 
20 
because I take it that you will only pay for eight thousand if 
they – eight thousand tons of coal if they provide eight 
thousand.  You will not pay for ten thousand.   
 
But when it comes to the quality where you grant 
temporary relief in regard to quality, that is where my 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 40 of 244 
 
concern is.  Namely, in terms of the coal agreement, you 
would have impose an obligation on Tegeta to supply coal of 
Grade A quality and maybe for a certain period they did that 
and the – your obligation is to pay a price that is appropriate 
for Grade A quality of coal.   
 
After some months they say to you, please provide us – 
grant us some temporary relief.   We cannot grant you Grade 
A coal for the next ten months for the following reasons 
which you as Eskom find acceptable. 
 
And I am saying that when you then grant a relief to 
10 
say they can give you Grade B, you should be saying we will 
adjust the price as well, we cannot be paying you for grade 
A coal for the next ten months when you will be providing 
us with grade B coal.  That is what I am raising because I 
do not see it addressed in the letter.  I would have 
expected it to be addressed.  Why was it not addressed? 
DR NTETA:   It is not addressed because it is addressed in 
the overall of the contract and when you talk about an A 
grade coal, A grade coal is a band so when we are putting 
it - for example, if a supplier came and said we normally 
20 
give you A grade coal which is a band from a CV – I am 
just going to give an example – of 26 CD to 30 CD, if I give 
that an example.   
The grade B is maybe a 25 CD.  Jumping between a 
band is significant but within the band it is an acceptable 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 41 of 244 
 
because we are able to adjust in terms of our operations 
and the implication is smaller.  So we would then accept it.   
The 
contract 
then 
addresses 
those 
various 
mechanisms 
in 
terms 
of 
how 
we 
would 
accept 
this 
particular coal to come through. 
I also gave an example is that there are various 
aspects that, when you look at the coal quality, so you 
might have an issue of sulphur that we say that we will 
accept – sorry, Eskom says they will accept up to 1% and 
the supplier then says can you provide us with temporary 
10 
relief on the quality of the sulphur for 1.1 or 1.2?  And we 
have looked at in terms of the significance and then we 
would make a decision in terms of that.  So it is not as 
clear to be able to then say X and then try and cater for it 
within the contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying the letter might not deal 
with that, namely the adjustment of the price but the 
contract would have had a provision or did have a 
provision that effectively said if the supplier provides coal 
of a lower quality than grade A then this is how the price 
20 
will be adjusted.  Is that what you are saying? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, so the contracts in general would do that 
and also, as we moved further, a lot of the contracts are 
now based on a rand per gigajoule which talks to the 
energy content.  So the later contracts that I was in 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 42 of 244 
 
involved in, then – we were then – it talks to that particular 
mechanism. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this particular contract, do you 
remember whether it had a provision for the adjustment of 
the price in the event of the supplier providing coal of a 
lower quality? 
DR NTETA:   So this particular contract, if my memory 
serves me correctly, has quite an extensive penalty 
calculation and regime that talks to elements in terms of 
the type of the quality, the kind of volumes, etcetera, and 
10 
that is some calculations that are there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but provisions relating to penalties, 
would not apply, I would imagine, based on what you and I 
have discussed earlier on, namely, where you grant 
temporary relief to a supplier of coal you cannot at the 
same time be contemplating that you will impose penalties 
for – against the supplier because during the period of the 
temporary relief the supplier provided coal of a lower 
quality, you cannot be contemplating that.   
 
So what I am looking for is whether you are saying 
20 
if we go to the contract in this case we will find provisions 
that say, in effect, where Eskom provides temporary relief, 
this is how the price will be adjusted or where it says in 
the case of the supplier providing quality – providing coal 
that is of a lower quality than stipulated in the contract, 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 43 of 244 
 
this is how the price will be adjusted.  That is now separate 
from the penalties because the penalties will not apply if 
you grant temporary relief.  Are we going to find a 
provision that says that, as far as you remember? 
DR NTETA:   As far as I remember the contract does not 
talk about the issues of temporary but it would talk to the 
issues in terms of how you manage the contract.  I do want 
to say that I do not want to start delving into the details of 
this particular contract because I have not looked at it 
recently but my understanding would be that it would then 
10 
deal in terms of the mechanisms of it or the management of 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, part of the reason why one is 
looking at some of these things is because there is an 
allegation that before the change of ownership Eskom was 
very hard on OCM.  They for a long time were complaining 
that they were operating on a very – under a contract that 
brought a lot of hardship on them and wanted Eskom to 
accommodate their situation in various ways and Eskom, 
after Mr Brian Molefe had arrived, took a very hard line 
20 
against them but once there was a change of ownership 
and Tegeta was involved, the attitude – Eskom’s attitude 
was very favourable to them.   
There 
was 
inconsistency 
if 
you 
look 
at 
how 
Glencore was treated and how Tegeta was treated. So that 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 44 of 244 
 
is part of the reason why we are looking at this.  Here is a 
situation where Mr Mabelane grants them temporary relief 
for 10 months or 11 months, I am not sure, and then you 
also come and you grant them and when I look at the 
letter, it does not say anything about adjusting the price.  
It seems, on the fact of it, that although the quality of the 
coal is lowered, that will be provided, the price remains the 
price for grade A coal.  That is why I am trying to establish 
but I think from what you have said it seems that: 
1. You accept that the letter granting them relief, 
10 
both your one and Mr Mabelane’s one, does not 
deal with that. 
That is point one. 
2. I think you also say, as far as you can recall - 
and you have said that you would need to look at 
the agreement because you have not looked at it 
recently - but as far as you can recall, the 
agreement did also not deal with the adjustment 
of the price during the period where temporary 
relief has been granted.  It had provisions about 
20 
penalties and you and I agree that penalties 
cannot 
be 
applicable 
for 
a 
situation 
where 
temporary relief has been granted. 
Is my summary of your evidence a fair summary? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I would like to add, if I may, Sir? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 45 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   With regards to the allegations that Optimum 
had a difficult time prior to the new owners, I do not want 
to talk to that in the sense because I dealt with Optimum in 
terms 
of 
trying 
to 
look 
in 
terms 
of 
that 
particular 
agreement.  I will – and I do not want to also deal with the 
temporary relief that was granted by Mr Mabelane, I would 
rather provide my thinking behind the temporary relief that 
I provided to them.  I provided to them a temporary relief 
of three months and it was quite specific in terms of the 
10 
period because my understanding is that if you are having 
difficulty with your operations and you have indicated to 
the operations team, Eskom operations team, then it will 
take you three to four months to resolve it, that then we 
are willing to look at that.   
 
But you will also note that of the different reliefs 
that were provided, my relief was linked to in November 
where we then instituted because, in my opinion, you had 
been allowed three months to sort out your operations, you 
were not able to do so, so then we will then begin to 
20 
institute and take, you know, institute penalties in terms of 
your agreement and actually not pay for anything that we 
get from you.   
 
And that was my thinking at the time, it did not 
mean that because it was now Tegeta, it was simply in 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 46 of 244 
 
terms of trying to get the coal – you are not able to supply 
us with the coal, we are putting penalties, etcetera.  They 
did complain that they felt it was unfair but that was the 
contractual understanding and obligation that I believed 
served from my temporary relief. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to round off on this point because 
one may be trying to look at this only to find that maybe 
the foundation of one’s thinking is flawed, you would know 
whether or not the price, the prices that Eskom paid for 
coal were dictated, at least in part, maybe wholly, by the 
10 
quality of the coal that would be supplied.  
 In other words, I know we have been talking about 
different grades, you know, do you know whether that that 
was – there was that distinction or was there no distinction 
about, you know, whether the quality was part of what was 
taken into account in saying we will pay so much for this 
coal?  I would have imagined that [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously]. 
DR NTETA:   In the later years the quality was linked to – 
the price was linked to the quality and as we moved 
20 
towards more of a rand per gigajoule contracting, so it was 
linked to the quality, it was also linked to the market. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And at the time of you granting this 
relief, does this fall within those years or does it not fall 
within those years, the time when you granted the relief? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 47 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   It was in the later years.  However, the 
contract was linked to a rand per ton. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   So the contract was signed I think in the 
1960’s.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   I stand to be corrected.  So we were 
operating on an older pricing mechanism within a current 
period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, Mr Seleka? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Dr Nteta 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have – we have not gone on the tea 
break. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We have gone past the tea break.  We 
can take the tea break if somebody feels that they need a 
tea break, otherwise we could take it at 12 o’clock.   Dr 
Nteta, do you need a tea break right now or comfort break?  
Or we can take the break at twelve?  From your side? 
20 
DR NTETA:   You can take the break at twelve, Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am also fine, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   To continue. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 48 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your junior is fine as well. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   She takes the cue from me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Okay, let us continue, we 
will take it at twelve. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Dr Nteta your explanation 
regarding your own temporary relief that you granted must 
have caused the – understood against the background of 
the previous temporary relief, which was given for ten 
months, is it not? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because in fact in your affidavit what 
you are saying is you were not giving them a new – well, 
the essence is you were not giving them a new temporary 
relief, you were extending the existing temporary relief. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So if it was an extension of a ten 
months temporary relief, now you are adding three months 
to it, one wonders whether did you have different reasons 
at a time when you granted yours that were different from 
the reasons that were given to Mr Mabelane, ten months 
20 
before.  I mean, in fact, in December, 2016. 
DR NTETA:   So one of the questions that I asked the coal 
operations 
team 
is 
that 
what 
has 
happened 
since 
December to up to this date, were they not able to resolve 
their issues that they had which was their operational 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 49 of 244 
 
issues and in terms of the area that they were mining.  And 
response that they provided is that they were not able to 
resolve those areas, they are still mining in that particular 
area.  So there will be still be issues in terms of the 
volume.   
 
Now 
for 
those 
kind 
of 
engagements 
and 
understanding I would rely on the people mandated to 
manage the contract to use their judgment and then say 
whether it works or not. 
 
So – and when you talk about in mining operations, 
10 
it can take you three weeks to mine through an area, it can 
take you a year to mine through an area. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but …[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   So in them saying that it had …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, let me interrupt. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because that is a general statement, 
one always has to confine oneself to this particular 
request,  this particular relief that was granted. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The reasons why it was granted and 
why you signed for it instead of making a general last 
statement because it does not assist us know the facts of 
what transpired here. 
DR NTETA:   Specific to this agreement I asked the coal 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 50 of 244 
 
operations department as to what had changed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   yes. 
DR NTETA:   Because they had the temporary relief.  Had 
they gone and mined through the area that they need to 
mine through and the answer was that no, we have not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
DR 
NTETA: 
 
 
They 
still 
have 
challenges 
on 
their 
operations. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So the Chairperson has 
accelerated the matter because it is exactly – I wanted to 
10 
go exactly to where the Chairperson was talking about, 
that – and I just need to make that statement for you, that 
prior to Tegeta taking over, the position of Eskom regarding 
Optimum, 
after 
they 
entered 
into 
that 
cooperation 
agreement and they were also doing, as you quite correctly 
point out, it was a relief.  It was a temporary relief in 
regard to the quality of coal and the values.   
 
However, when Mr Molefe comes on board, he 
terminates that and there is an insistence on the part of Mr 
Molefe and Mr Koko that we want the penalties to be paid 
20 
of 2.17 billion.  You are aware of that? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that is the stance that was 
adopted throughout until Optimum is – the mine is taken 
over by Tegeta and now we see, after that, there is a 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 51 of 244 
 
different attitude on the part of Eskom, they are willing to 
compromise on the coal and the value, the quality and the 
value and for a long period of time, thirteen months.  
Shortly before Tegeta is unable to operate and it goes into 
business rescue.  You see the picture that emerges? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So then – Chair, I will move on.  
Well, just before I do that, the penalties that were imposed, 
you say in November 2017, were those the only penalties 
…[intervenes] 
10 
DR NTETA:   Sorry, I did not hear the question? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The penalties imposed in November 
2017, were those the only penalties imposed, to your 
knowledge, in respect of – in regard to Tegeta? 
DR NTETA:   I do not know, I request that you ask the 
finance department. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  As far as I know, it was the only 
one but I am not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Dr Nteta, paragraph 2, number 2 of your 
letter granting relief, says that in effect, I think, Eskom 
20 
reserves its rights on all penalties and not deduct the 
same.  What did that mean? 
DR NTETA:   So – sorry, I cannot get to that letter now but 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 188. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 52 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   So one of the elements in terms of reserving 
the rights is that though we are providing you with this 
temporary relief we reserve the rights to impose our 
penalties at a – we reserve our rights in terms of the 
contract so that we can institute aspects of the contract, 
which is the clause that I used to then impose the 
penalties, accept that we – because we are reserving our 
rights. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you remember what you and I got to 
understand each on …[intervenes] 
10 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …with regard to the place of penalties 
during a period of temporary relief.  This gives one the 
impression that you, Eskom, would be saying we are 
granting you temporary relief but we reserve the right to 
impose penalties on you for doing exactly what we have 
decided to condone.  That does not seem to make sense to 
me, if that is what it means.  Does it mean that or does it 
mean something else? 
DR NTETA:   That is my understanding because it is an 
20 
open …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to make sure – but just to make 
sure you understand what I mean.  When I read this, I 
understand Eskom to be saying we are granting you 
temporary relief which means you can provide us less 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 53 of 244 
 
volumes of coal, you can provide us a lower quality of coal 
and that conduct on your part would normally be a breach 
of the contract and if you were acting in breach of the 
contract we would be entitled to do a number of things 
including penalties.  Now we are granting you temporary 
relief, we are saying you may do those things but at the 
same time we are saying we are reserving our rights to 
impose penalties.  Is my understanding of what it says 
correct? 
DR NTETA:   It is correct, Sir, which is why I said earlier 
10 
that the suppliers would agree with you because they say 
that you give us this opportunity but you have something 
hanging over our head because you can come back and 
impose. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying, therefore, that although 
this is what is written here, you did not really intend to do 
that because it would not make sense to provide temporary 
relief and still impose penalties? 
DR NTETA:   So the intention was to provide temporary 
relief but we want to ensure that we reserve our rights.  So 
20 
if there is – for whatever reason that comes out in that 
period, if something comes up, we want to be able to still 
institute and impose penalties.  So it is a letter that is 
saying you can – we understand your issues, however, we 
are keeping the door open for ourselves.  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 54 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But did you accept that it does not make 
sense, the two cannot live together during a period where 
you have granted temporary relief? 
DR NTETA:   At the time my thinking, whether it is floored 
or not, was that we need to ensure that we leave the door 
open for Eskom so that they can institute their penalties.  
So that was my thinking at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but as you speak now you can see 
the challenges with that. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I see the challenges of the supplier. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Well, also for Eskom 
because you want to be genuine.  If you grant temporary 
relief genuinely, you cannot be – you cannot grant with one 
hand and take away with the other.  You accept that? 
DR NTETA:   So you are asking a practitioner, a 
procurement practitioner, so I will say I understand it but I 
would also want to leave the door open for my company.  
Yes, I hear you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I – ja, but you understand now 
that although at that time that is how you thought but when 
20 
you – we interrogate it now, you can see where the 
challenges are with having that clause. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 55 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  And, I mean – ja, your penalties, 
the penalties imposed by you, Dr Nteta, if it is you who 
imposed the penalties, it is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe – I am sorry, Mr Seleka, just to 
make sure we round off on this at least as far as my issue 
is concerned, Dr Nteta.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you accept as you testify now that 
where you have granted, as Eskom, where Eskom had 
10 
granted temporary relief to a supplier of coal to in effect 
say I am allowing you to provide me with a lower quality 
coal for this period, Eskom could not subsequently impose 
a penalty on a supplier for supplying Eskom with a lower 
quality in terms of their own temporary relief.  Do you 
accept that it could not do that? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So, therefore, where Eskom 
granted temporary relief such as the temporary relief that 
you granted – and I know you said you did not want to talk 
20 
about Mr Mabelane’s temporary relief but this would also 
apply to his, then in that case where this temporary relief 
was granted, by implication, it meant that the supplier 
would not be visited with penalties for providing Eskom 
with lower quality coal.  You accept that? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 56 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   And, in fact, Dr Nteta, it was not for 
that period. 
DR NTETA:   Pardon? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The supplier was in fact not visited 
with a penalty – penalties for the period of the temporary 
relief. 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  So we did the penalties, I think it was in 
November. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, after that period going forward. 
DR NTETA:   For that month, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But the penalties that you are talking 
about, they did not relate, did they, to the period of 
temporary relief. 
DR NTETA:   So I would have to look in terms of the actual 
period because one of the issues was the volumes that 
they had to ensure that they provided a certain volume 
period.  I do not recall the details in particular but I think 
20 
that they did not but I am not too sure.  So it would be to 
look to those particular requirements in terms of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think you also said at some stage 
something to the effect that you imposed those penalties 
because they did not meet certain conditions that you had 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 57 of 244 
 
imposed for the temporary relief, is that correct? 
DR NTETA:   Ja.  I would like to have a look in terms of the 
penalty that was imposed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR NTETA:   If my memory serves me correctly, there was 
issue I think of the volume.  So that three month period, I – 
and memory, I need to check, they did not provide the 
minimum that they were requested to do. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
So, 
in 
other 
words, 
what 
you 
…[intervenes] 
10 
DR NTETA:   But I would really like to check that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, as the penalties that you 
are talking about that you sought to impose are concerned, 
you would be saying we did not impose penalties in regard 
to conduct on the part of the supplier that we had 
condoned.  We imposed penalties for conduct that we had 
no condoned.  In other words, if they had said we will 
provide 8 000 tons and you had said that is fine, you only 
imposed penalties when they provided less than 8 000, is 
that correct? 
20 
DR NTETA:   I think, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that your understanding? 
DR NTETA:   Like I said, I would like to have a look in 
terms of that, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that would be your understanding. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 58 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   Yes, ja, I think so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  In other words, they would have 
breached the relief that was even given.  So they went 
lower than the relief that was even given and for that they 
would have attracted penalties insofar as they even 
breached the relief that was granted. 
DR NTETA:   Yes insofar as they did breach that relief, 
yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the principle, if your recollection is 
correct, would be we will not impose penalties as long as 
you, the supplier, stay within the ambit of the temporary 
relief but once you go outside of the ambit of the 
temporary relief, namely you – we have agreed that you 
may give us 8 000 instead of 10 000, you then give us 
6 000, then we will impose penalties because you are now 
outside of the relief we have granted but as long as you 
stay within the four corners of the temporary relief we have 
given you, there will be no penalties and as far as quality 
20 
is concerned, if you continue to give us the quality that we 
have said is acceptable to us, for example grade B instead 
of grade A, there will be no penalties.  But if you then 
begin to give us grade C or grade D, then there will be 
penalties.  Those will be the principles as you understand 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 59 of 244 
 
how you would have applied them. 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  And also, within that period we will 
almost like leave you but as soon as that period is finished 
then it is a different discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you go back, ja.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I want to go to a different topic.  
I see it is three minutes before twelve. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Let us take the tea break 
then. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    We take a fifteen minutes tea break.  
We adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue, I see we were not able 
to keep within the two hours that we had agreed upon, but 
that is not your fault Mr Seleka, it is I had lots of questions 
for Dr Nteta which took some time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is not yet up Chair; we still have 
20 
some time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well we started at half past so the two 
hours will be up at half past twelve, we started at half past 
ten, after the technical issue.  So I do not think you will 
finish within fifteen minutes, but let us continue.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 60 of 244 
 
The bottom line is that why we want to finish as 
early, as soon as possible, we do not want to leave issues 
not dealt with properly, we seek to strike a balance 
between not being too slow and taking a lot of time, but at 
the same time being able to do justice to the issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Dr Nteta I want to 
move on to a different aspect which is your second meeting 
with Mr Tony Gupta.  Now that is the meeting that comes 
10 
after the contract with Tegeta in regards to Brakfontein has 
been concluded on the 10 t h of March 2015.   You had the 
first meeting, subsequent to that, you cannot recall exactly 
when, and then you also talk about the second meeting. 
 
Let us now go into that second meeting.  I have a 
question in regard to the address of Tegeta’s premises or 
offices, Tegeta.  The address ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Seleka I missed some of 
the things you said earlier on.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying you going to a second 
meeting she had with Tegeta or at Saxonwold…[intervene]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   With Mr Tony Gupta.  
CHAIRPERSON:   With Mr Tony Gupta? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 61 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   But there was just something I needed 
to clarify with her in regard to the first meeting because of 
the address.  I understand Dr Nteta that the Tegeta’s 
offices are in Sandton, the address is in Sandton? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   And is it correct that you would have 
known that address during the time of engagement with 
them prior to them being given the contract or awarded the 
contract? 
10 
DR NTETA:   No.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   From your communication with them.  
DR NTETA:   So I just – the communication that I had with 
them was basically via email or on the phone or in person.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay now let us go into the 
second meeting.  Could you please tell the Chairperson 
how that meeting came about and what was discussed?  
CHAIRPERSON:   And when it was.  
DR NTETA:   Okay in terms of when it was I cannot recall 
the exact date but with regards to how it came about Mr 
20 
Tony Gupta called me on my cell phone…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry you cannot recall the exact date 
but would you recall the year and month more or less, 
which year was it?  You cannot remember that either.   
DR NTETA:   What I can say it was I cannot remember it 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 62 of 244 
 
would have been after the contract was signed which is 
from March 2015 but I cannot recall exactly when. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that is fine, okay alright 
continue.  
DR NTETA:   So Mr Tony Gupta gave me a call and 
requested that he would like to meet with me.  I indicated I 
would meet with him and the reason why I opted to meet 
with him it is because we have been engaging with the 
CEO who is Mr Ravindra Nath with regards to the current 
coal supply agreement that Tegeta had with Eskom.   
10 
Myself and I do not believe I was alone in that 
thought that that coal supply agreement frankly put it was 
badly written.  It was – there were grammatical errors 
within it and we in terms of fuel sourcing had been looking 
to clean it up and just improve it and also what I had been 
working on with the team was a master coal supply 
agreement which is a standard template.  So also wanting 
to move it into our standard master supply agreement 
template.   
So the team I had requested the team to engage 
20 
with Mr Ravindra Nath the CEO on several occasions and 
there were not getting any traction in terms of that 
agreement and in fact there was almost a stubborn not 
moving.   
They would agree to meet you he would be given 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 63 of 244 
 
the agenda, he would then get to the meeting they would 
discuss issues he would say okay he will attend to it and 
then he would not and this has been going on actually for a 
while for some months.   
So when Mr Tony Gupta requested for the meeting I 
had thought to assist the team in being able to unblock 
because I felt that Mr Nath was acting, was being 
instructed actually not to engage with us and not to do 
anything with the contract.   
So I was hopeful or I can say rather ambitious in 
10 
wanting to then address it with the shareholder to request 
Mr Tony Gupta to actually to instruct his CEO to engage 
with us so that we can then start to access the contract 
and move it towards the master supply agreement.  So 
upon arrival at the residence…[intervene]       
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, just before you move on, Dr Nteta 
just before you move on.  You say Mr Tony Gupta called 
you, telephoned you? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So would you have given him your 
20 
contact details? 
DR NTETA:   No.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So how was he able to telephone you? 
DR NTETA:   I will assume that he would have received the 
number from maybe from Mr Nath, I cannot answer where 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 64 of 244 
 
he got my number from.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Could you have exchanged your details 
with him in your first meeting, could you have? 
DR NTETA:   No.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   When he telephoned you did he tell 
you the reason for asking to meet with you?  
DR NTETA:   So when he called me he indicated that he 
would like to talk to me with regards to the coal supply 
agreement.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes but what about it? 
10 
DR NTETA:   He just said that I would like to talk to you 
about the coal supply agreement.  I will be quite frank and 
say when I received the call it was for me I thought great 
now we can talk about this coal supply agreement and then 
I can request that he ask his CEO to engage with the 
negotiations.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   If he did not tell you the details he just 
mentioned coal supply agreement, did you ask him what 
about the coal supply agreement so that you can prepare 
yourself for the meeting?  
20 
DR NTETA:   No I did not do so because one what was 
forefront in my mind at the time was the difficulty we were 
having with the CEO.  So when I received the call what 
came to my mind immediately was the opportunity to have 
him speak to his CEO because we are not getting any 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 65 of 244 
 
traction.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   By this time which is either in – middle 
2015 or later 2015.  Did you now after your first meeting 
have knowledge of who Mr Tony Gupta was? 
DR NTETA:   I had knowledge of who he was after the first 
meeting, correct.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did you tell your immediate director at 
Eskom that I was called into this meeting and low and 
behold thinking that I was going to meet with Mr Nath it 
was Mr Tony Gupta meeting with me.   
10 
DR NTETA:   So I did not inform my directors sorry my 
immediate bosses with regards to that and quite frankly 
because the environment within Eskom was not one of 
great trust, comfort so I did not.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh I see.  Did you tell anybody 
because you mentioned to him in the first meeting that 
what he wants, the information that he wants falls within 
the primary energy division.  Did you tell anybody within 
that division that there is this enquiry by Mr Tony Gupta?   
DR NTETA:   So I informed yes so I informed the coal 
20 
operations team with regards to – that there seems to be a 
requirement or a query with regards to the management 
and operations of that so they should expect a discussion 
with Mr Nath because at my first meeting I had indicated to 
Mr Gupta that through his CEO he should engage the coal 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 66 of 244 
 
operations people.      
ADV SELEKA SC:   But you did not mention to the division 
that you had a meeting with Mr Tony Gupta?  
DR NTETA:   No, I did not.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay back to the second meeting what 
– you cannot remember when but do you drive again to 
Saxonwold? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I do.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just before that I may have missed 
something Dr Nteta the difficulties to which you have 
10 
alluded that you say that you had or Eskom had with the 
CEO.  Is that the CEO of Tegeta?  
DR NTETA:   Yes it is with the CEO of Tegeta.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And who was the CEO of Tegeta at the 
time?  
DR NTETA:   Mr Ravindra Nath.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, what were those difficulties? 
DR NTETA:   So the difficulty that we were having was in 
regard to him engaging with us on discussing and moving 
the current contract that was signed with them moving it 
20 
towards our master coal supply agreement template and 
cleaning up the grammatical issues that were there in the 
agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there was an agreement that was in 
place already between Eskom and Tegeta?    
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 67 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   There was an agreement, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but there were concerns that you as 
Eskom had about the agreement, is that correct? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, the quality of the agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The quality of the agreement.   
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you wanted Tegeta and Eskom to 
actually adopt another agreement, I think you call it master 
coal agreement or something like that? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, so we wanted to move it to the master 
10 
coal supply agreement template that we had been engaging 
with legal on and we wanted to use it as a template going 
forward 
for 
all 
our 
suppliers 
and 
also 
there 
were 
grammatical issues mistakes in the agreement so it was to 
clean it up.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay and he was – was he reluctant 
to do so or was it just taking long to do what he needed to 
do for the two parties to get to the master agreement?  
DR NTETA:   He was reluctant.  
CHAIRPERSON:   He was reluctant and that is where your 
20 
issues were with him.   
DR NTETA:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright but from what you are 
saying in substance there might not have been a problem 
with the agreement that was in place then but it was simply 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 68 of 244 
 
not the Eskom template agreement and maybe because of 
grammatical 
mistakes 
and 
so 
on 
it 
was 
a 
little 
embarrassing to Eskom.    
DR NTETA:   So yes there was no issue in terms of 
generally – let me not say that.  One of the elements that 
came out there was a PWC audit that was done on a few 
suppliers within the primary energy space and one of the 
things that the PWC audit came up with was in terms of the 
agreement 
the 
quality 
of 
the 
agreement 
and 
their 
recommendation had been that we need to improve it and 
10 
we need to move it towards, we need to improve it and for 
me the suggestion was to move it towards the master 
template that I have been working on.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I would imagine that Eskom would have 
maybe a template would have a precedent an agreement to 
say whenever we are going to conclude the coal agreement 
with a supplier this is the type of agreement we conclude 
and that most of the time the supplier would fit within the 
terms of that standard agreement obviously there maybe be 
changes here and there but most of the time the supplier 
20 
would accept the agreement that Eskom normally uses to 
conclude coal arrangements.  Would that be correct?             
DR NTETA:   Your thinking is correct however there was 
no, excuse me…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want to drink water?  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 69 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   I think I am fine now I needed to clear my 
throat. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, alright.  
DR NTETA:   Your thinking is correct in the sense that 
there should be a standard template that particularly in the 
environment, well a standard template that can be used for 
if I use it as coal supply agreement.   
However, there was no specific template and what 
the practise and what would happen is that we would then 
indicate to legal that we need an agreement in place for 
10 
the supply of coal these are the details in terms of the 
supplier etcetera and we would engage and they would 
engage and draft individual agreements per supplier.   
Whether they in the background had some form of 
template that they would have used in general then you 
would have to ask them.      
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not know, yes.  
DR NTETA:   So what I had said because one of the issues 
is that it would take a lot of time and there would be a lot 
of backwards and forwards.  So I had started working with 
20 
the legal department to come up with that very template 
but we have standard clauses that if there are deviations 
that we get approval from legal for the deviations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this particular agreement with which 
you were not so happy had it been prepared by Eskom’s 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 70 of 244 
 
legal department or had it been prepared by Tegeta or their 
lawyers?   
DR NTETA:   Eskom legal department.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh what had happened they had always 
been preparing these agreements and I assume that the 
quality was fine what happened this time do you know or 
you also do not know what had happened?   
DR NTETA:   I do not know what had happened I have had 
the opportunity last night to read Mr Bester ’s…[intervene]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Affidavit.  
10 
DR NTETA:   Affidavit and in Mr Besters affidavit he 
indicates that he was instructed to get an agreement in 
place within 48 hours.  So I can only deduce based on Mr 
Bester ’s affidavit that that is why the quality was not to my 
standard.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes was not, ja okay I am sorry I 
interrupted.  I just wanted to understand why you were 
welcoming a proposal for a second meeting with Mr Tony 
Gupta so I wanted to understand that.  But back to the 
conversation where Mr Tony Gupta called you…[intervene]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair may I ask something before we 
move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because it is important for yes, Dr 
Nteta if you turn to page 66 paragraph 6.7 just before the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 71 of 244 
 
Chairperson moves onto a different point, paragraph 6.7.  
In the light of the answers that you have given to the 
Chairperson 
regarding 
a 
template 
how 
should 
we 
understand that paragraph?   
That on 7 November 2014 – this is before March 
2015 when the agreement was concluded, you say you sent 
an email to Mr Nath of Tegeta attaching coal supply 
agreement template for their perusal this is a normal 
occurrence particularly for new suppliers that have never 
contracted with Eskom.  So there seems to be a template. 
10 
DR NTETA:   So what I sent through to Mr Nath as I 
indicated to you each engagement that we have with the 
supplier we go to legal and we then indicate to them this is 
– we want to have an agreement with them and they will 
then draft a CSA template or a CSA agreement and then it 
would then get sent.   
But at the time there was no – perhaps it is just my 
thinking there was no signed off coal supply agreement 
that had standard clauses that day or night whoever we are 
dealing with these are the standard clauses that we always 
20 
use.  The legal department would send us a coal supply 
template, sometimes we would simply delete from a 
previous one we would delete the supplier and even send it 
but there was nothing that was for what I believe it should 
be correct is a signed off template.         
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 72 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that may well be so but I 
think…[intervene] 
DR NTETA:   So what I sent to him was something that I 
had received from legal because I had indicated to them 
that we would be what talking to the supplier and it is 
something that is an agreement that should have been 
used for another coal supply agreement.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja but the entire paragraph of your 
affidavit 6.7 conveys the message that this was your 
standard practice or normal practices as you used the word 
10 
in regard to new suppliers.   
So a template was there whether it is signed off or 
not but there is this template that you would share with the 
new supplier prior to the agreement being concluded so 
that 
you 
give 
them 
the 
opportunity 
to 
familiarise 
themselves with what would be the terms of the agreement 
to raise concerns if they so wish and discuss the matter 
with you.      
DR NTETA:   Correct so when I say this was standard in 
terms of new suppliers.  So when we – and when I say with 
20 
standard 
if 
a 
new 
supplier 
is 
engaging 
with 
the 
organisation they have no sight of the type of agreements 
that are in place.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   So what we try and do provide them an 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 73 of 244 
 
example of the type of agreements in place and that is why 
I said the standard, yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes and this is the point.  
DR NTETA:   So…[intervene] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Carry on.  
DR NTETA:   Exactly, yes Sir.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   You can go ahead.  
DR NTETA:   So the issue and the concern that I am trying 
to raise here is that even though we sent them the type of 
agreements in place when we engage with legal they then 
10 
draft and one against the other it is not necessarily all the 
time that it is the same it would depend on who within the 
legal department is drafting the agreement.   
Who within the legal department I could be working 
with as opposed to my colleague and they would then 
provide an agreement but there is nothing that is, what I 
was looking for is something that would come and be 
signed off by the head of legal which is what we always 
should send through because yes.         
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but the point is this that prior to 
20 
the contract being signed on the 10 t h of March 2015 the 
supplier, potential supplier had been given the template of 
a contract about four months before which template you 
would have seen, you created an email attaching the 
template and sending it to the supplier.  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 74 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is surprising that after such a long 
period of time prior to concluding the contract once it is 
concluded it is concluded with mistakes that needed to be 
amended or improved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words why did you not correct it 
before you signed? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, it is surprising. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words why did you not as Eskom 
correct the mistakes before you signed? 
10 
DR NTETA:   So I sent the agreement four months earlier 
as indicated by Advocate Seleka and that is where it is.  
Now when the 48 hours before that Mr Bester refers to 
what could have happened is that when I say they legal 
would have sent an agreement because there would have 
been a request can you send an agreement and then that 
agreement get sent again.   
It does not necessarily mean the same agreement 
that was sent four months ago is the same agreement that 
was sent later because there is no generic signed off 
20 
template.  So the question is why would it not be corrected 
and not been fixed before it was signed.  I am going to 
then deduce from the information from Mr Bester the 48 
hours is that there was a rush to sign that particular 
agreement and the legal department did not thoroughly go 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 75 of 244 
 
through 
the 
agreement 
because 
the 
element 
of 
the 
agreement would be something that – it is within the 
domain of legal and I do not want to answer that particular 
aspect.   
So what I observed on after the fact is that there is 
grammatical issues in it and what grammatical issues led 
us move to what the journey that we are taking to go to a 
master coal supply agreement template that is signed off 
by legal.         
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know what the grounds of 
10 
urgency were that justified imposing this 48 hours’ period 
within which it had been signed and from what you are 
saying it looks like that imposition that period might not 
have been imposed by Eskom maybe it was imposed by 
Tegeta.   
Do you know what reasons were given why it had to 
be rushed like this in circumstances where four months 
earlier or even five months earlier you had sent a template 
to Tegeta that being ample time for both sides to look at 
the agreement correct whatever mistakes and sign it.  Do 
20 
you know what reasons were given for this 48 hours’ 
ultimatum?    
DR NTETA:   No I do not know because I was not given the 
reasons as I indicated, as I had an opportunity to look at 
Mr Bester ’s affidavit that is where I then see that he was 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 76 of 244 
 
requested within 48 hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright Mr Seleka.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, take us then Dr Nteta into your 
second meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, before the second meeting let us go 
to the conversation arranging the second meeting.    
DR NTETA:   Yes, as I indicated he gave me…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did the two of you agree what the venue 
would be for your meeting that is Tony Gupta and yourself? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, so he requested that I come through to 
10 
Saxonwold and to discuss the coal supply agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you agreed?   
DR NTETA:   Yes, and I agreed.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Why did you agree to go to him rather 
than him coming to you? 
DR NTETA:   The reason why I agreed to go…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You had already been there before in 
terms of the first meeting.  I would normally have expected 
that a supplier who wants to have an agreement with 
Eskom comes to Eskom you know generally but I will allow 
20 
for the fact that there may be circumstances where you 
might say let us meet at a neutral venue maybe even let us 
meet at the supplier ’s place.  But I would have normally 
have expected that Eskom would say you come to us you 
know but here you had already been there first time why do 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 77 of 244 
 
you agree to go to the venue to be there venue second 
time around?     
DR NTETA:   I concede with you that we normally would 
meet - at Eskom we would sometimes meet suppliers at a 
neutral venue at the financiers’ etcetera.  We do that.  And I 
also concede to you it is not this practice that to do so. At 
the time I was just hoping that I would be able to resolve the 
matter and unblock – and which is why I agreed.  But I will 
concede that it general we should [00:00:20] at Eskom only. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  I thought the Chairperson might 
also be interested in this.  When I asked Dr Nteta whether 
you 
mentioned 
to 
anyone 
particularly 
your 
immediate 
superiors at Eskom that you had a meeting with Mr Tony 
Gupta the first time around you said no you did not because 
of issues of trust.   
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You think you can elaborate on that? 
DR NTETA:  Yes I can.  So in the lead up to the initial 
agreement if you – the Brakfontein agreement. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  I had been engaging with the supplier for about 
I do not know about 12/18 months prior to that.  From the 
time of about January 2015 when my immediate supervisor 
joined us for the meeting with Tegeta – from that time from 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 78 of 244 
 
January 2018 to I will say until about March there was 
continued – there was continued requests that – from the 
senior General Manager for me to be providing weekly 
reports with regards to the progress on the transactions 
etcetera. And for me it built a level of lack of trust or lack of 
understanding of the genuineness of the engagement and I 
at the time when I was meeting I did not know that if I then 
go and let us say complain or inform my superiors that you 
;know I have had this meeting or I am trying to you know for 
whatever reason I did not feel that they would then support 
10 
me and – and it might be detrimental to – to myself and my 
job. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am not sure that I follow that.  As I 
understand it Mr Seleka’s question was whether you shared 
with the information with anybody that you were going to 
have a meeting with Mr Tony Gupta – the second meeting.  Is 
that correct Mr Seleka 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That she had the – that she had the first 
meeting with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  So your answer is yes you did 
20 
not tell anybody. 
DR NTETA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right? 
DR NTETA:  Yes correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say the reason why you did not 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 79 of 244 
 
tell anybody was because the environment at Eskom at that 
time was such that the – you did not trust.  What did you not 
trust that is what I want to get? 
DR NTETA:  I did not trust the people that I worked with at 
Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DR NTETA:  I did not trust that I would get the support for 
what I would want to do at Eskom.  That is the trust that I did 
not have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the – the one person one could 
10 
expect you to share the information with would have been 
your immediate boss, is that correct? 
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And at that time who was that? 
DR NTETA:  My immediate boss at that time was Mr 
Mboweni. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mboweni.  You say you did not trust 
that they could support you.  What kind of support are you 
talking about?  You were going to have a sitting with Mr – 
well Mr Nath this is the first meeting which ended up being 
20 
with Mr Tony Gupta.  What support are you talking about that 
you thought they would not give you? 
DR NTETA:  So my immediate boss was Mr Mboweni.  Prior 
to when he was signing the agreement he had requested that 
I provide him with weekly reports.  I did not understand 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 80 of 244 
 
where, why and where those reports were going and why.  So 
I was not feeling comfortable.  I did not know quite frankly 
you know where he stands.  So in answering you in terms of 
the person you should have told immediately would be Mr 
Mboweni.  I was not comfortable in understanding what 
would happen to me and sharing with – the information.  The 
kind of support that I am also talking about. 
 
So for the second meeting we from the field sourcing 
division were wanting to open the contract and engage with 
the contract and the supplier was not known.  So I did not 
10 
know as to whether there would be support for us to fix that 
contract or they would then say leave it alone.  And I just felt 
that it needed to move to a master supply agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you believe that there was a risk that if 
you shared this information with Mr Mboweni he could ask 
you not to pursue the line that you wanted to pursue about 
the contract or did you believe that he might give information 
to Tegeta that you did not want to be given to Tegeta except 
through yourself at the right time or both? 
DR NTETA:  I would say it would be both in terms of just a 
20 
lack of general trust and comfort.  I also believed that I could 
potentially lose my job and they could look for something or 
you know for reason to do so.  So it was not – it was not a 
pleasant environment in which to work on and there was 
fear. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 81 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is it that you thought they would fire 
for? 
DR NTETA:  Sir I do not know what they would fire me for 
but just judging in terms of the corporate environment they 
can be anything that – they can look for something.  So I 
cannot say I thought it was X or Y but I just felt that it is not 
something – they would then decide to make my – my time 
there very unpleasant or find reason to fire me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you believe at the time that Mr 
Mboweni was in one way or another on the side of Tegeta or 
10 
the Gupta’s on certain issues between Eskom and Tegeta? 
DR NTETA:  I did not know.  At the time I did not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  You see I am trying to understand 
your reasons for not sharing the information with him and the 
issue of the absence of trust that you have talked about – 
that you did not trust him.  Because if you told him that you 
had just been to a meeting with Tony Gupta and this is what 
happened you thought you had an arrangement to meet with 
Mr Nath and this is what happened.  I do not see on the face 
of that anything that should make you think if you shared 
20 
that information with him you could be fired.  So that is why I 
am trying to understand why would you think along the lines 
of losing your job if you simply shared the information with 
him that you had been to a meeting with Mr Tony Gupta and 
this is what happened. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 82 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:  The reason why I would feel that way as I 
indicated before he had been requesting me earlier to give 
him weekly reports.  What – face value would be that why 
would somebody need weekly reports?  Where is it going?  
Why is it going?  And if it is not something that should be 
requested why is he not in a position to indicate to whoever 
is requesting those reports that they will not be forthcoming.  
So I did not feel that even in his position he was able to 
resist any pressures that he was getting and what would 
happen is that instead of protecting myself or people within 
10 
the division what simply happened is that then we would then 
be – I am going to use a strong word “persecuted”.  So the 
environment though it is – what I am trying to share with you 
is that it was not pleasant.  It was toxic and there was lack 
of trust within the organisation.  So whether it is my 
immediate supervisor or someone up – people within above 
him there was a lack of trust in terms that I had. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you think that Mr …. 
DR NTETA:  So sharing with him – yes Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes continue, continue. 
20 
DR NTETA:  So sharing with him in terms of meeting with 
them and you know the irritation that I felt I did not feel that 
it is something that would remain between the two of us and 
it was a safe environment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you – are you saying that what you did 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 83 of 244 
 
not want to share with him is that fact that you were irritated 
by what had happened but it would not be in the sharing of 
information that you had had a meeting with Tony Gupta that 
you had a problem with.  In other words you – the part you 
did not want to share with him is that you were irritated. 
DR NTETA:  No the part that I did not want to share was: 
1.  That I was irritated. 
2.  That I had had a meeting with Mr Gupta. 
3. It was you know under the guise of reaching with the 
supplier. 
10 
I did not want to share with him because I did not know the 
implications.  At the time I did not know.  If he was aware of 
it I did not know if they – if he was aware that they were 
going to ask for it.  I did not know.  Because we did not know 
where information was going, what was the consequences of 
it etcetera.  So that is why I did not feel safe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you think that he would not have liked 
the idea of you having met with Mr Tony Gupta? 
DR NTETA:  I do now know.  As I – I do not know whether if 
he would not have liked it or he would have been upset that 
20 
within fifteen minutes I left.  You know I do not know.  I did 
not know where he stood.  I was uncomfortable about it and 
yes.  So I did not know.  Whether even if he was aware and I 
did not know but I did not feel comfortable and I did not feel 
safe. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 84 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But how would you report to him seeing 
that he was your immediate boss?  How would you report to 
him on progress about this matter if you were not going to 
tell him that you had had a meeting with Mr Tony Gupta?  
How could you report to him? 
DR NTETA:  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Be a reasonable one or accurate one if you 
are going to not tell him about such a meeting. 
DR NTETA:  So I would report to him in terms of the 
progress on various transactions.  It is not – the reporting to 
10 
him on the transactions is not – it was not regular meetings 
where 
I 
would 
run 
him 
through 
various 
transactions.  
Because we – we dealt with quite a few transactions.  So the 
– it was – it is not a – the repertoire that we had it was not a 
regular you know one on one meetings.  Just quite purely 
because of the share volume of his responsibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he know that you were uncomfortable 
with the agree – with the existing agreement and that you 
wanted the parties to move to what you called I think Master 
Coal Agreement.  Did he know that you had that problem 
20 
with the existing agreement?  Did you share that with him? 
DR NTETA:   I do not – I do not – I cannot recall if he knew 
but he may have known because if I indicated to you TWC 
provided a report on it.  So I cannot answer.  I cannot 
answer if we knew at the time. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 85 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  If he did know do you know whether he 
would have known because you told him or he might have 
known from other sources? 
DR NTETA:  So he might – like I have indicated he might 
have known having – because the TWC report would have 
been sent to him.  So through reading it he would have then 
picked up that the agreement needed to be improved. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DR NTETA:  I do not – I do not recall having a discussion 
with him specifically on that.  Ja I – ja I do not recall but he 
10 
– I am going to – I know that the report was sent to him.  I 
cannot answer to you whether he read the report or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is lunchtime Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know I interrupted you.  We – we are 
three minutes – four minutes past one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if there are two or three questions that 
you then should not wait for after lunch you can deal with 
them but if you … 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No I think I am fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are fine we could adjourn at this stage. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I am fine Chairperson.  It will be the next 
issue, the next issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 86 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja so … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe should we try if we can and 
finish with the content of the second meeting or is that – how 
long do you think that will take? 
DR NTETA:  Can we do – yes I would accept that proposal 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja let us do that ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Dr Nteta just before we go on a 
break just go into the second meeting then and what gets to 
be discussed in that meeting? 
10 
DR NTETA:  So what gets to be discussed is that one of the 
issues that – that Mr Gupta asked me about was to – looking 
at the – he was interested in the difference between the med 
– what we call medium term coal supply agreements so 
which Tegeta falls within and also interested in terms of a 
cost plus agreements.  Cost plus contracts which is where 
the traditional agreements that were signed in about 1960’s.  
So he was interested to understand what are the differences 
between the two, who gets a cost supply agreement, who 
gets a medium term supply agreement, why do we no longer 
20 
move provide cost plus agreements?  So those are the 
contents of the discussion that we had.  Also the content of 
the discussion is that I raised with him I said we – speaking 
of your medium term agreement we would like to move it to 
template and we feel that your CEO is not – is not engaging 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 87 of 244 
 
us on it and requesting that he instruct his CEO to engage 
with us on it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Okay. 
DR NTETA:  That is the content of the discussion. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  You give us some of that content on 
page 83 of Eskom Bundle 14 paragraph 9.6.  What I picked 
up as you go there between the first and the second meeting 
is that which is one thing you have left out in your 
explanation.  There is one commonality there the sampling 
process.  Coal sampling.  It was discussed in the first 
10 
meeting.  It is also discussed in this meeting. 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  So in the discussion in looking in terms of 
the two the coal sampling that happens more on the cost 
plus agreements is because those mines have a conveyor 
directly to the power station that they are feeding.  So the 
sampling process is – is different because there is not 
necessarily stock piles.  Whereas in the medium term 
agreement there are – the coal is mined – it is placed on a 
stock pile and then it is sampled and the samples are taken 
to labs etcetera.  So looking in terms – so those are the 
20 
differences in terms of the two agreements.  When I was 
saying – I was asking in terms of what are the differences 
etcetera and also discussed looking in terms of why is the 
case that on the cost plus they do not have stock piles 
etcetera. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 88 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But does this discussion not make you 
uncomfortable? 
DR NTETA:  The discussion about the cost – the cost plus 
elements? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No what Mr Tony Gupta… 
DR NTETA:  The discussion in general? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes with Mr Tony Gupta is seeking to 
discuss with you does it not make you uncomfortable? 
DR NTETA:  It makes me uncomfortable and it raises 
concern. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  It raised a concern to me in terms of also upon 
leaving because it was also a very short meeting.  Was 
because I then said to myself I was wondering if they were 
looking to move towards a cost plus arrangement because 
they are currently in a medium term agreement.  So I made a 
note to myself that you know be prepared that if they then do 
decide to open this agreement because I was hopeful that 
they would that they might want to then change the 
agreement in totality and move it towards a cost plus 
20 
agreement because of – asking in terms of how those 
mechanisms work. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes but the point I am making with you is 
this.  You said one of the reasons why you did not tell your 
immediate boss is that you do not know what he might say 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 89 of 244 
 
about you meeting with a supplier. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And that is where my focus is.  But here 
you are. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  An employee of Eskom.  You go out of 
your office.  This is not a weekend on a Saturday you mind 
your business – you are on duty. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And you come being called from your 
10 
office.  You go to this – to the man at his private residence 
to discuss matters of your work. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is my question does that not make 
you uncomfortable?  Is that not something that you in fact 
could have been disciplined about? 
DR NTETA:  I cannot answer as to whether I could have 
been disciplined about with regards to that because in terms 
of meeting with suppliers leaving our place of work that is 
something that – that does happen.  I indicated at the 
20 
beginning of this discussion to the Chair that I concede that 
it is not best practice and go and meet a supplier outside of 
the organisation.  I concede to that fact. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
DR NTETA:  Whether it was done and in terms of a practice 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 90 of 244 
 
at Eskom it is because not only myself but even our seniors 
meet suppliers outside of the premises of Eskom.  And it is 
not best practice.  Making me feel uncomfortable yes I did 
feel uncomfortable.  One of the elements that I was also 
uncomfortable about is that where did he learn about cost 
plus agreements? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  You know so – and how much information does 
he know?  Is he verifying this?  So those are the kinds of 
things and I just said to myself I need to be – the team 
10 
needs to be wary that if we are going to open these 
agreements that might be something that comes up. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well do – do you agree that the fact that 
you did not share with – or maybe let me ask this question 
first.  We know that you did not share with anybody the – 
within Eskom the fact of your meeting – first meeting with Mr 
Tony Gupta, is that right? 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja at least not with your immediate boss?  
20 
At least not with your immediate boss. 
DR NTETA:  Yes not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ja. 
DR NTETA:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that what happened also in regard to the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 91 of 244 
 
second meeting with Mr Gupta?  Did you also not share it 
with your immediate boss? 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  Yes I did not share with my immediate 
boss. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you share it with other people within 
Eskom? 
DR NTETA:  No I did not share with anyone within Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  I did not share with my immediate boss. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
DR NTETA:  But I did not share with anybody period. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Would you not concede that therefore 
it makes your two meetings with Mr Tony – this makes your 
two meetings with Mr Tony Gupta to really be secret 
meetings within the context of Eskom.  You did not want 
anybody within Eskom to know about these two meetings you 
had with Mr Tony Gupta.  So you kept them as a secret to 
yourself.  What do you say to that? 
DR NTETA:  I – yes I concede that I did not tell anyone at 
Eskom. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  That I met with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  And I kept it to myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 92 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:  Correct.  I did not feel comfortable and I did not 
trust. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay maybe we should adjourn at 
this stage.  We will adjourn at this stage Dr Nteta.  It is 
about twelve minutes past one we will resume at quarter past 
two.  We adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is a lunch adjournment Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:  Thank you I… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You can make your way by twelve 
minutes past two or ten past two. 
10 
DR NTETA:  Will – will do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you. 
DR NTETA:  Thank you. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, before we proceed.  Where are 
we with regard to the witness who was scheduled for today? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He is around.  They have gone out for 
20 
lunch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is around? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  That is Mr Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Koko? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 93 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And his legal representatives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   His legal representatives as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Should we not talk about what is to 
happen ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   With regard to that before we proceed? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I think so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because there should be certainty about 
10 
what is going to happen. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, are they outside at the moment? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, they are out for lunch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m?  Ja, out? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Outside for lunch, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe somebody could call them in.  
And once they are in, then we will stop. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then discuss what is going to happen.  
20 
So in the meantime, you can continue but once they are in, 
you can indicate to me.  Then we can ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Certainly.  Chair, I think we are done 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 94 of 244 
 
with the second meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we are done.  But let me ask this 
question Dr Nteta.  You asked Mr Tony Gupta to instruct his 
CEO to cooperate, as I understand it, with Eskom with 
regard to moving to a Master Coal Agreement.  Is that right?  
That is what you said, you asked him to do? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was his response to that request? 
DR NTETA:   He said he will do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Do you – did the CEO of Tegeta 
10 
subsequently behave in a manner that suggested that he had 
been instructed to do so? 
DR NTETA:   No.  So to answer you.  The agreement was 
never changed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That agreement was never changed? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you speak to the CEO after your 
meeting with Tony Gupta with regard to amending the 
agreement or changing it, and if so, what was his attitude? 
DR NTETA:   I did so on several occasions.  And he 
20 
indicated that he would but the team never progressed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was there a problem from Eskom’s team 
as such now or as opposed to a problem on his side or do 
you not know where the problem was now? 
DR NTETA:   The problem was always from the – the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 95 of 244 
 
beginning from the supplier’s side.  So the Eskom team that 
was working on it, continually tried to move that agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay alright.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Sorry, a 
question came to mind as you were asking the questions.  
Now it is slipping my mind.  Dr Nteta, I would like us to look 
at the – before I go into the pre-payment.  There is a 
meeting on the 24 t h of November 2015 which you attended.  
Can you recall that?   
 
This meeting – in that meeting, it was yourself, Mr Koko, 
10 
Ms Daniels on behalf of Eskom and the representatives from 
Tegeta ...[indistinct] [00:04:41] and representatives from 
...[indistinct] 
[00:04:41] 
[background 
noise 
interference 
present]  You recall that meeting? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can you tell the Chairperson how it 
came about that you were invited to the meeting and who 
invited you? 
DR NTETA:   I recall the meeting.  I will confess that I recall 
a meeting more from the documents that I got sight of which 
20 
enabled me to recall the meeting.  With regards to how I got 
invited, I am not – I cannot remember if I was asked verbally 
or if there was a meeting requested.  I cannot remember 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 96 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   ...how I got the invitation to the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   what meeting was that Mr Seleka?  I have 
missed your question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This meeting...  Chair, what gets to be 
discussed in that meeting is Glencore introducing Tegeta 
Oakbay as the potential buyer.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is a meeting involving Eskom, 
Glencore and Tegeta? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And Tegeta. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Where about in terms of year, month? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is 25 November 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  I think, Dr Nteta may be seeking to 
refer to it.  In paragraph 8.2 of your affidavit Dr Nteta on 
page 71.  Eskom Bundle 14, page 71.  Except that your date 
is different here.  Unless if you are talking about a different 
meeting in paragraph 8.2.  
DR NTETA:   So I believe that we are talking about the same 
20 
meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   As I have indicated to you, is that, my 
recollection 
is 
more 
from 
having 
seen 
subsequent 
documents.  So when I was saying it was in December 2015, 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 97 of 244 
 
it may have been in November, end of November. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. So ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   But in reference to the participants that you are 
speaking to like December 2015, is regarding that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   With regard that meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  Let me cut to the chase by saying 
this to you.  What I wanted to find out from you is why you 
were invited to that meeting, who invited you and what was 
your role in that meeting?  There is one particular aspect 
10 
about that meeting which I want you to address the 
Chairperson on.  And I will come to is.  So it is, who invited 
you, why were you invited and what was your role in that 
meeting? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before she answers.  Have we got the – 
Mr Koko and his lawyers around already or not?  Are they all 
there? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I see it is only Mr Koko present.  
They are outside.  Ja, Mr Koko, if you do not mind.  Please 
call them in.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Let us continue in the 
meantime. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Ja, those three questions Dr Nteta, 
if you can recall. 
DR NTETA:   As I have indicated.  I do not recall who invited 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 98 of 244 
 
me to that meeting.  I was present.  Correctly, I was present 
in the meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   My understanding or my recollection is that I 
would have been invited because it had to do with coal 
supply and working with the Fuel Source Department of 
Primary Energy.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
DR NTETA:   I cannot recall the third question.  Sorry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The third question is, what role did you 
10 
play in the meeting? 
DR NTETA:   Okay.  So.  And I am going to indicate that, I 
am having read documents to refresh my memory.  So some 
of this is based on what I read but I do not recall if there was 
a formal indication as to my role.  But one of the things was 
to take minutes and I think Mr Koko’s affidavit, it was taking 
minutes.  I cannot recall. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   But to take minutes of that particular meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Well, if you cannot recall, that is 
20 
fine.  I think we will deal with the contents of the meeting in 
more detail when the other witnesses come.  But briefly, this 
meeting comes against the background Chairperson of 
negotiations for Tegeta to acquire Optimum.   
 
Optimum is in business rescue and there is an offer to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 99 of 244 
 
buy it from Oakbay/Tegeta but as that point – and Dr Nteta 
you should also confirm this – as that point, the sale is or 
the contemplated acquisition is only in respect of OCM, 
Optimum Coal Mine, not the holding company. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not the holding company, Optimum 
Holdings.  But the minutes ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  The minutes...  Ja, I get a 
note, the transcribers are saying there is a background noise 
10 
or that they cannot hear the witness. 
DR NTETA:   By me? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry.  They cannot hear the witness 
when she testifies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The transcribers...  Where ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Can they not hear me because my voice is 
soft?  Should I bring the mic closer?  Is this better? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I suspect it is some other technical 
issue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where is Reverend Stimela?  He is not 
here.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   He is not here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Transcribers, are you not able to hear the 
witness but you can hear everybody else?   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 100 of 244 
 
TRANSCRIBERS:  [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that so? 
TRANSCRIBERS:  [No audible reply] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So we may need to ...[intervenes]  
TRANSCRIBERS:  There is no sound. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...adjourn for them to fix that.  We may 
need to adjourn for them to fix that but before we adjourn, let 
us – address me on the issue of the witness who was 
scheduled for today, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see Mr Barrie is here. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Representing Mr Koko and Mr Koko is 
here. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Barrie, we are still busy with the 
witness who started yesterday but I thought that we need to 
stop that and Mr Seleka can address me with regard to what 
the position is with regard to the witness scheduled for 
today, your client, so that there can be certainty about what 
20 
is going to happen.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka.  Firstly, I think the first thing 
is, how long you think you still need with this witness. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 101 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then you can address the question of 
what is going to happen with regard to Mr Koko.  Are you 
going to be able to proceed or what is the position? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chair, I think with this – with 
Dr Nteta, going into the issue of pre-payment, we might take 
an hour on that issue to an hour/30 minutes.  So that is 
going to take us to roughly, what, half-past three to four.  
That is the first thing. 
 
Mr Koko, as I understand, was ready to proceed today 
and we were ready to proceed with his evidence.  I know that 
10 
there are documentation they are exchanging with us but I 
suppose that does not stand in the way of us, if we are able 
to proceed, to do so.  If not in full, at least in part.  Because 
I know that the Chairperson’s hands are full and I am mindful 
of that as well.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  What did you say about – was there 
any issue about 3.3. Notices in regard to Mr Koko’s 
evidence? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We have – there was that issue in 
December.  The beginning of the year as well.  Chairperson, 
20 
the Eskom work stream has attended to the 3.3. Notices.  So 
insofar as persons may have been implicated or are – may 
be implicated by what Mr Koko has to say, those people have 
been notified.  So we have picked it back on our previous 
notifications and done fresh notices for the people who we 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 102 of 244 
 
see might be implicated in Mr Koko’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Rule 3.3. contemplates that anybody 
who is implicated in statement by a witness who is going to 
give evidence, should be given a notice of the existence of 
that statement or affidavit and should be given the relevant 
portions, at least, of the statement.   
 
And then the second part is that, of course, the 3.3. 
Notice tells him or her, her rights or his rights.  And then the 
next part is that he or she should be notified of the date 
when the witness will testify. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For quite some time what has happened is 
that Rile 3.3. Notices would be served even if the date when 
the witness would be – would testify is not known yet but 
once the date is known then the witnesses – the implicated 
person is notified.  So if that has been taken care of then 
there has been compliance.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that been taken care of? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chairperson, Mr Koko has come 
20 
previously to testify.  He has come on two occasions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He has given us or the Commission two 
affidavits.  The second of which is a comprehensive affidavit.  
It includes all the matters. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 103 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So his affidavits would have already 
been shared ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...with whoever is implicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or thought to be implicated by his 
evidence previously. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Already. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So right now, it would simple be, Mr 
Koko is coming back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And this time around, he will be 
testifying on this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You already have the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You will be notified of the next date, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So from your side.  Once this witness is 
done and you estimate that might be at half-past three or 
four. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 104 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then you would be ready to proceed with 
Mr Koko.  And in terms of how much time is required for him, 
how much time is required for his evidence on your 
assessment? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  We have scheduled Mr Koko for 
the whole day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For the whole day? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So you think what is necessary is 
10 
the whole day? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if we start when we are done with this 
witness, we could go up to a certain point and then 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   We will have to reconvene. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 And 
then 
maybe, 
subject 
to 
their 
availability, maybe continue tomorrow to finish before we 
take tomorrow’s witness. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Barrie, you have heard what the 
situation is now.  What is your attitude? 
ADV BARRIE:   I have no particular attitude regarding the 
issue, apart from the fact that we have arranged to be here 
today but not tomorrow.  We have no idea that there is any 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 105 of 244 
 
possibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE:   This is not a rolling ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, no.  We – I said 
...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I talked about tomorrow on the basis of 
saying if you are available. 
ADV BARRIE:   I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Obviously, you have not been told about 
10 
tomorrow. 
ADV BARRIE:   I go back to the Western Province tomorrow 
morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No.  So you would be available that 
...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We us whatever time is available today 
but if we do not finish, then another date would have be 
arranged. 
ADV BARRIE:   As you pleases. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright. 
ADV BARRIE:   Chairman, there is just another issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE:   My colleague here, is in relation to the issue 
of the Eskom application to cross-examine.  It would be 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 106 of 244 
 
appropriate for some arrangements to be made about that 
particular issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have been told by Mr Seleka about an 
Eskom application for leave to cross-examine.  I have not 
seen it.  So it must be somewhere within the secretariat’s 
offices.  And I indicated that I cannot say anything about that 
until I have seen it and read it.  So obviously, that is not 
your fault that it has not reached me.  I have asked Mr 
Seleka to speak to the secretariat to make sure that I get it 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV BARRIE:   Well, we oppose the application.  There are 
reasons.  But we will probably have to deliver a short 
answering affidavit to the affidavit that was delivered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE:   That is besides Mr Koko as a party. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE:   Which we can do.  It is just a question of 
arranging the logistics and when that application will be 
heard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the process is that once an 
20 
application for cross-examine a witness has been lodged, the 
person lodging that application, I think, is supposed to serve 
on the witness of the application.  But in any event, if they 
do not do that, the secretariat would check whether a copy 
has been served on the witness. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 107 of 244 
 
ADV BARRIE:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if it has not been served, then 
...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE:   That has indeed happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE:   We do have the application, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  And I think then the rules are 
supposed to indicate within what period the witness should 
file an answering affidavit if they oppose.  But if they do not 
do that, namely the rules, then I should issue directions as 
10 
to when that application should be filed.  But as I say, it has 
not reached me.  So I did not know about it until 
...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE:   I am not aware of any provisions of the rules 
that make ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, there might not be. 
ADV BARRIE:   ...a particular provision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There might not be anything in the rules.  
Well, you already have the ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You already have the application.  Why do 
we not deal that now?  Can you find your answering affidavit 
within seven days – how many days from now? 
ADV BARRIE:   We would be able to, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let us take that as the direction as to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 108 of 244 
 
when to file. 
ADV BARRIE:   Ja, the real issue relates actually to the date 
of the hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV BARRIE:   The real issue relates to the date of the – 
when the application will be argued. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, but we need to have all the 
papers in first.  Then we can talk about the date for hearing.  
Some of the applications, we do not have oral argument.  We 
just ask the parties to file the argument and then I decide in 
10 
chambers.  So.  But I take if you on that, once I see all the 
papers.   
 
So I think file your answering affidavit within seven 
calendar days from today and Eskom should then file their 
replying affidavit if they wish to do so within seven days 
after you have filed yours. 
ADV BARRIE:   Ja, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
ADV BARRIE:   But the upside of all of that is, apart from 
20 
the Eskom application, we will stay here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay.  Ja, ja.  Stay.  Stay here.  
Obviously, the Commission’s legal team, if they want to 
oppose, then they must also file within seven days if they 
want to oppose, within seven days from today. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 109 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is the order Chair.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Okay.  Let us continue 
then. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The technical issue 
has been sorted out.  They can now hear the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Dr Nteta, yes.   
DR NTETA:   Thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  And then in regard to that meeting, 
quickly back to that meeting.  As at the time – as at – or 
10 
prior to that meeting, what was on the table between the 
parties negotiating for the sale of OCM, it was that only OCM 
was to be sold.  Do you recall that or you have no 
recollection? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, when the meeting commenced, we were 
discussing OCM. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   Optimum Coal Mine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And in that meeting, in particular in 
regard to the sale, the minute indicates that Mr Koko then 
20 
advised the other parties that Eskom will consent to the sale, 
and I paraphrase, only if OCH Assets are also – are to be 
sold. 
DR NTETA:   I am silent because I do not recall the details.  
So I will take it that the minutes would be a true reflection 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 110 of 244 
 
unless otherwise indicated.  For example, who suggest OCH, 
et cetera.  Personally, I do not recall it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You do not recall it? 
DR NTETA:   But I will take...  Ja, but I will take that the 
minutes reflects the discussions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  But you have seen both the 
affidavit of Mr Koko and Ms Daniels? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I have seen them.  Mr Koko’s I received 
last night.  So I did not – and it is 1040 pages.  So I did not 
go through everything. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And Ms Daniels?  Because she 
also talks about this. 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  Yes.  And that is where most of my 
recollection comes from and I am relying on the information 
that she has indicated there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see.  Okay we will deal with the matter 
with them when they come in due course.  Let us go to the 
pre-payment.  The R 659 million pre-payment that the BTC 
resolved to make on the evening of the 9 t h... of the 11t h of 
March 2016.   
20 
DR NTETA:   11t h of April? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   11 April 2016.  Thank you, Dr Nteta.  
This decision that gets to be made by the Board, Tender 
Committee starts with the drafting of a submission which 
...[intervenes]  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 111 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Which you started. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But then something would have triggered 
the drafting of that submission.  And I want you to tell the 
Chairperson about what triggered the drafting of that 
submission. 
DR NTETA:   The drafting of the submission emanated from 
a discussion that I had – was several discussions that I had 
with Mr Ravindra Nath who is the CEO of Tegeta.  They were 
10 
currently supplying coal and the agreement for that was due 
to an end(?).  He indicated that they have access to the coal 
and they would like to continue supplying Eskom with the 
coal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  Just pause there for a moment. 
DR NTETA:   And as a ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just pause there for a moment.  Now we 
know that Tegeta, at this time, this is April 2016, it has an 
agreement, a coal supply agreement with Eskom in respect 
of Brakfontein Mine.   
20 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That agreement was concluded on the 
10t h of March 2015.  So that is the year before this. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now Mr Nath is coming back to you in 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 112 of 244 
 
respect of a contract for a different mine. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And which mine is this? 
DR NTETA:   Optimum Coal Mine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And when he comes to you, then I 
think you can tell the Chairperson when exactly does he 
come to you and what is he saying to you? 
DR NTETA:   So Mr Nath – came to me – I am not going to 
– I do not know the exact date but I am going to say 
around about end of March, beginning of April when we had 
10 
discussions with regards to coal from Optimum Coal Mine, 
at that discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you – I am sorry? 
DR NTETA:   Should I continue? 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you mention the month please 
always mention the year as well because we deal with 
different years so that we are all on the same page as to 
March of which year that you are talking about. 
DR NTETA:   March 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, continue. 
20 
DR NTETA:   So we had a discussion with regards to 
availability of coal for them to supply to Eskom and there 
were few discussions that we had.  Adv Seleka, I have 
actually forgotten the question, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, please repeat the question, Mr 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 113 of 244 
 
Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh.  Yes, what – okay, you have 
indicated when does he approach you and I think you have 
touched about – you have touched a bit on what does he 
discuss with you but go a little bit in the details.  Here is 
Mr Nath, how does he communicate with you?  Is it 
telephonically or is coming to see you and go into the 
details of what he is asking you. 
DR NTETA:   So the discussion that I had with him were 
both telephonic and also meeting with him in terms of the 
10 
discussion also because that would be the nature of the 
engagements that  I would have with him on the supply, 
either telephonically or meeting with him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or in person? 
DR NTETA:   And both. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Meeting in person? 
DR NTETA:   Meeting in person, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And where do you meet? 
DR NTETA:   So the …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Where do you meet with him?   
20 
DR NTETA:   We meet …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is not Saxonwold? 
DR NTETA:   At Eskom.  No, at Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  So he comes to Eskom. 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  So the discussion …[intervenes] 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 114 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Speak up, Mr Seleka, your voice is very 
soft. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So raise your voice. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So Mr Nath comes to Eskom to meet 
with you. 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  So the majority of the engagements that 
I would have with Mr Nath would actually be telephonic, he 
would 
sometimes 
come 
through 
to 
Eskom. 
 
So 
in 
responding to your question in terms of the engagements 
10 
that we had that led up to the drafting of the submission, 
the majority of the engagements were telephonic and I do 
think he would have – I would have met him as well in 
person, maybe once, but mainly telephonic discussions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, did – were …[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   The discussions …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was it you initiating this engagement 
or was it him? 
DR NTETA:   It was him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was him? 
20 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  The nature of supply to Eskom is that 
the suppliers would then indicate that they do have coal 
availability and then we take the discussion further. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Unsolicited? 
DR NTETA:   Unsolicited, yes. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 115 of 244 
 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
so 
even 
in 
this 
case 
…[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   If that you called it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Go ahead? 
DR NTETA:   So even in this case he indicated that there 
is availability for coal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, so you – I want to be absolutely 
clear, you did not invite him and ask him whether they have 
coal or not? 
DR NTETA:    No, he indicated that they have coal. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  So what then does he say to 
you? 
DR NTETA:   So the initial discussions were that we have 
coal available.  At the time – I cannot recall if we actually 
spoke about the exact tonnages that were available but I 
would expect that it would have been maybe similar to the 
tons that they were currently supplying but anyway, they 
indicated that they have got tonnage and coal available.  
So those were the initial discussions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And where would they obtain this coal? 
20 
DR NTETA:   From Optimum Coal Mine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And supply which power station? 
DR NTETA:   So to supply Arnot Power Station and it could 
also supply Kriel Power Station as well as Hendrina but the 
main issue was for Arnot Power Station based on the coal 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 116 of 244 
 
quality. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Remember, I want you to tell the 
Chairperson what he told you. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   So the initial discussions were in terms of we 
have coal to supply.  As I indicated to you, they were 
previously supplying coal to Arnot Power Station so it was 
just so that we do have this coal for this particular quality 
on – that we can provide to yourselves.  As I indicated, I 
10 
cannot recall if he gave the volumes or not and we had a 
few engagements with regards to – purely on the supply of 
coal.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was price indicated? 
DR NTETA:   The price indicated, yes, would have been 
discussed at one of the engagements that we had. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was Arnot Power Station not been 
supplied? 
DR NTETA:   So the history behind Arnot Power station is 
that Arnot Power Station, had previously been supplied 
20 
coal through an agreement with Exxaro.  However, for a 
quite a few years they were not able to meet the demand, 
the coal volumes that are required for Arnot Power Station 
so there were several suppliers that would supply a coal to 
Arnot and this was more on an ad hoc basis.  There was no 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 117 of 244 
 
stable, secure supply for Arnot Power Station.  One, 
because of the volume that is required for the power 
station. Secondly, because of the qualities, it was a – the 
requirement was a higher quality and the market and the 
market that was generally a bit difficult. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So what do you do with Mr Nath’s 
approach to you in regard to Tegeta having to supply coal? 
DR NTETA:   So we discuss it and we discuss also in terms 
of the volumes and availability.  Later on in the – as I 
indicated we had several engagements on the topic. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
DR NTETA:   Later on in the engagement he then indicates 
that in one of the conditions that they have for the supply 
of coal is that they would require Eskom to prepay for that 
coal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  Well, just make us understand.  
The engagement is over a number of days. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I even want to say maybe even a week 
or two but it was – ja, it was over some – a period. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  You have said in your affidavit at 
20 
the beginning of his approach to you he did not indicate 
that they required a prepayment. 
DR NTETA:   Correct.  So the initial engagements that I 
had with him was that we have coal on offer to supply to 
yourselves and there was not a discussion with regards to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 118 of 244 
 
prepayment.  As I indicated that there were several 
discussions.  It was actually to the end of the discussions 
in April where he then indicated to me that one of the 
conditions for the supply of this coal would be that Eskom 
prepays for this particular coal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How did that sound to you?  Here is 
somebody who wants …[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   How does it sound to me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Here is somebody who wants business 
from Eskom but now he is already putting conditions.  Was 
10 
that not strange? 
DR NTETA:   So for me what it sounded like is that he was 
gauging our appetite and I would say it was a negotiation 
that he used.  He was gauging our appetite in terms of are 
we interested in the coal and yes, I did indicate that we are 
interested in the coal because we have a requirement for it 
and then once understanding that we do need the coal then 
to say well, now that I know that you need the coal, this is 
the prepayment.  So for me it was a negotiation tactic that 
he used and so at that point was then when I then realised 
20 
that okay, because if it is a pure requirement for coal, it 
goes through term mandate where it is a sign-off in terms 
of the head of primary energy.  But the prepayment for me, 
it indicated to me to me that this was something that had to 
be discussed in terms of in the area of finance because 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 119 of 244 
 
they deal with payments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, part of what comes 
across as strange to me is the language that you say he 
used.  He wants business from Eskom but he is putting a 
condition.  He is not saying, you know, we would request 
you to agree to a prepayment because we are in this 
particular situation, he is saying I want business from you 
but before I can have business with you I am going to put a 
condition that you must comply with as if you are the one 
who needs him more than he needs you and maybe that 
10 
was the situation in terms of his knowledge of how dire 
Eskom’s need was for coal but it comes across as strange 
to me for somebody who is looking for business to start 
putting conditions as opposed to making a request or just a 
proposal.  
DR NTETA:   Noted, Chair, and I will ask the Chair excuse 
my language that I used.  I did not indicate what he said 
verbatim.  One, because of the time that has taken… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, so it was not verbatim, perhaps I should 
20 
have said there was a request.  Yes, there was a request 
for a prepayment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, he put it as a request or you cannot 
remember? 
DR NTETA:   I cannot remember his words verbatim. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 120 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
DR NTETA:   In terms of what exactly that he said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR NTETA:   I am saying that I have used my language 
which I do not want misrepresent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   That that is what he said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR NTETA:   For me it was that before I can accept this 
coal there is prepayment, so I used my own language.  
10 
Apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  But I think also the emphasis or 
the focus, rather, Dr Nteta, was in your observation that 
this might have been a negotiation tactic that once I 
…[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   It could have been. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Once I have gotten you to agree 
that you needed coal, now I can move to my next step of 
negotiation which is but can you pay me up front before I 
20 
give you the coal?  
DR NTETA:   As I indicated that possibly could have been 
a negotiation tactic. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let us get certain things in place here.  
The Arnot Power Station, you say it had been supplied coal 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 121 of 244 
 
by Exxaro, a company called Exxaro. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you know until when did Exxaro 
supply Eskom with coal at the Arnot Power Station? 
DR NTETA:   Exxaro supplied Arnot with call up until I 
believe it is December 2015 when their contract ended.  
They had a 40 year contract with Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   December 2015.  Now after December 
2015 do you know what happened in regard to the supply 
of coal to Arnot? 
10 
DR NTETA:   So the supply of coal to Arnot even prior to 
December 2015 was being supplied by several contracts, 
short term contracts to supply Arnot.  So some of those 
shorter term contracts continued post 2015 and in another 
instances we sought to find additional suppliers to Arnot 
Power Station.  I had also issued an RFT which looked to 
find additional sources for Arnot. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I heard you say that Tegeta had a 
contract and it was about to expire.  Could it be one of the 
short term contracts you are referring to, that Tegeta had 
20 
to supply to Arnot? 
DR NTETA:   Ja, Optimum – yes, they had a – they were 
supplying Arnot with coal in the period up to April. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, as I see the evidence, there was 
an agreement with Tegeta in January 2016 to supply Arnot.  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 122 of 244 
 
You are aware of that agreement? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  There was also …[intervenes]    
DR NTETA:   So I think there were two agreements, if I 
remember correctly, but perhaps you can clarify. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Then there was one in February 
2016.   I think there was a third one or if not that particular 
one, which was about to end sometime in April 2016. 
DR NTETA:   If my memory serves me correctly there were 
two. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   And the ones – the second one was the one 
that was due to expire, yes, in March or April. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Now to your – according to your 
recollection, were those agreements with Tegeta based on 
a prepayment? 
DR NTETA:   No. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then in April 2016 when Mr Nath 
approaches you, was this the first time that prepayment 
was mentioned to you? 
20 
DR NTETA:   It was the first time that prepayment was 
mentioned to me by – yes, by Nath of Tegeta. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And this would have been still to 
supply the same power station, Arnot? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 123 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Why do you take such a long time to 
answer is it because the sound comes late to you?    
DR NTETA:   Yes, it does, particularly when I speak I – 
then I hear an echo. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
DR NTETA:   So I was just trying to figure out what that 
was. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  If you have – well, just for the 
purpose of the Chairperson.  Chair, the aspect regarding 
the prepayment is dealt with from page 71.  Eskom bundle 
10 
14, page 71, of Dr Nteta’s affidavit under paragraph 8. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I have got it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, Dr Nteta, if this was then the first 
time – well, the first time you are approached by Mr Nath 
regarding prepayment but had you dealt with a contract 
that required prepayment before this approach by him? 
DR NTETA:   Personally? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   No. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No.  So what did you do?  How did you 
20 
handle the matter? 
DR NTETA:   So at the end stage when he indicated that 
he required a prepayment I thought it could not because I 
have not dealt with personally prepayment myself and I 
also recognised that through the segregation of duties it is 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 124 of 244 
 
not something within my domain and realm.  It is something 
that, you know, would have to be looked at elsewhere.  So 
what I then did is I actually went and I sought a guidance 
from my principles.   
I initially went through to Mr Mboweni’s office.  He 
was not available and then I, because they sit in the same 
area, I then went to Mr Mabelane who at the time was a 
CPO 
for 
Eskom 
and 
indicated 
to 
him 
that 
I 
have 
approached by the supplier to supply us with coal for 
Arnot.   
10 
While, yes, we do require the coal, they have then 
requested a prepayment and I sought his guidance in terms 
of how would I then handle this particular matter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes and what was his guidance? 
DR NTETA:  Under his advice he then indicated that he 
thought it best that we take the request through to the BTC 
so that they can then – board tender committee, so that 
they can then apply their mind in terms of this particular 
request that we received from the supplier. He felt that it 
was rather prudent to do that instead of within primary 
20 
energy 
adjudicate 
it 
because 
of 
the 
issues 
of 
the 
requirement for prepayment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the time that …[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   So based on that then that is when I then 
said okay, I will do so, and then start – sorry? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 125 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, continue? 
DR NTETA:   So based on that  I then – based on that I 
then said okay and then began to start working on a 
submission to the board tender committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the time you started working on a 
submission that would go to the tender committee did you 
have something in writing from Tegeta formally making this 
request and giving motivation for it? 
DR NTETA:   No, Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the position that all you had was just 
10 
either a telephone conversation that you had with Mr Nath 
or a meeting where he made this request? 
DR NTETA:   Correct, Sir.  So often times when we get 
unsolicited offers to provide coal, those unsolicited offers 
come in the form of a meeting or a discussion where 
suppliers will come through to us and then say we have got 
particular coal requirements, etcetera, and then we would 
work from that.   
At some point within the discussions we would then 
say okay, provide an offer.  I will say that not all my 
20 
colleagues do that because it is not something that is – it 
is not all my colleagues do that but would normally refer to 
an approach, to say the approach was made by a supplier.  
So at the time that I started working on the document there 
was no formal letter.  We had been discussing for about a 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 126 of 244 
 
week or so and there was not a formal letter that I 
received. 
CHAIRPERSON:   During your discussion with Mr Nath did 
he indicate to you how much amount he was talking about 
in respect of prepayments? 
DR NTETA:   He did not indicate the rand value.  As I 
indicated before, the beginning of our discussion, I cannot 
recall if we spoke about when the issue of the monthly 
volumes were but he did not indicate the figure in terms of 
the 659. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you were preparing your 
submission to the BTC what amount were you going to talk 
about if you had not asked him what amount he was talking 
about? 
DR NTETA:   So the submission for the BTC was based on 
volume and the cost of coal.  So the request was we would 
like for you to prepay for the coal that we are going to 
provide to you over a – I think it is five month period.  So it 
was rand per gigajoule times the volume. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you saying although he did not 
20 
mention the amount, that is Mr Nath, the amount was 
ascertainable, easily ascertainable? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, he mentioned the volume and the 
gigajoule, so we multiply the volume by the rand per 
gigajoule, the figure. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 127 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So at that time there had been no 
agreement or there had been agreement on the price, so 
tons or whatever? 
DR NTETA:   There was an indication of the price in terms 
of a rand per gigajoule. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there was an indication of the price 
that Eskom was prepared to pay and that seemed to be 
acceptable to them or what was the position? 
DR NTETA:   So in terms of the unsolicited offer is that the 
suppliers would indicate the amount of coal that they have 
10 
to offer and then they would then indicate the cost of that 
coal and that is what they would advise us in the approach 
to say that we believe that we will sell this coal at – I am 
going to use a simple – at R10. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
DR NTETA:   And we have got a 100 000 tons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And your – and the position was 
that whatever price they had indicated was acceptable to 
Eskom as far as you were concerned as [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
20 
DR NTETA:   When they provide us with the – no, so they 
would indicate what the price is and so what we then do is 
then we would one, look at negotiating in terms of their 
pricing, we would also then – or if we are taking it to the 
board tender committee, we would then indicate that this is 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 128 of 244 
 
their offer price and then come – get a mandate to then 
enter into negotiations with them and then we would 
negotiate as well from there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So then at some stage you would 
go back to them to say your price is acceptable or your 
price is not acceptable, here is our counter offer as far as 
the price is concerned. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So when he spoke, he requested 
a prepayment, is the position that what he meant was 
10 
before we deliver to you so many volumes of coal we will 
ask you to give us the payment for that coal, that amount 
of coal.  In other words, whereas normally we would deliver 
coal first and then you pay after, this time we want to 
reverse the arrangement, we want you to give us the 
money first then we deliver the coal.  Is that what his 
request meant? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the prepayment, the money that 
Eskom was going to pay if it went along with his request 
20 
was always going to be determined by the price that is 
agreed for coal and the volumes of the coal.  Is that right? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 129 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Dr Nteta, in paragraph 8.4 or 
your affidavit …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Seleka, again. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did confirm that at the time that you 
started preparing the submission that would go to the BTC 
to ask for approval for the prepayment arrangement that 
was requested by Tegeta you did not have anything in 
writing from Tegeta making this request for prepayment and 
10 
giving motivation as to why in their case there should be a 
reversal of the arrangements namely you must pay them 
first for call that you have not received and then they 
deliver the coal.   
Now what reasons had he give you verbally when 
you were talking about this?  What motivations did he 
give? 
DR NTETA:   So the motivation that he gave in terms of the 
prepayment requiring the money upfront was that they 
required to open up the export portion of the mine because 
20 
when they went, when Optimum went into business risk and 
I think it was actually from August the year before, but I 
stand to be corrected on the time, they had closed down 
the export portion of the mine, so in order to, they needed 
to restart the mine and the they needed the funding to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 130 of 244 
 
restart to the mine so that they can provide us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Effectively you are saying that Tegeta 
didn’t have money to restart one of its operations, is that 
correct, and therefore that’s why they wanted Eskom to pay 
in advance for coal still to be delivered so that they could 
restart one of their operations, is that right? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Would that be a sound reason for 
Eskom to engage in a prepayment, I know that you said 
that I think you had not dealt with prepayments before but I 
10 
am – you were, I don’t know whether the chief negotiator 
but you were the senior person talking to the CEO of 
Tegeta, that just doesn’t sound right to me.   If you – if I 
wanted to do business with you we must do it the same 
way I do it with everybody normally.  We must have an 
agreement that you provide me with coal, once we have 
delivered coal and I have looked at the coal is it 
acceptable, the quality is fine, then I pay you, this idea 
that I must pay you first for coal that I have not yet 
received because you want to run your business or restart 
20 
one of your operations doesn’t sound right to me.  Does it 
sound right to you? 
DR NTETA:    So in terms of the understanding this 
particular principle had been applied before, it started in 
2008 when we had some emerging miners who needed 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 131 of 244 
 
some funding upfront so that they are able to beneficiate 
because we also recognise that the industry of coalmining 
is quite capital intensive and it is quite cash intensive, so 
it had happened before and a lot of times the suppliers do 
indicate to us that you know they are generating the initial 
cash is an issue so it made sense to me because I 
understood that their export operation was no longer 
operational and we needed some funding, so it made sense 
to me but with regards to the operations etcetera that 
should 
have 
been 
in 
the 
domain 
of 
the 
operations 
10 
department to ascertain those elements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does this type of situation, let’s leave 
out 
the 
question 
of 
maybe 
assisting 
previously 
disadvantaged suppliers maybe who might need some 
assistance, leaving that 
consideration aside, when 
a 
supplier make this kind of request for the reasons that Mr 
Nath gave you wouldn’t that give you some discomfort that 
you may be entering into a very important contract with 
somebody who doesn’t have financial stability and that that 
might threaten the contract that you might enter into with – 
20 
that you might conclude with them, that their financial 
situation might be precarious, and it might not be in the 
interest of Eskom to go into a very important contract 
involving millions of Rands, maybe billions, with an entity 
that maybe go into business rescue anytime, or which 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 132 of 244 
 
could be liquidated anytime because they are not in a 
financially strong position, with that situation that they had 
be a kind of a red flag to say you know should we really 
continue with this arrangement, is that not too much of a 
risk? 
DR NTETA:   So one of the challenges that we have within 
the procurement facility and we look at unsolicited bids is 
that when we receive an unsolicited bid we need to look at 
that bid and entertain that bid and see if it is something 
that can be done, because we then follow the other side, if 
10 
we then independently, and I say myself, if I independently 
then say no to a particular supplier and yes to another 
supplier then there’s often challenges, so one of the issues 
that we have, we had was when suppliers come and they 
put in certain requests, we would look at them and 
entertain the requests and see if it is something that can 
be done. 
 
So when the supplier and in this particular case it 
was Tegeta, comes through and says that we have coal, 
this is we requested to prepay for this coal then we – I 
20 
would look at that request and then see which is the 
appropriate mandate to then further interrogate, at face 
value I would not be able to say no to them or to any other 
supplier and that is a challenge of unsolicited offers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But do you accept or you do not accept 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 133 of 244 
 
that it would be in the interest of Eskom to look at what the 
chances are that an entity that they might conclude a 
contract with that involves lots of money over and long 
period of time might not be an entity that is going to be 
around for a long time. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, so the agreement, when you look at the 
agreement it was five months, so in the timeframe of 
Eskom five months is considered a short time, so it is not – 
we 
don’t 
consider 
it 
a 
long 
agreement, 
so 
it 
was 
considered for a short period of time and then we would 
10 
then look in terms of what can we do to mitigate our risks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka?  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Dr Nteta this matter 
also has to be looked at against the background facts that 
prevailed at the time, so Tegeta had the short term 
contracts already from January 2016 with Eskom supplying 
to Arnot.   In fact those contracts are three in number and 
the one – one of those was about to expire, the third one 
was about to expire in April. 
 
Now those contracts you have said, well you 
20 
understand them to be two but there are in fact three, they 
were not concluded on the basis of a prepayment.  Do you 
recall that you did the fuel sourcing in respect of those 
contracts? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 134 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You did? 
DR NTETA:   Yes I think the question, you broke up a bit, 
was they were not concluded in terms of a prepayment and 
I am saying correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Yes, but also that you were involved 
in the sourcing of that fuel, of those contracts? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you know that there was no 
prepayment? 
DR NTETA:  Yes.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now this is the third or the fourth, I 
beg your pardon, this would be then the fourth agreement 
in respect of which they are making an approach to Eskom 
in 2016, correct. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which is also a short term agreement.  
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   For five months you say?  For five 
months?    
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But when they come this time around 
they are asking for a prepayment? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But they didn’t ask for it at inception of 
approaching you? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 135 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You don’t know, or do you, what 
suddenly made them to come up with a prepayment 
requirement or request? 
DR NTETA:   No I don’t know what suddenly made them 
come with a prepayment requirement, except for what they 
indicated to me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Were you – was that reason you 
gave, that reason you gave about they needed funding to 
open up the export coal mine, is that their reason? 
10 
DR NTETA:   That is the reason that Mr Nath gave me yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You can recall that for sure?  
DR NTETA:   Ja, he spoke to me on the phone because 
when he asked me for the prepayment I did ask him why he 
wanted the prepayment and then he said no he required it 
for the funding etcetera.  I also indicated to him on the 
phone, I said I am just asking but I – you know I am not 
saying whether it is something; that we will look or 
something that we wouldn’t look at, so that’s what he 
indicated to me. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, can I accelerate my question 
because I will come back step by step.  Did you give that 
reason to Ms Suzanne Daniels?  
DR NTETA:   I can’t recall if I gave it to her verbally or not, 
I really cannot, I cannot recall if I gave it to her verbally at 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 136 of 244 
 
any point.  I know that Mr Nath did tell me about it but I 
can’t – I really can’t recall if I told her over the phone or I 
didn’t tell her etcetera. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did you give it to her in writing? 
DR NTETA:   If it was in writing it would have been in the 
submission document. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well your submission documents 
...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   So in terms of the submission document I had 
a lot of engagements with both Suzanne and a lot of 
10 
engagements with Edwin and copying also Mr ...[indistinct]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And Mr Koko? 
DR NTETA:   Giving feedback, so ...[indistinct] might be 
able to say if I told her on the phone or I didn’t tell her, I 
would rather say you should look at the email trail to 
indicate as to if I told her or not because I would have put 
it in the submission if I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe continue Mr Seleka, I have got 
some question but just continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, okay, we will go to that 
20 
submission in due course Dr Nteta because in your email 
to Ms Daniels you specifically said you didn’t deal with the 
prepayment, it is in the resolution but you didn’t deal with 
it. 
DR NTETA:    Yes, so in one of the many engagements that 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 137 of 244 
 
I had with Suzanne ...[indistinct] also spoken to her so in 
making amendments to the document.  I wanted – I sent 
her an email with the document just to highlight to her that 
the issue of prepayment is only in the resolution, it is not 
in the body of the document, so that he is aware that it is 
not in the body of the document and she would then be 
able to provide guidance as to whether it needs to be the 
detail of the document or not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but what I am trying to find out 
from you is whether you told her in writing or you were 
10 
saying you cannot recall verbally but did you tell her in 
writing? 
DR NTETA:   Advocate Seleka as I said to you I cannot 
recall I would have to go and look at the emails really 
because there were a lot of engagements back and forth, if 
it is not in the email then I would then say that I did not 
give it to her in writing.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because I am trying to get certainty 
from you in regards to is it as a matter of fact that Mr Nath 
gave you that reason, that this is the reason why we want 
20 
a prepayment. 
DR NTETA:   Mr Nath gave me that reason on the phone 
yes when I asked him why do you want the prepayment and 
that was at the very initial request for the prepayment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 138 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   For example ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I see that you have made a 
distinction between that request for prepayment and the 
initial approach which was as you say for coal. 
DR NTETA:   Yes I made that distinction because at the 
beginning of our engagement with Mr Nath it really was 
about coal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I see, and that means – tell me if that 
is a correct understanding, when they approach you 
regarding coal they are saying we have coal we can supply 
10 
you immediately?  
DR NTETA:   You broke up a little bit, I am going to repeat 
what I think that you said, their approach to me was that 
we have coal that we are able to supply to you yes, and so 
in my first discussions with him was that we have coal that 
we are able to supply to you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  But the prepayment brings 
a completely different scenario in the picture. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What it means then in terms of the 
20 
prepayment is that we do not have the coal, we want to 
open the export coal mine, you say maybe it is the coal 
component of the mine, export coal component of the mine, 
and once we have opened it we will mine the coal and in 
due course we will have it available to supply to Eskom, is 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 139 of 244 
 
that a correct understanding? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.   
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was this a situation where he was 
saying the money that we would like you to pay up front to 
us whatever we need to do with it is necessary for us to be 
able to then give you the coal that we are talking about, 
was it that kind of situation? 
 
Or was the position that we will give you coal, not 
10 
dependant on you giving us prepayment but we need you to 
give us prepayment for other operational reasons for our 
business. 
DR NTETA:   So it was – we require you to give us coal 
and to prepay for the coal that we will give you for the five 
month period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So ...[intervenes]    
DR NTETA:   I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes continue. 
DR NTETA:   I want just to note is that my discussions with 
20 
Mr Nath did not – on the prepayment aspect were very 
limited, because I really did not want to give him the 
impression that we are accepting his offer because of this 
requirement for the prepayment, so my discussions with 
him were more in terms of why do you want it so that we 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 140 of 244 
 
are able then to you know to understand it and it was a 
question if he asked me for something I am going to ask 
him why do you want it, and when you then talk about 
payment those elements would be negotiated and there 
would be understanding on the payment aspect of it as to 
is it required, is it not required etcetera.  
 
So it was not this long intensive discussions that I 
had with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I can understand that attitude at a 
certain level but I would imagine that before you put pen to 
10 
paper in preparing submissions to the BTC you would want 
to have a full understanding of what they had in mind of 
what this money would be use for and what it would mean 
if you were to refuse as Eskom to make the prepayment so 
that is why I am asking the question 
whether 
you 
understood him to be saying we need the prepayment 
because whatever we are going to do with that money 
needs to be done if we are going to be able to give you the 
coal that we are talking about or whether the position was 
we – irrespective of the prepayment we will be able to give 
20 
you the coal that you are talking about but we think you 
should give us prepayment for this and that and that 
reason. 
DR NTETA:   The scenario number one that you indicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is scenario number one? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 141 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:    Yes it wasn’t irrespective; they were not 
going to give us coal irrespective. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so what was your understanding of 
what they do with the money in order to be able to give you 
coal? 
DR NTETA:    My understanding of what they would do with 
that money would be to beneficiate the coal so they were 
going to open up the export portion of it and so they are 
able to beneficiate the coal and then provide it to us.  That 
was my understanding. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words they were not in a 
position to enter into a coal agreement with you and 
deliver coal to you without you giving them a prepayment? 
DR NTETA:   That is my understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now the prepayment was it going to 
be the whole amount or the total coal that they were going 
to provide during the contract period or was it going to be 
in 
tranches 
of 
certain 
amounts 
according 
to 
certain 
volumes that would be delivered at certain intervals? 
DR NTETA:   The prepayment was for the five months 
20 
contract that they had where it was to be provided up front 
and then they would deliver over those five months. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you would give them like half a 
billion rand straightaway and then over five months then 
they would be – they would deliver this coal to you? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 142 of 244 
 
DR NTETA:   Correct, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did you apply your mind to the 
question of what security does Eskom have in terms of this 
money that you will pay in advance in case something 
happens to Tegeta and then they are not able to deliver 
this coal, what arrangement or what security did you think 
would be put in place to protect Eskom in that regard? 
DR NTETA:   So yes I applied – well not applied my mind I 
asked a question to Ms Daniels in the – looking at the 
submission to say that okay if Eskom agrees to this what 
10 
security did we have and there needs to be some form of 
security. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what did she say? 
DR NTETA:   So and that is where the discussion in terms 
of the security, in terms of there is a very – I just can’t 
remember the wording, but security in the form of shares 
and – their shares in terms of Brakfontein was the 
suggestion that she had. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it something you understood that 
she told you about in terms of security or is it something 
20 
that you didn’t understand but you left it with her because 
she was a legal person? 
DR NTETA:   So I had limited understanding in terms of the 
security, because I believe that she is a legal person, I 
also then also believed that on the finance side they would 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 143 of 244 
 
have to do the calculation as to whether whatever security 
that is being offered is that adequate, so for me it was how 
do we need to get the procurement risk and they said we 
can do that with regards to legally and then the finance 
would then look in terms of is that adequate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course you ought not to support a 
submission that Eskom should agree to Tegeta’s request 
for prepayment unless you understand that there would be 
an adequate security arrangement, you agree with that? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if a legal person tells you some legal 
things that you don’t understand you won’t support until 
they can tell you in a language you can understand and 
you can reason it out yourself and say okay I do 
understand so I support this is that correct? 
DR NTETA:  That is correct, so as I indicated to you I had 
a vested understanding in terms of the securities that were 
available, also understanding that when you send the 
submission through to BTC the mandate is that for those 
that are best able to negotiate those particular aspects 
20 
then they do so, so I understood that well we have a – I 
think it was a seven year contract and the shares and the 
value in terms of the aspect of the bigger security so it 
would make sense that we are able to then put in some 
sort of a claim on that coal should they not do so. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 144 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would take it also that before such a 
prepayment would be made at least some investigation 
would be conducted by Eskom into Tegeta or any such 
entity because you don’t want to put in half a billion Rand 
of your money into this entity because there is this 
agreement about coal and only to find that it is up to here 
in debts and in a few days time it is liquidated, so I 
assume that there would be an investigation conducted by 
Eskom to look at such risks? 
DR NTETA:  So there are two aspects of it, one is that 
10 
when we are looking in terms of new suppliers there is an 
investigation 
that 
happens 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
financial 
statements etcetera.  When it is suppliers that have been 
in the system and have been supplying coal we generally 
don’t look in terms of their financial viability etcetera.   
However having said that, that when you then look in terms 
of there is a risk that is involved of paying certain sums up 
front then the – those then who say that we should take 
this risk would need to do some sort of risk mitigation in 
terms of that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then what I do find a little strange is 
that for something like this you were prepared to go to the 
extent of preparing the written submissions, submission 
that would go to the BTC without having asked Tegeta to 
put their request in writing and provide their motivation so 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 145 of 244 
 
that as you prepare your own submission you have 
something from them in writing that says this is the request 
we are making, this is our motivation for it. 
 
Is there any reason why you didn’t ask them to give 
you something in writing? 
DR NTETA:   So I note that you say it is strange, however 
when you look in terms of the practice, what we do is we 
would draft a submission and we will indicate that we have 
been approached by the supplier, therefore it may be an 
approach in terms of an email, maybe an approach in terms 
10 
of a meeting etcetera, and we then draft submissions.  I 
did request the supplier while in the process of drafting the 
submission to then provide a formal offer letter for the 
coal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And they did? 
DR NTETA:   But it is strange, as you indicate that is 
strange, but it is practice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but did they provide it in writing 
after you had asked? 
DR NTETA:   Yes so the supplier provided an offer letter.   
20 
In fact I contacted the supplier, I continued because I 
suspected Adv Seleka is going to ask me these questions, I 
contacted the supplier and asked them, I said I require an 
offer letter in terms of the coal that you are supplying.  The 
supplier was taken aback in the sense that why would you 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 146 of 244 
 
want this particular offer because we discussed it, I have 
given you the reasons etcetera, and then indicated to me 
why do you want it, what exactly are you looking for, can I 
send something as a draft so that I can understand if this 
is what you are looking for, which is what he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that included the request for 
prepayment and the reasons for the request? 
DR NTETA:  It was a request for the prepayment but not 
the reasons for the request. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so you had to rely on your 
recollection of what Mr Nath had said to you verbally in 
terms of the reasons when you prepared the written 
submission to the BTC? 
DR NTETA:   Yes that was – I relied on what Mr Nath had 
said, I relied on what Ms Daniels provided and I also relied 
on information that I received from Mr Madelani on the 
submission yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Seleka? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.   Yes Dr Nteta indeed 
those questions were going to come from me, but that is 
the difficulty I should express to you I have with the reason 
because you – we don’t see you communicating the reason 
or the motivation for the prepayment to Ms Daniels and let 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 147 of 244 
 
me just for the purpose of the Chairperson outline this.  
Remember you write in your affidavit that the last approach 
made to you is on the 8 t h of April 2016.  This is on Friday.   
Now we don’t know exactly when on that day were you 
approached, we don’t know exactly – sorry if you nod, you 
probably need to speak out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just articulate your response because if 
you nod that doesn’t get captured by the record. 
DR NTETA:   Okay, I can’t recall why I was nodding, maybe 
it was for the last discussion on the 8 t h, I can’t remember 
10 
when I nodded. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So I am saying apparently you were 
last approached either telephonically or in person by Mr 
Nath on the 8 t h of April 2016. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This was on a Friday.    
DR NTETA:   Yes, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Shall I assume that you are at work at 
this time? 
20 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   When do you start to draft the 
submission? 
DR NTETA:  I don’t recall exactly when I started to draft 
the submission, it could have been on the 8 t h, it could have 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 148 of 244 
 
been on the 7 t h, I really can’t recall the exact day when I 
started, it could have been on the 9 t h.  I do know that I 
worked on the submission over the weekend.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, so 8 t h is a Friday, the next day is 
a Saturday, that is the 9 t h, the first communication received 
between you and Ms Daniels is on Sunday the 10 t h of April, 
remember to say yes or no. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, yes, Sunday the 10 t h sorry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the first communication we see 
between you and Ms Daniels is on the 10 t h which is on 
10 
Sunday. 
DR NTETA:   Correct.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   That Chairperson is on page 199.  I 
beg your pardon, 199 is a reply to you.   189 is your email 
to Ms Daniels, 189, I beg your pardon.  But you will recall 
this – you will stop me because I am giving the page 
numbers for the purposes of the Chairperson, because 
Chair I see we are going to run out of our estimation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but how far are you from finishing? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are very far from the end, we will 
20 
still be a while Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that so? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Dr Nteta can confirm that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Unfortunately. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 149 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Unfortunately ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If that is so maybe we should do what 
one would have liked to avoid, maybe we should stop with 
Dr Nteta because arranging for her to finish might not be a 
problem even maybe on short notice, I am not sure.  I 
assume that it is not more than an hour that you might 
need?   You think it might be more, but not more than two 
hours? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It might, not more than two hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay so that we could easily fit that 
10 
into an evening, an evening session, so I think that is what 
we 
should 
do 
then 
we 
can 
release 
her 
on 
that 
understanding that we are going to arrange a date when 
probably in the evening we can slot her in one of these 
days before the end of next week I would hope, and then 
try and finish.  Dr Nteta obviously you can hear what I am 
saying. 
 
Would 
you 
have 
any 
problem 
if 
we 
make 
arrangements along those lines? 
DR NTETA:   Chair I don’t have a problem, but I must say a 
note to self next time I must get a lawyer because I think I 
20 
am being de-prioritised because I don’t have a lawyer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] no Dr Nteta even if you had a 
lawyer the same consideration could come up, okay so I 
think we are going to release you but I am asking Mr 
Seleka and his team that they be in touch with you and 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 150 of 244 
 
they will talk to me with a view that we find an evening 
between now and the end of next week if possible when 
you can come in maybe at four o’clock or five o’clock and 
then we try and finish but obviously if there is a day when 
you can come in during the day that will be explored as 
well, but because it is going to be short notice it is 
something that will be discussed with you to make sure 
that you are available.  
 
So I think let us release her on that basis. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Chair.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Dr Nteta then and 
an arrangement will be made for you to complete your 
evidence in due course.  Thank you very much for making 
yourself available. 
DR NTETA:   Thank you.   I don’t know the protocols, do I 
just hang up or do I have to wait for you to leave the room 
sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am going to adjourn because the – Mr 
Seleka  needs to make some arrangements for the next 
witness, so after I have adjourned then you can disappear 
20 
from the screen in the manner that has been agreed 
between you and the technical team.    
 
We will then take a ten minute adjournment, will ten 
minutes be enough. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It will be enough Chair. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 151 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we adjourn.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes Mr Barrie. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  I am afraid that there again some issues 
of housekeeping that we need to refer to. In that regard 
10 
Chair if I may hand up to you a letter or a copy of a letter 
that we received from Mr Seleka it is dated the 22 December 
of 2020 and there are certain aspects of this letter that we 
need to – that we need clarity on.   
 
The first issue on which we need clarity is whether 
you are aware of this letter? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am – I have not seen the letter but Mr 
Seleka did mention that there was a response to – to your 
side. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes the… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I did I think when I – when you were 
here last time I did ask my Registrar to give a copy of the 
letter that you gave me. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  No that was long. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of [?] 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 152 of 244 
 
ADV BARRIE SC:  That was now the third. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To – to the Secretary of the Commission. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  That was to put on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To discuss with me.  I have made enquiries 
recently and it seems that the Secretary himself might not 
have done much about it.  The last time I heard and he is 
supposed to see me about it so that I understand what is 
going on. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes I – just if we can go – just go back 
into the history.  What this relates to is a letter that was 
10 
written on the 3rd of – it was actually incorrectly dated the 3 
December it was actually delivered on the 2 December and it 
was addressed to you in your capacity as the Chairman of 
the Commission in which we raise those issues.   
 
And then during the course of the testimony of Mr 
Koko on that day various issues were raised some which 
also were covered by the letter. 
 
And what you Mr Chairman stated is that if there is 
any 
information 
that 
can 
be 
made 
available 
to 
the 
commission regarding potential corruption or malfeasance in 
20 
Eskom then that should be made available by way of a 
written statement. 
 
And you will then recall that what happened then was 
that such a – in the form of a supplementary affidavit was 
prepared which was then made available to the commission 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 153 of 244 
 
on the 11 December when we appeared before you.  You will 
recall in the evening. 
 
And what is relevant now in this letter is that and I 
want to refer you – the letter has a particularly objectionable 
tone but we do not want to raise that with you at this time.  
But what we do need to raise with you and if you can 
possibly turn to page of the letter.  It is [00:04:24] by Mr 
Seleka and it states on behalf of the commission.  It is on 
that basis that we assume that it carries your authority. 
 
And that is what the first point of clarity that … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no it would simply be – it would simply 
be a response of the legal team as represented by Mr Seleka 
the legal team of the commission.  It would not necessarily 
be my response.  It would be a response of the legal team of 
the commission. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Well then we  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Ja as I say it was issued on your behalf 
and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no. 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:  On that basis we – we take it at face 
value. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what is the issue on page 4 just talk 
to me about that? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes we want to refer to you paragraph 7, 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 154 of 244 
 
8 and 9 in the letter where it is stated you will recall that in 
the letter which you informed us on the 11 t h that you had 
read my client made various – or on his behalf his attorney 
speaking on his behalf averred that there were instances of 
corruption and malfeasance and irregularities in Eskom that 
are apparently not being investigated by the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  And you on that day on record said that 
well if Mr Koko has information in that regard it should not 
put forward in terms of a letter but the information should be 
10 
provided to the commission by way of a formal statement 
which was then done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  At a later time by way of the affidavit.  
But what he stated in paragraph 7 and you will recall that 
there were various issues.  The one relating to the 
preferential treatment that Glencore has received in the past 
and still receives at the hands of Eskom. 
 
The second related to bribery and corruption of a 
company called Just Coal a supplier to Eskom which has 
20 
been admitted by its Managing Director publicly and before 
the – the Parliamentary Select committee. 
 
And then there are the matters of Sumi Tomo and 
then the matter of the contract at Madupi relating to Mr 
Masangu.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 155 of 244 
 
 
So what paragraph 7 in the letter states is as follows:  
It says: 
“What 
you 
have 
stated 
in 
your 
letter 
regarding Glencore is once again evidentiary 
material already contained in affidavits of 
witnesses before the commission including 
one of your client’s affidavit.” 
Now we are only aware of one affidavit and presumably Mr 
Seleka is referring to that on your behalf. 
“It is not for the commission to comment on 
10 
such matters in correspondence. However 
insofar as your client alleges preferential 
treatment of coal suppliers in the Glencore’s 
[00:07:34] your client is at liberty to provide 
the 
commission 
with 
information 
to 
substantiate these allegations.” 
Which has been done.  And then it goes on.  And to 
demonstrate its relevance to the commission’s terms of 
reference.  Now that is the issue that we need to enquire 
about.  Is because that was not when you addressed us and 
20 
Mr Koko in that regard on the 3 December. 
 
That was not stated by you as it were a precondition.  
I would think… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry.  Are you saying 
that Mr Seleka says please show us the relevance of the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 156 of 244 
 
information or documents you are asking for and you are 
saying that was not an issue? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  That was not something and we would 
think that is for obvious reasons because it would be for the 
commission to investigate allegations and eventually to come 
up with an answer to the question whether in terms of the 
terms of reference this is something that requires to be 
addressed in the commission’s final report.  It is obviously 
not something that the commission can address until an 
investigation has taken place. 
10 
 
So what we need to require to know is is this now 
what is a – a requirement before the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well certainly. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Is that people who have information to 
supply to the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well certainly if people supply information 
that they believe is relevant to the work of the commission 
we cannot spend a lot of time looking into that unless we are 
satisfied that it is relevant. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So relevance is important otherwise we do 
not want to be spending hours and hours on something that 
may not be relevant. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  But with respect you – you set that out 
very, very correctly and that it is for the commission to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 157 of 244 
 
assess the relevance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no, no, no. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  It is for the commission to look at the 
information which is provided. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  And to decide whether that information 
should be further investigated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but what I am… 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Whether it warrants investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but what I am saying is I would see 
10 
nothing wrong if the legal team says please tell us what the 
relevance of this information is because… 
ADV BARRIE SC:  So must we assume now that this… 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words before they – they might 
take a view that it is not relevant or they cannot see the 
relevance. 
 
But 
you 
the 
person 
who 
submitted 
the 
information might have a certain perspective and might think 
it is relevant so when you respond to the legal team you say 
as far as I am concerned this is the relevance. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes but that is… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe they get persuaded maybe they 
do not get persuaded. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes I again would say that the legal team 
is not the commission Sir.  You are the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No the legal team is there to assist – to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 158 of 244 
 
assist. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Me and they have a role to play and the 
play a very important role.  So if they – certain things need 
to go to them first because they bring them to me and they 
some of the issues that I will raise and in order to make sure 
that when they bring those things to me the matters are ripe.  
They would explore those things because obviously they 
know they will say what is the relevance of this?  What is – 
sometimes it is relevant but not so important that kind of 
10 
thing. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Now if we then go onto paragraph 8 and 
that refers to the entity Just Coal Pty Limited in which Mr 
Koko in his supplementary affidavit gave detailed information 
also of the fact that the Managing Director or CEO of that 
company admitted bribery and corruption and the bribery of 
Eskom [00:11:47].  But we nevertheless received a letter 
from the commission stating that we have to provide – and it 
is relevant in terms of the terms of reference of the 
commission.  Well what is before you already it is very 
20 
obviously relevant to the terms of reference of the terms of 
commission.  And we do not understand why – if obviously 
regularity has been pointed out and bribery and corruption 
why there is now a requirement that you did not specify on 
the 3 December that is now put forward but not only do we 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 159 of 244 
 
need to provide information in this regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let – let… 
ADV BARRIE SC:  But we need to explain the relevance to 
the terms of reference. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us deal with this matter in this way.  It 
seems to me that I do need to have a meeting with the 
members of the legal team Mr Seleka and Mr Seleka as well 
as the Secretary of the commission and that they should put 
together all the correspondence exchanged between yourself 
and the legal team or the Secretary and the commission and 
10 
I get briefed fully as to where everything is. 
1.  Because I was concerned that the Secretary has not – 
does 
not appear to 
have 
done much 
about the 
[00:13:45] letter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well we – we are making… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am going to – to make arrangements 
Mr Seleka I think talk to all concerned. There may be other 
people other than the Secretary. There may be other people 
are involved in some technical things.  Let us find time 
before the end of this week if possible.  Maybe – maybe after 
20 
the hearings. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To have a meeting so that with all the 
information so that I can be briefed fully what where the 
challenges may be with the request or some of the requests 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 160 of 244 
 
made by Mr Koko’s legal team. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Well this is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And after – after that briefing it may be 
necessary to – to involve – to have another meeting 
involving Mr Barrie.  It might not be necessary depending on 
what the briefing will be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I would like this matter to be finalised 
as soon as possible. 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Mr Chairman the issue is really that you 
gave a certain directive – directives regarding what we 
should do to bring these allegations to your attention which 
we have done.  Now if you go on to paragraph 9 of this letter 
it states as follows: 
“The commission is not investigating the 
matter of Sumi Tomo.” 
That relates as you will remember of Mr Tsotsi having 
written unlawful – unlawful a letter to Sumi Tomo to 
undertake that for certain transformers that were not ordered 
20 
payment would be made. 
 
Now the statement is simply that the commission is 
not investigating the Sumi Tomo matter and the clarity that 
we require from you Sir is that correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we are going to have a meeting.  I 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 161 of 244 
 
know that whether it is Madupi or Kusile I know that there 
was a time when I as approached about whether there 
should be any investigation and I said we cannot start a new 
investigation we do not have the time in regard to whether it 
was both or one of those.  Certainly I have – I have made 
that decision.  But - 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Is that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Barrie there is no need to continue to 
discuss this now. I am going to have a meeting before the 
end of the week with the relevant members of the legal team 
10 
of the commission who are involved in this matter and the 
Secretary of the commission and other people within the 
commission who might be relevant and I will have all the 
correspondence before me that has been exchanged.  I will 
check what challenges there are and after that I will have 
taken a view on the matter and either you will then be 
informed or I might need to have a meeting that would 
involve you side before there is any finality. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I think we must leave the matter at 
20 
that. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  There is just one further issue in this 
regard that I do need point out.  And it is as you have 
indicated that you rely heavily on the legal team.  So this is 
representative at least of the legal teams albeit that it is 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 162 of 244 
 
issued on behalf of the commission but in paragraph 9 it 
goes on to say that: 
“The commission does not have the time and 
capacity to investigate the Kusile and Madupi 
matters.”  
That is understandable albeit that it is within your 
terms of reference.  But it then says – it goes on to say: 
“It has taken a decision to confine itself 
primarily to matters identified in the Public 
Protectors Report.” 
10 
 
Now is that correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes it is correct that already last year not 
even last year 2019 in the extension application that was 
filed in the High Court I made it clear that in order for the 
commission to finish its work within the time that I asked for 
it would have to confine itself within the issues that are 
identified in the Public Protectors Report but I did say that 
those matters that fell outside of the Public Protectors issues 
but within the terms of reference of the commission that the 
commission had already started we would try and finish.  And 
20 
that if any matter that we had not started was brought to my 
attention which I thought in my own discretion were – was 
particularly important then I could make a decision to say we 
look into that.  So that is in the – in the High Court papers 
already. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 163 of 244 
 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Very well.  So it does not imply a 
limitation of if we published or otherwise of the terms of 
reference? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  It does imply a limitation of the terms of 
reference to be published in terms of the Commission’s Act 
in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  It does not imply or in any other manner 
some limitation of the terms of reference. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you go and read what is said in the 
affidavit is that the – the commission would either the 
President to amend the terms of reference or the commission 
would make a recommendation that other matters that it 
could not deal with because of the constraints on time be 
dealt with by law enforcement agencies or by some other 
forum.  So that is what it said. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because otherwise if we were going to 
investigate everything that is covered by the terms of 
20 
reference we would sit here for ten years. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  If there is an indictment the – the state of 
affairs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja because when you see the terms of 
reference. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 164 of 244 
 
ADV BARRIE SC:  But we obviously have an understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
You 
see 
the 
terms 
of 
reference 
contemplate us looking at every municipality in the whole 
country.  Looking at every depart – national department.  
Looking at every provincial department.  Looking at every 
SOE.  It is just too wide. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  And insofar as you are unable to do that 
no doubt it will be covered by the recommendations that the 
commission will in due course make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:  I say that insofar as you are unable to 
deal with all those matters then I would assume it would be 
dealt with in the recommendations that the commission will 
make in relation to other matters that have come to the 
commission’s attention. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that … 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Because that – the commission has been 
unable to attend to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes what I said in the extension papers is 
that either we will ask the President to amend the terms of 
20 
reference or we will ask that those matters that we are not 
able to deal with be referred to some other forum or law 
enforcement agency. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  I then want to go to the second matter of 
housekeeping and that relates to the request in terms of the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 165 of 244 
 
relation of Access to Information Act.  You will recall that on 
the prior occasion on the 11 December we handed a copy of 
that personally to you but the original thereof had been 
delivered to the commission some days earlier. 
 
Now in terms of the Act that had to have been 
responded to within 30 days and if it is not responded to 
then it is regarded as a refusal of the request. 
 
Now we obviously have understanding that there 
were holidays etcetera in the intervening period of time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:  But the question that now arises is 
whether we should regard the fact that the notice in terms of 
the promotional of Access to Information Act or request in 
terms thereof has not yet responded to is whether we should 
regard it as a refusal and unfortunately here you are the 
information officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I have just said… 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Whether we regard it as a refusal of that 
request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I have just said to you that I made 
20 
enquiries recently with the Secretary and I established that 
not much had been done and I have said that I am going to 
have a meeting involving the Secretary and the legal team 
and everyone concerned to look at all these requests that 
you have made and that includes that one.  And I have said 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 166 of 244 
 
that after that I will be able to take a decision.  Either the 
decision will be taken without any further meeting with you 
or I might decide that before a final decision is made there 
should be a meeting involving your side.  But it – that is a 
decision which one it will be is something that I will take a 
view on once I have had a full briefing as to what challenges 
if any there are in granting the request that you have made 
or granting – giving  you the information that you request. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes Chairman but Chairman the issue is 
then as I understand what you putting across to me is that 
10 
despite the provisions of the act we should not regard the 
fact that the document has not yet been responded to as a 
refusal of the request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no definitely at this stage I have 
not taken a view that you should not be given the information 
on the contrary my inclination is that the commission should 
give you as much information as possible that you are 
entitled to.  Or if their grounds not to give you certain 
information that should be raised with you and let us hear 
what you have to say.  So certainly there is no attitude to 
20 
say in a blanket way you should not receive anything.  
Certainly I want to be briefed fully about what has been 
exchanged between your side and the legal team and the 
Secretary. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 167 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what the Secretary’s attitude is and 
other units of the commission.  And then after that we can 
take it from there. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Ja Mr Chairman the [00:25:16] request is 
a request that stands on its own legs in terms of the 
legislation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  And… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I have said that I want in that meeting 
to discuss that plus this and all the requests that you have 
10 
made to the commission I want to put finality to this. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Chairman with respect on each occasion 
that we have prepared – that we have appeared before you 
you have expressed the sentiment that you have just 
expressed again and our attempts to get hold of the 
documents even via the issuing of a request in terms of 
[00:25:53] have met with no success.  And the question is 
now how long is it going to take? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I have just told you Mr Barrie. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Because the act – the limit that the act 
20 
provides has already been exceeded.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Barrie what I have told you is two 
things.   
1. I want a meeting with the relevant people within the 
commission to be briefed fully about what is the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 168 of 244 
 
problem.  Are there any challenges?  Both in terms of 
the [00:26:24] request and in terms of this. 
2. I have said to you that meeting is going to be – I want 
that meeting to be before the end of the week and I 
said after that you will be contacted. 
Whether you are contacted to say let us have a meeting or to 
say this is the final position.  That is what I have told you.  
Now I do not know what it is that you do not understand 
when it will take place. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Well it is a question of when is the 
10 
commission now going to ask for an extension? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Is the commission going to ask for an 
extension of the time period provided for in the Act? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well leave that to us.  I have told you what 
is going to happen within this week. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Very well I hear that.  And let us – on a 
third point of housekeeping the roof leaks and it drips water 
20 
on these benches. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Barrie. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  And I am not sure of that you are aware 
of it but… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Barrie.  Mr Seleka I want us 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 169 of 244 
 
to continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see Mr Koko raises his hand.  Mr Koko 
good afternoon. 
MR KOKO:  Good afternoon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your Counsel was speaking to me just now 
and I think when your Counsel was speaking you were 
speaking to me through him. 
MR KOKO:  I understood Chair but I have – I am burning in 
my chest. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  So I am burning in my chest and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Shall I give you one minute? 
MR KOKO:  Please give me one minute? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay one minute. 
MR KOKO:  When we came here people accused me of 
meeting people anywhere else.   
CHAIRPERSON:  People accused you of? 
MR KOKO:  Accused me of meeting people in dark corners 
including Melrose Arch. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR KOKO:  I make – I – telephone records are very 
important to prove who is where.  I have made this 
commission – commitment to the commission that I will give 
relevant telephone records to the commission.  I have done 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 170 of 244 
 
that.  I may have done that late but I have done that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:  But I get a letter paragraph 6 on your letter that 
says: 
CHAIRPERSON:  This letter? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  506 that says: 
“Mr Koko you – we do not have telephone 
records of anybody.” 
10 
Now the Chairman said in this – when I was last here is that 
when you have records we have no reason to keep them 
from you.  But when I get a letter from the commission that 
says we do not have these records when I know you have 
them it borders on a trust relationship.  So Mr Seleka says to 
Ms Daniels on the 15 September day 67 he says: 
“But you know I have – we have obtained 
telephone records between you and Mr Koko 
in which we see that there is a telephone call 
from him to you the evening before.  The 
20 
night 
before 
three 
minutes 
before 
the 
evening.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  My telephone records show me that this 
telephone call that Mr Seleka is talking about here is factual. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 171 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is? 
MR KOKO:  It is factual. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  For Mr Seleka to then write back to me and say: 
“I 
do 
not 
have 
telephone 
records 
of 
anybody.” 
When I know he has them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  It is a trust issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR KOKO:  It burns me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  It burns. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I understand what you saying. 
MR KOKO:  It further supports what I have been saying to 
you all along that the only reason these telephone records 
are not coming out, it is because they are not telling you the 
story they want you to believe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   That is the only reason.  I have  ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...that the legal team writes to me to tell me 
what - in the townships, I will say it is a lie but I have not 
seen it in this area. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 172 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   These things should be sorted out. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We should not really be taking so long 
about some of these things. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now I do know that one of the witnesses – 
I do not know if it was Ms Daniels or – I do know that one of 
the witnesses was referred to cell phone records. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why was that not given to Mr Koko. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, they should read the letter to you 
in totality because the letter says, the telephone records of 
the witness that were referred to hear, is the one of 
Ms Nomkuleko Molefe.   
 
That has been conveyed on more than one occasion.  It 
is repeated here because my telephone conversation with 
Mr Koko’s 
attorney, 
he 
says 
we 
must 
give 
them 
the 
telephone records that were referred by the witnesses before 
the Commission.   
20 
 
And I say then, with that definition in mind, the answer 
is, the only person who has not only made reference to the 
telephone records but also undertook...   
 
Sorry, 
before 
that 
Chairperson. 
 
Paragraph 
5.  
Ms Nomkuleko Molefe is the one who referred.  And that has 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 173 of 244 
 
been conveyed to in a letter and the records were then again 
provided to you.  So that is done. 
 
Now if – and these issues can be dealt with in chambers, 
so that they can be dealt with, with us telephonically by 
virtual meeting that also on such and such date you referred 
to Ms Daniels to telephone records.  He did not provide us 
with telephone records.   
 
Then we can go to the transcript and say:  Okay here it 
is.  Let u see what we can provide then in regard to that.  
But the request has been blunted and general.  At least, 
10 
specified insofar ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what you would know, of course, is 
what telephone records you have. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They relate to certain witnesses which 
relates to conversations or alleged conversations with 
Mr Koko. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why do you not just give them all of those 
irrespective of how the request has been formulated by his 
20 
lawyer?   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say that you know Miss so and so and 
so and so and so and so.  We have got telephone records 
where – which are connected or allegedly connected with 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 174 of 244 
 
mister – conversation with Mr Koko.   
 
And say, here are all of the telephone records that we 
have where one or other of the following witnesses seems to 
have had a conversation with you.  Here they are.   
 
What we have given you is everything we have.  As long 
as it is a telephone record that allegedly relates to a 
conversation that you had with somebody who has given 
evidence in the Commission.  To say, here they are. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chairperson, since their prior 
request. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have done that exercise with the 
relevant persons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
After 
the 
December 
holidays 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...I had meetings with them.  We have 
made some progress in regard to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So the Chairperson – be consistent with 
the meeting that the Chairperson has in mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You will then get the latest. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 175 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In regard to what is happening now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And the request regarding that can be 
provided 
because 
either 
then 
personally 
also 
have 
knowledge of how much does the Forensic Investigation 
Team has in regard to that information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, what you can do is to say, as far 
as us as the legal team leading evidence in regard to Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As far as we are concerned, these are the 
10 
records that we are aware of. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that we are aware of that relate to your 
conversations with some of the following people or the 
following people.  When – what we are giving you is all that 
this legal team is aware of. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
20 
ADV BARRIE:   Chairman, it is for that very reason why the 
prior request was delivered.  It is because it was avert that 
my attorney had in some way or another limited the very, 
very 
detailed 
request 
that 
had 
been 
made 
in 
prior 
correspondence.  So the prior request has to be responded 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 176 of 244 
 
to in terms of the act. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE:   And that means, we are asking for all those 
records if they are in the Commission’s possession. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE:   It is not a question of relevance.  We do not 
have to provide a reason why we need those records.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE:   We are asking them in terms of that 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us talk ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE:   If they are in their possession ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us stop the conversation now 
Mr Barrie.  I have indicated what my attitude is.  But 
anything that can be furnished to Mr Koko’s legal team 
without having to wait for the meeting that is going to 
happen, should be furnished.  And then, of course, there will 
be the meeting.  Okay alright. 
ADV BARRIE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please let us continue.   
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think let us administer the oath again 
because we have had quite some time lapsed.   
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR KOKO:   Matshela Moses Koko. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 177 of 244 
 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objections in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR KOKO:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence that you will 
give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the 
truth?  If so, please raise up your right hand and say, so help 
me God. 
10 
MR KOKO:   So help me God. 
MATSHELA MOSES KOKO:  (d.s.s.) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FURTHER EXAMINATION BY ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, 
Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, you might just in a few minutes 
or a few sentences, just tell the public what Mr Koko’s 
evidence will be about today so that they can follow. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Koko has 
appeared before the Commission previously.  He has 
20 
appeared on two occasions.  He was called to deal with 
matters pertaining to the suspensions of the four executives.  
That was the first part of his appearances. 
 
This second part of his appearance relates to matters of, 
what we have called for ease of reference, the transactions.  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 178 of 244 
 
They, primarily, relate to the transactions done between 
Eskom and the company called Tegeta.   
 
And along with those transactions, what was happening 
simultaneously in regard to other entities, in this case such 
as Glencore, Optimum, entities such as Azaro.   
 
And we will also look at matters pertaining to Trillion and 
McKenzie to the extent that we do not traverse issues that 
have already been done at court Chairperson. 
 
So in regard to the transaction matters.  Mr Koko has 
prepared an affidavit and he deals with the pre-payment or 
10 
pre-payment decision of R 1 68 billion.  
 
And then the process in regard to the motivation for that, 
he 
will 
deal 
with 
that 
because 
Mr 
Koko 
signed 
the 
submission that was submitted to the board to make that 
decision for that pre-payment. 
 
There is – the build-up to the pre-payment, also 
Chairperson, is the interactions between Eskom in the 
acquisition of Optimum.  The interactions with Tegeta, with 
Optimum with the DMR.  Mr Koko will deal with that. 
 
He will also testify then on the pre-payment we were 
20 
busy dealing with, with Dr Nteta which comes in the following 
year, April 2016.  Mr Koko also signed the submission in 
regard to that pre-payment.  We expect that he will explain 
the details of it, the rationale.  And ultimately, the penalties 
that were persuade against Optimum.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 179 of 244 
 
 
Mr Koko, then there will be a few questions from my 
side, arising from matters testified previously.  I just want to 
tidy up the loose ends before I go into the transactions. 
 
Now Chairperson, I am mindful of the time because I 
suppose we will have to stand still at the time agreed with 
Mr Koko’s counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Even though 40-minutes was taken in 
dealing with preliminary issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Further on housekeeping 
Chairperson.  We have the bundles for the purposes of the 
record.  We have Eskom Bundle 15.  One five.  That bundle 
Chairperson has been updated.  So it will be ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is 15A. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, 15A and 15B. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I see.  Ja, 15A and 15B. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that contains Mr Koko’s affidavits 
with the annexures.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And it has been updated with other 
material relating to Mr Koko.  Then we will use the 
Reference Bundle, Eskom Bundle 18.  One eight.  So there is 
also A and B in that Reference Bundle.  On eight, A and B. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we going to need it later or now? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 180 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I am not starting with it now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I may in the process, yes.  We can just 
have it handy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Mr Koko, a couple of 
matters then arising from your appearance previously.  I just 
want to start with that and finish it off.  You testified on one 
of the two occasions where we were dealing with the 
suspensions, that Ms Daniels and Mr Masango testified at 
10 
the Parliamentary Portfolio 
Committee that they acted 
together to get rid of you.   
 
And this was in response to the Chairperson asking you 
about:  Why would they have on the 10t h of March 2015 
communicated to other persons the same information or 
similar information?   
 
You have explained and explained but ultimately came to 
this:  Chair, I can tell you this is what they testified at 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee that they acted together 
to get rid of me.  You remember that? 
20 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But I have seen in your letter, which my 
learned friend said is incorrectly dated the 3r d because it 
was delivered on the 2 nd of December 2020, that in a 
paragraph and I will read paragraph 71, you read there.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 181 of 244 
 
“Ms Masango also told the Parliamentary Portfolio 
Committee ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Paragraph 
71 
of 
his 
affidavit 
or 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is the letter from his attorney 
Chairperson. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, the one that that should refer(?) the 3rd but 
it is actually the second one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that is right. 
MR KOKO:   Thank you.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, I think I will have a copy for the 
Chairperson.  I would presume that my learned friend has a 
copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, just – maybe you can read it aloud. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But arrangements should be made for me 
to have a copy. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  Thank you.  So it says: 
“Mr Masango also told the Parliamentary Portfolio 
Committee that he worked extremely hard with 
20 
Ms Daniels 
and 
an 
unnamed 
journalist 
to 
get 
Mr Koko out of Eskom. 
This 
occurred 
after 
Mr 
Koko 
had 
removed 
Mr Masango from his position as Eskom’s Group 
Executive, Group Capital i.e. the Eskom division 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 182 of 244 
 
responsible for new capital projects, including the 
massive Medupi projects.” 
 
That is all in brackets, and then you say: 
“In January 2017, because of his involvement in 
corruption.” 
 
So the collaboration between the two of them, you are 
saying, it happened after you removed Mr Masango from his 
position in January 2017 because of his involvement in 
corruption.  That is what is stated in that paragraph. 
MR KOKO:   That is correct.  The collaboration between the 
10 
two, when the two of them has never made a secret. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Koko.  I do not know 
whether it is the aircon.  Ja, I think they need to adjust it.  
Mr 
Koko, 
please 
just 
repeat 
what 
you 
said 
because 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I am saying, it is correct.  The collaboration 
between the two, the two of them have never made it secret.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have never made it...? 
20 
MR KOKO:   Secret. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is that they never made it secret? 
MR KOKO:   The collaboration ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   To have you removed? 
MR KOKO:   To have me removed. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 183 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   They have never made it secret. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that so? 
MR KOKO:   Independently and collectively. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And this is after a certain date or 
month in 2017? 
MR KOKO:   Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Yes Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, thank you.  Just for the 
benefit of the Chairperson.  I want to hand up to the 
10 
Chairperson a copy of that letter. 
MR KOKO:   Wait.  They are not watching now.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  The letter does not seem to be 
paginated Chair but the paragraphs are numbered.  I was 
reading from paragraph 71. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 71. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Mr Koko, but that does not seem to 
20 
be an answer to the Chairperson’s question which he was 
specifically asking in relation to 10 March 2015 because if, 
on your version, the collaboration started after you removed 
Mr Masango in January 2017, that means that collaboration 
would 
have 
only 
started 
nearly 
two 
years 
after 
the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 184 of 244 
 
suspension of the executives.   
MR KOKO:   I have no doubt that is the case. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Then there was again your 
statement made when you were testifying, that in 2015 and 
we are talking about Mr Salim Essa ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Mister...? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Salim Essa.  That in 2015 you did not 
know Mr Salim Essa. 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But if you go to – in fact, it starts with 
10 
your disciplinary hearing.  I will go to the email.  You 
remember charge one of your disciplinary hearing related to 
emails you exchanged with Businessman. 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that was from July 2015 shortly after 
you came back from your suspension. 
MR KOKO:   It was like 2015. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   2015.  And those exchanges, they go all 
the way, at least in 2015, to December 2015.  There are 
correspondence after in 2016 that ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR KOKO:   That sounds correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chairperson, they are in the 
Reference Bundle, just for the Chairperson’s ease of 
reference, page 10, 18B.  Reference Bundle.  Has Mr Koko 
has the... 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 185 of 244 
 
MR KOKO:   18B. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And what page?  Have you got the 
page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 1018.   
CHAIRPERSON:   One eight.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ten, one, eight. 
MR KOKO:   18? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   18B, yes.   
MR KOKO:   Okay.  Page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   1018.  Ten, one, eight.   
10 
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   But Chair, I am doing just for your 
benefit because Mr Koko ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  No, that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Otherwise, I could move a little faster. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you will see the email.  In fact, the 
one is on the 20 t h of ...[indistinct] [00:21:36] [coughing in 
20 
background]  The first one is on the 20t h of July.  That is on 
the day from your return from your suspension.  Are you on 
that page? 
MR KOKO:   Let me just... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   There... 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 186 of 244 
 
MR KOKO:   Remember, we followed the black ones? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, 1018. 
MR KOKO:   Ten, eighty? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One, eight.  Ten, one, eight. 
MR KOKO:   Ten, one...  Ja.  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that is the first email from Matshela 
Koko, kokomm@eskom.co.za, Monday, 20 July 2015 at 07:56 
and 
the 
email 
is 
addressed 
to 
infoportal1@zoho.com, 
internal consulting directive.  Print this, you say.   
 
Now those emails...  Chairperson, they go on.  And I will 
10 
ask Mr Koko – let me just go through the emails quickly.  The 
email has an attachment which is the document there 
attached 
which 
is 
an 
Eskom 
document, 
Directive 
for 
Implementation 
of 
National 
Treasury 
Cost 
Containment 
Instruction.   
 
Chairperson, then you go to page ten, thirty-two (1032).  
It 
is 
another 
email 
on 
the 
same 
date 
to 
infoportal1@zoho.com, also from Mr Matshela Koko.  The 
subject is Top Engineers.  And then you have an attachment.   
 
On the next page:  Approve all conditions agreed 
20 
between acting CFO and acting GE, GC and T on Friday, 
26 June 2015.  And then there is a spelling error, it seems 
there.  Top Engineers Development Programme.   
 
You see that Mr Koko?  I just give you the page numbers 
quickly.  I will expedite this.  Then on page 1035.  There is 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 187 of 244 
 
another email on the same date, 20 July 2015 from Matshela 
Koko to infoportal1@zoho.com.  The subject is Eskom 
Resolution and the message is:  Print this one too.  It is a 
round-robin resolution date, 5 March 2014. 
 
The next email is on page 1056.  Also sent from yourself 
kokomm@eskom.co.za.  This one is sent on Saturday, 
8 August 2015 at twenty to twenty at night, also to the same 
email 
address 
infoportal1@zoho.com. 
 The 
subject 
is:  
Online Vending.  And the message... 
 
Now these emails so far, they do not identify a person.  
10 
There is no Dear Paul or Dear Ms so and so.  It is just a 
message you say, print this.  And this one simple says: 
“We did not finish our discussions about this 
transactions.  This is what is going to board 
(meaning to the board) of 18 August.” 
 
I suppose 2015.  The date is not indicated there.  Would 
it be 2015 Mr Koko? 
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   The date for that 18 August? 
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the question? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The 18 August Chair does not have a 
year number.  So I am just asking whether that will be 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   Which one? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 188 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   At page 1056. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sure it is 2015. 
MR KOKO:   I am sure it is 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Then the document is 
attached to a person:  Submission, document, executive 
summary.  This is an Eskom document.  The next email. 
Chairperson, you will find it on page 1075.   
 
This one is sent on Monday, 21 September 2015 at 16:32 
also from Mr Koko to infoportal1@zoho.com.  The subject is:  
10 
Me(?) and E.   
 
And the message is simple:  RE. R-E.  Nothing further.  
There is a document there attached of 31 August 2015 which 
pertains to Mr Pedra(?). 
MR KOKO:   Pedra. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I think Mr Pedra, who was being 
suspended or given a notice of intention, rather, to suspend.  
Do you recall that document Mr Koko? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  Then there is on page 1078 and 
20 
email from Mr Koko on Wednesday, 30 September 2015 also 
sent to infoportal1@zoho.com.  The subject is simple RE, R-
E.  There is no message in that email.   
 
But there is an attachment of a letter addressed to 
Minister Lynne Brown by Dr Ngubane.  Suspension of contact 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 189 of 244 
 
in any form whatsoever and or commercial relationship with 
the Mail & Guardian, City Press and Sunday Times. 
 
Chairperson, you will recall when Ms Daniels was here, 
there was a document, a round-robin – meant to be a round-
robin resolution of, amongst others, Eskom, Denel and...  I 
cannot recall if Transnet was part of it.  But Dr Ngubane also 
testified about.  It came from Businessman, then into Eskom 
and it was asking Eskom to take the resolution, to terminate 
any contact with these media houses.  Were you aware of 
that communication Mr Koko? 
10 
MR KOKO:   Was I aware of...? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That communication that came from 
Businessman through Dr Ngubane and asking that the 
resolution be taken by the board, exactly from that subject 
line we see. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I have listened to the evidence 
before this commission so I am aware of what the 
discussion of Mr Seleka say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But is your awareness based on what 
you heard in terms of evidence or you were aware at some 
20 
stage during 2015 or...? 
MR KOKO:   Not at all, my – it came to my attention arising 
out of the evidence in this committee.  I knew of this and I 
at your own time, I can go into the discussions around 
…[intervenes] 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 190 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can deal with it, ja. 
MR KOKO:   But I only became aware of the information Mr 
Seleka is talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:   In this Commission. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, we will come to it.  Then you 
have the email on the next page, page 1080 which is also 
from you sent on Saturday 14 November 2015 at 10.36 to 
info portal, again the subject is simply: 
“RE no message”  
10 
And it attaches electricity load shedding review and way 
forward document.  You were aware of this document as 
well? 
MR KOKO:   I am aware of this document. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then the next page is 1084.  Again 
from yourself, Eskom, Kokomm@eskom, Wednesday 25 
November 2015 to info portal.  1@zoho, the subject is 
simply – really no subject.  The message is: 
“Give the boss please” 
That is the message, we do not know who is asked to give 
20 
the boss please. 
MR KOKO:   I am aware of this. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You are aware of that.  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And I think the last two emails, if you 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 191 of 244 
 
turn to page 1087.  I think there is an email missing in 
November.  Two emails.  But let me look at this one at 
1087.  So that is an email.  The bottom email is from 
Businessman 
– 
and 
we 
know 
businessman 
from 
the 
evidence is the same info portal address.  It is dated 10 
December 2015.  That date is significant because it 
coincides 
with 
other 
issues 
and 
it 
is 
sent 
to 
Matshela@2010. 
“Subject:  Two pager.  Two pager between Tegeta 
and Eskom, salient points.” 
10 
And the salient points are set out there.  We will come to it 
in due course, this email.  And at the top of it, seems to be 
you, Matshela2010@Yahoo on Thursday, the same date, 10 
December 2015, forwarded the two pager to Ms Suzanne 
Daniels.  Do you see that? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, Sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   She has already testified about you, 
you would have seen during her testimony. 
MR KOKO:   Certainly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then on the next page, page 10.88.  
20 
There is an email exchange at the middle of the page.  Ja, 
but these are 2016 emails.  They are not relevant for 
present purposes.  So that is the 2015 exchange of emails 
starting on page 1018.  Mr Koko, it was established that 
the disciplinary hearing of Mr (sic) Suzanne Daniels, she 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 192 of 244 
 
has testified here about this info portal email address.  
She is not finished yet, I should emphasise, she is not 
finished, that this email address belonged to Mr Salim 
Essa.  Your comment? 
MR KOKO:   Testified by who? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am saying it was established at the 
disciplinary hearing of Ms Daniels that this email of info 
portal 1@zoho.com belongs to Mr Salim Essa. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I not that.  I am shocked, I am 
flabbergasted and it angers me, if that is indeed the case.  
10 
I received this Whatsapp email address from  - after my 
suspension of 2015 from Ms Daniels and Ms Daniels, I 
have met him – I was unsuspended on the 15 t h or 16 t h July.  
I met her before the 20 t h and she, before my suspension, 
she was my assistant and overnight out of the blue she 
was in the Chairman’s office.   
 
When I was unsuspended I had discussions with her 
because 
I 
was 
concerned 
about 
how 
I 
ended 
up 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   When your suspension was lifted? 
20 
MR KOKO:   I beg your pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:   When your suspension was lifted. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, I beg your pardon.  When my suspension 
was uplifted I met with her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 193 of 244 
 
MR KOKO:   And we discussed how to work around the new 
board, around the new Chairperson given my previous 
experiences with the Chairman because I still today am of 
the firm view that I was suspended because of my 
relationship with Mr Zola Tsotsi.  Ms Daniels gave me the 
email address and say you need to deal – to keep the 
Chairman informed and we need to have three way 
meetings as often as possible so that they are not 
blindsided, so that they are properly informed and the 
problem with you, Mr Koko, is that you came to make up 
10 
your mind and move on your own and isolate the board and 
the Chairperson.  So this email, in her view, the Chairman 
uses 
this 
email, 
so 
if 
you 
have 
got 
information 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Chairman at that time being a 
reference to? 
MR KOKO:   Dr Ngubane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Dr Ngubane, okay. 
MR KOKO:   Yes and if you have information that you think 
that the board think – Mr Ngubane thinks differently, send 
20 
it, I will print it out and I will arrange a three way meeting 
between yourself, myself an Dr Ngubane that would clear a 
lot of the problems in terms of communication.  And 
Chairman, without fail, without fail and I certainly wish that 
we can go one by one with these emails and I can talk you 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 194 of 244 
 
through why I thought at that point it is important to bring 
them to the Chairman.   
 
We had a meeting – the way it works at that level is 
that the Chairman hardly uses his computer.  You know, I 
am sure he does, I mean, he is a doctor, but most of the 
time, when you sent the documents to him the assistant 
cleaned them out and then arrange a meeting and then 
when you walk into the Chairman’s office for the meeting 
you find the documents are already served.  
Chair, I suspect we have a pre-briefing before you 
10 
come in and this is a document Mr Koko want to discuss 
with you and then sometimes I would have discussed 
previously with her or I would then get back into the details 
with it.   
So, without fail, these documents, after I have sent 
them to Businessman, found their way to a three way 
meeting between me, Dr Ngubane and Ms Daniels.  If it 
turns out that somebody else, Mr Essa, owns the email 
address or use the email address it makes me angry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, what is the last word you said? 
20 
MR KOKO:   It makes me angry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It makes you angry, okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me say, Mr Koko, to the extent 
that you may deem it necessary that we go through those 
emails one by one, that arrangement – that should be done 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 195 of 244 
 
at some stage.  So you just mentioned that you wish that 
could be done, so I am just saying …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   I wish that could be done.  But what is also 
important, Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   If it is not done now, at some stage it 
must be done. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that you can deal with them properly. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, what makes me even more upset is 
having listened to the evidence before this Commission 
10 
and having read - the legal team had the decency to give 
me the records of Ms Daniels’ testimony.  I mean, Ms 
Daniels says my legal team and OUTA did extensive 
research on the identity of the Businessman email address 
and it belongs to Mr Seleke.   
On both occasions both at the disciplinary hearing 
and here, when it was put to her that but hang on, Mr 
Richard Seleke. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This one is Seleka. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, so Mr Seleke.  It is not Mr Seleke, it is 
20 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Richard Seleke. 
MR KOKO:   It is not Mr Richard Seleke because Mr Seleke 
was not even in the employ of the department when you – 
this email was used.  Her body language – she just became 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 196 of 244 
 
stubborn and say but, I hear you, but you have not proven 
who this email belongs to and I have read the subject 
matter expert or the forensic expert that emailed the 
computers.   
I mean, even though the heads of argument in the 
disciplinary hearing says we could not conclusively say it 
was Salim Essa, that is the message that comes out of the 
heads of argument in the disciplinary hearing.  We did not 
conclude – we did not conclusively conclude that it is 
Salim Essa but we have relied on the attachments that 
10 
were sent on that email and we can see that some of those 
documents were originated or active by Salim Essa and 
therefore, in all probabilities, it belongs to Salim Essa. 
 
Chairman, it does not matter for me whether it is 
Salim Essa or not.  It does not matter.  What matters to me 
is that if that email address belongs to an external party 
then it is a serious security breach for me.  That concerns 
me.   
Salim Essa is neither here nor there but whenever I 
communicated on this email address, I never had the 
20 
intention or the impression that there is a third party that 
does not belong to Eskom that is having access of that 
email address. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ja, we have got 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 197 of 244 
 
time limitations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I think we need to take a 
very short break. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just ten minutes and then we will 
resume. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Koko, 
talking of the version of Dr Ngubane and Ms Suzanne 
Daniels, you would also recall that between the two of 
them the one says the email was given to me by the other, 
the email address and that the one said it is an email 
address that belongs to Richard Seleke of the DPE and 
vice versa.   
 
So Dr Ngubane says that is the explanation from Ms 
Suzanne Daniels, Ms Suzanne Daniels says when he gave 
20 
it to me, he gave me that explanation.  Do you recall that 
as well, that evidence? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, I do, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But I think when they came here, and 
particularly referring to Dr Ngubane, he had to concede 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 198 of 244 
 
that that email could not belong to Mr Richard Seleke. 
MR KOKO:   I do not believe so too. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Suzanne Daniels has …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What you have – the answer you have 
given I guess means you do not believe that it belonged to 
Mr 
Richard 
Seleke 
not 
that 
you 
do 
not 
believe 
…[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is what you mean. 
MR KOKO:   That is what I mean, that is what I mean. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I thought I heard Mr Koko say I do 
believe that that is what he conceded. 
MR KOKO:   Certainly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well – no, I think he went beyond that.  I 
think he said he also does not believe it belonged to Mr 
Richard Seleke. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, earlier.  Earlier, he said… 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he is stating his position.  I think 
his position is, that is Mr Koko, I also do not believe that it 
belonged to Mr Richard Seleke. 
MR KOKO:   I agree with what you have set out here and I 
am saying over and above that… 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 199 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I do not believe that it belongs to Mr Richard 
Seleke. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR KOKO:   Purely based on the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, yes.  I do not know whether you 
have also looked – you are aware of the Fundudzi report 
because it goes into this email of Businessman info portal 
10 
and how CVs were exchanged with this email address to 
the DPE and people should be appointed at this board and 
that board. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, only to the extent that I have heard 
through this Commission. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   The Fundudzi report, I did not have sight of it 
because it had nothing to do with me and what I can 
confirm is that I listened to the evidence and I can confirm 
what Mr Seleka is saying. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you.  Then the other item 
which you testified about – Chair, I am moving on.  I do not 
know whether you have questions on the emails? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, do you intend dealing with them 
more at some other stage in terms of the individual emails? 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 200 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not really, I will have – well, there is 
one or two that I will go back to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, maybe let me ask this 
question.  You must just tell me, Mr Koko, if I understood 
your evidence correctly.  I understood you to say you were 
given this email address, info portal, is that what…? 
MR KOKO:   Info portal.soho.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Now I understood you to say 
you were given this email address when you came back – 
after you had come back from your suspension. 
10 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that the person who gave it to you 
was Ms Daniels.  And what I did not understand quite 
clearly and I would like you to deal with that again, I 
seemed to understand that she was saying to you here is 
an email address that you and I and Dr Ngubane can use 
but I did not understand use under what circumstances.  
So just tell me more about that conversation when she 
gave it to you. 
MR KOKO:   No, Chair, this is the email address that is 
20 
used by the Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Chairman. 
MR KOKO:   This is the Chairman’s email address. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is what she said to you. 
MR KOKO:   That is what she said. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 201 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   yes. 
MR KOKO:   And, Chair, the Eskom security policy, 
information 
security 
is 
also 
given 
to 
me 
and 
the 
Commission has it.  What did not make me uncomfortable 
is that without fail all board members used their private 
email addresses.  I also used my private email address as 
far as when I was still at Duvha and that is typically 
triggered by the servers coming down, wara, wara.  But it 
was not unusual, it was not something to raise my 
eyebrows because, I mean, you have got – I have seen, I 
10 
have listened to this Commission, you referred to board 
emails left, right and centre.  I do not have access of them 
but, I can assure you, almost most of them are on private 
email addresses.   
So 
there 
was 
nothing 
that 
would 
make 
me 
suspicious because first, it is not un-procedural, the 
company policy does not prohibit it and the rest of the 
board members are using it.  So I did not see anything 
wrong. 
In fact, only when the Gupta emails saga blew then 
20 
I started becoming very suspicious.  In fact, worse things 
happened because after that my account was shut down by 
who because of suspicious activities on my yahoo email 
addresses.  It was too much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So was Ms Daniels effectively saying to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 202 of 244 
 
you – presenting this email address to you as one of the 
email addresses you can use to communicate with the 
Chairperson or as the only email address to use? 
MR KOKO:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was your understanding? 
MR KOKO:   No, the Chairman – the board members have 
got email addresses, they have email addresses.  I have 
never sent Dr Ngubane and email address before I was 
suspended.  I had no reason to interact with her.  With him, 
my apologies.   
10 
 
When I came back, Ms Daniels was very clear, she 
did not say this is an email that a portal that hundred of us 
have got access to it, it was an email of Dr Ngubane.  
Whether it was an email of Dr Ngubane on the Eskom one 
or on a personal one, Ms Daniels has access to it, as the 
assistant.  So again it was not a surprise that I will send it 
to it and printed it.  My plea has the same as well.  In fact I 
saw one of the – some of the emails.  I am sure Mr Seleka 
will go to it.  My PA sent it to somebody else on behalf of 
Mr Koko.  So you do have that.  It is common within 
20 
Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now there is something that seems 
unusual with regard to the use of this email address by I 
think – Mr Seleka will correct me if my recollection is 
wrong, by many, if not all the people, who seemed to have 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 203 of 244 
 
used it.  Namely, that there seems to be a conscious 
decision not reveal the identity of the person to whom the 
emails are addressed when this email address is used and 
on the emails to which Mr Seleka has drawn our attention, 
coming from you, I see that the same thing seems to 
happen, there seems to be no email where you address the 
person:  Dear Chairman, Dear Dr Ngubane or anything like 
that.   
 
Now it may well be that if it was just one person 
and we talk about three emails that one should not make 
10 
much out of it but I just note that, if I am not mistaken, 
almost everyone else who has used it, does not reveal the 
identity of the person they are sending the email to. 
MR KOKO:   Good question.  Chairman, I worked for Mr 
Molefe for over two years.  Anoj was also my senior, Mr 
Singh was also my senior.  I invite your investigators to go 
and check my communications, you have them, you have 
imaged my computers.  See how – what I communicate with 
Mr Molefe.  I never said Mr Molefe.  I never do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is quite important because it might 
20 
show that that is how you normally …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Ja, even today, I do not call Mr Molefe by his 
name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Even today I do not call Dr Ngubane by his 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 204 of 244 
 
name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So but what – are you saying that 
your emails will not have Dear Chairperson, Dear CEO. 
MR KOKO:   No, no, well …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Dear Dr Ngubane. 
MR KOKO:   Let me say no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Let me say no.  That may sound stupid to say 
no but I am simply saying you will find by and large, if not 
most of them, I will either say Boss, Chief or Legoa.  That 
10 
is how I address… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that is fine because I think in that 
way you are identifying the person if you say Boss or 
whoever or whoever.  You might only be using the 
salutation or the name that you used to relate to that 
person but at least it is there, you know?  If it was Mr 
Brian – not Brian, Mr Abram Masango, maybe you would 
say Maki. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, exactly, exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a way of addressing him. 
20 
MR KOKO:   In fact that is how I addressed him even in 
writing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  So, therefore, to the extent 
that in emails to other people such as maybe Dr Ngubane 
or Brian Molefe you might say Dear Boss or Hi Boss or 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 205 of 244 
 
Dear Chairperson or whatever, that would not say to me 
that is the way you normally – that would not say you do 
not address the person because, as I see it, the three or 
four emails that Mr Seleka referred to, there is no 
salutation like Hi Chairperson or Dear So and So, it is 
silent as to who you are referring to. 
MR KOKO:   There is a reason for that.  It is all of them, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So that is the part that I am saying 
– then I am saying you are not the only one, it seems that 
10 
other people who were sending emails to the same email 
address, it seems that they were also not addressing the 
person in the normal way in terms of salutation, that there 
seems to be nothing, you know, to say who are sending 
this to. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I cannot talk about other people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, yes. 
MR KOKO:   I cannot talk about other people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, yes, yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:   In fact, the more I talk about other people 
20 
using this email address I get worked up but the emails 
that I sent, so there is an email for example that says print 
this, that is because I knew that the recipient on that one 
would be Ms Daniels because I would have discussed it 
with her.  It would be, Ms Daniels, we have not finished 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 206 of 244 
 
this 
discussion 
previously, 
so 
let 
us 
finish 
off 
this 
discussion.  There is a next board meeting coming, I do not 
want to get to that board meeting without having discussed 
this because then I am – it happens, Chairman, and all of 
them, without fail, all of them without fail, these are the 
emails where I think I have a serious disagreement with the 
Chairman.  All of them and I do not want to have a – that 
disagreement playing in the public. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   The Chairman – the discussion will be there in 
10 
the board and I will say my say but the Chairperson will 
know it is coming and he will not fully disrespect it and he 
will take it in good spirit. 
 
I mean, let me give you an example.  The email that 
bans Eskom from advertising on City Press, Sunday Times 
and Mail and Guardian, that is a resolution of the board.  
The person to give effect to that, it is the group executive 
commercial.  Who is that?  That is me. 
 
But I know that it is irregular.  It is irregular.  The 
Eskom procurement procedure which I was a custodian of 
20 
says if you think the supplier has committed a misconduct, 
you do not just suspend him.  There is a process you take 
the supplier through and the outcome is to stop using him, 
it goes through a process. 
 
But now I come in, there is a resolution of the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 207 of 244 
 
board, Suzanne gives me a letter from – addressed to the 
minister.  Said but, Suzanne, I cannot give effect to this.  I 
cannot.  And, for the record, Chair – and I listed to the 
evidence of Dr Ngubane, that letter, that resolution was 
never implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was never? 
MR KOKO:   Implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Certainly at Eskom precisely because of the 
discussion that I had with Dr Ngubane and Ms Daniels and 
10 
he - once I talked to the [indistinct 16.40] Chairman, I am 
not going to break the rules, of course I am polite and Dr 
Ngubane is an adult and he is a better version of Mr Tsotsi 
and he listened.  He listened. 
 
But this is why I have a preference, God willing, 
that we take every single email, every single attachment 
and say did you have cause to serve it to Dr Ngubane?  
And what was that cause? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, I think that will need to be 
done next time.  I think it is important. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That it be dealt with firstly because Mr 
Koko wants to show by way of dealing with each email that 
as far as he was concerned he was communicating with Dr 
Ngubane but also I think it is important for establishing 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 208 of 244 
 
exactly what the position was. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So next time when he is back just 
remember that we deal with that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair, because we will also have 
to get the version of Dr Ngubane and Ms Daniels on that 
explanation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  You said you were about to 
10 
move to something else, is that the case? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, it is my – one of the points – yes, I 
was about to move to one of the other points. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Connected with emails or not with 
emails? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Connected with my tidying up of the 
versions Mr Koko testified about last time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I just want to mention this to Mr 
Koko for you to comment.  It has got nothing to do with the 
emails.  You remember that in your evidence you said and 
20 
you have repeated today that you believe that your 
suspension was – I do not know if orchestrated is the right 
word – orchestrated or instigated by Mr Tsotsi.  Do you 
remember that? 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 209 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I recently had reason to look at the 
executive of Mr Linnell and I saw that he said in his 
evidence at the Durban meeting of the 8 March where Mr 
Tsotsi was the and Ms Dudu Menyi was there, he says that 
when the issue of the suspensions of the executives of 
Eskom was raised, Mr Tsotsi’s initial position was to 
oppose the whole notion of the suspension of executives 
and, of course, what that would mean, is that to the extent 
that what was being discussed at that time included your 
own suspension.   
10 
It would seem, according to Mr Linnell, that Mr 
Tsotsi’s 
initial 
position 
was 
to 
oppose 
the 
entire 
suspension of the executives.  So I just thought it is 
important to mention that you might or you might not wish 
to comment about it. 
MR KOKO:   Most certainly I would want to comment, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR KOKO:   I testified the last time I was here that Mr 
Linnell’s version is that actually the idea of the suspension 
20 
of the executives was his. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you said that, ja. 
MR KOKO:   It was not the President’s or Ms Dudu Myeni.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Mr Linnell says once I was appraised about 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 210 of 244 
 
the purpose of the investigation – I think that was the 
meeting of the 6 t h at the presidential guesthouse, the 
meeting before the 8 t h, I then suggested to Ms Myeni that 
you 
cannot 
do 
this 
investigation 
or 
this 
type 
of 
investigation and still have the executives in their jobs.  
That was the version of Mr Linnell.  He then says we met at 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Durban official residence of the 
president. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  And they then discussed the areas of 
10 
investigation 
with 
the 
clear 
understanding 
that 
the 
responsible executives of those areas would then be 
suspended and then he then says, after the meeting, 
because of the none of the people in those meetings knew 
Eskom.  That is his version.  So Mr Tsotsi is the one who 
emailed him the names of the people to be suspended and 
my name was one of the three. 
 
My submission to you was that the reasons put 
forward by Mr Tsotsi to include commercial and used the 
gas, the OCTGs, conversion of OCTGs from base load – 
20 
from peeking to base load based on the letter written by a 
certain Mr Jabu Maswanganyi, the sabotage letter that 
forced commercial to be included and using – pretending 
that I am responsible for generation when I am not was the 
work of Mr Tsotsi and he knew why he was doing it, he was 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 211 of 244 
 
hitting two stones with one stone. He was taking – he was 
opportunistically taking advantage of the situation that he 
did not create but he found himself into. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, two things.  As I understand the 
position, that you would be suspended, you were one of 
the executives to be suspended …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   One of the three. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One of three. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. One of three, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To be suspended, on my understanding 
10 
of Mr Linnell’s evidence was already contemplated initially 
…[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   On the 6 t h even. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja or maybe on the 6 t h, I might not be 
sure, but certainly at the start of the discussion on 
suspensions at the meeting of the 8 t h.  Your portfolio was 
one of the three mentioned.   
 
Now, for me, the importance of that in relation to 
your suggestion that Mr Tsotsi was behind your inclusion 
among those to be suspended is that even before Mr Tsotsi 
20 
could say anything, it would appear that you were one of 
the three that were contemplated to be suspended and if 
that is factually true, what does it do to your suggestion 
that you only got included among the executives to be 
suspended because Mr Tsotsi was pursuing his agenda 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 212 of 244 
 
about you. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, let us take the affidavit of Mr Nick 
Linnell further.  The affidavit of Nick Linnell says Mr Koko 
was 
going 
to 
be 
suspended 
because 
he 
slept 
with 
somebody under the garage or one of the parking lot and 
Mr Marokane is to be suspended because he erased the 
recordings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And Mr Matona is to be suspended because 
he protected both of them.  No one outside Eskom would 
10 
create such a story other than Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   And that is the evidence of Mr Linnell. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now I do not remember whether to 
the extent that Mr Linnell says that – he says that in 
relation to the meeting of the 8 t h or he says that in relation 
to the discussions at the board on the 11 t h. 
MR KOKO:   Mr Linnell goes further, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but what I am telling you that I 
remember quite well because I saw it recently in his 
20 
evidence, Mr Linnell, is that he says Mr Tsotsi’s initial 
position on suspensions at the meeting of the 8 t h was to 
oppose the suspensions and we know that he says that the 
suspensions that they were talking about related to three 
portfolios, which included your portfolio.  So I am saying to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 213 of 244 
 
you at least at that point, maybe later that might be 
different, at that point if that evidence of Mr Linnell is 
correct, Mr Tsotsi does not appear to act in a manner that 
shows some vendetta against you.  He is opposed even to 
your own suspension at that time.  Maybe later on it 
changes but at that time, I just want us to – I want to see 
what you have to say about the proposition that if Mr 
Linnell’s evidence is correct, that initially, at the meeting of 
the 8 March, Mr Tsotsi was opposed to the suspension of 
the executives that at that stage at least he might not have 
10 
had an agenda to have you suspended. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, the difficulty I have – the difficulty 
I have with that evidence is that I am saying to you 
Malesela Sekhasimbe, Mr Sekhasimbe is central to my 
reason of suspension.  And guess what?  Then the reasons 
for the suspension, by Mr Linnell, has that.  I have no 
contact with Mr Linnell.  I have no contact with the people 
who were in that meeting.  But why do we have a same 
view about Malesela Sekhasimbe?  Mr Koko must be 
suspended because he wants to – Mr Koko must be 
20 
suspended, and I am trying to quote it now, because he is 
causing bad blood between the board and Mr Tsotsi 
because of the Sumitomo matter and Malesela matter. 
Where would that come from?  It is written by Mr Linnell. 
 
And, by the way, Mr Linnell says at no stage did the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 214 of 244 
 
Guptas get involved into the suspensions but where would 
Mr – where did Mr Linnell get the story of Mr Sekhasimbe?  
He can only get it from Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, it may well be that at certain 
stage – and we can look at what stage that may have been 
– it may well be that at a certain stage Mr Tsotsi did give 
Mr Linnell that information and it may well be that Mr Tsotsi 
at a certain stage did adopt the attitude that, after all, it 
would not be a bad thing for you to be suspended because 
of the reasons that you give.   
10 
But what I am saying to you – and we will stop here 
because I think you – I have put it to you, you have said 
what you have to say, is it would seem that at least initially 
when Mr Tsotsi heard about the suspensions he may not 
have at that stage wanted you to do that, maybe later on 
he changed his mind.   What is your final comment on that? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I agree on one thing, that Mr Tsotsi 
did not, it was not Mr Tsotsi’s idea to suspend all the 
executives, because we now know it is an idea of Mr 
Linnell, one.   Two, I would buy in to your story if the 
20 
reasons later that were put forward by Mr Linnell of my 
suspension did not include Mr Sekhasimbi.  The fact that it 
includes Mr Sekhasimbi, what I relayed to him later or not 
makes me firmly convinced that Mr Tsotsi either – and it is 
possible that he may – first I concede that he did not come 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 215 of 244 
 
to suspend people there, because that is the work – Mr 
Linnell says it is my idea. 
 
But I am saying, given how Mr Tsotsi felt about me 
he used that opportunity to throw my name into the hat, 
that is why down the line the reasons for my suspension 
included Mr Sekhasimbi, but there is something more than 
that, that really I need you to consider. 
 
If I was part of the plan to suspend the four 
executives so that I can come back why would I be accused 
of sabotage?  Because once I play for your team, and you 
10 
accuse me of sabotage you write me off, one.  Two, when I 
addressed the meeting of the people in governance in the 
evening that suspended me and I pushed back on why I 
should not be suspended and gave reasons because 
allegedly we are playing for the same team the Board 
would have used that opportunity to say but leave this guy 
let him come back because his part of us and he is giving 
us a reason to bring him back and we would bring him 
back.   
But thirdly when if I am part of a team and you 
20 
employ teams to come and investigate me and Denton’s 
comes up with allegedly demining allegations against me 
but I am part of your team surely if Denton – according to 
the version that Mr Seleka always put was part of the 
scheme you know Denton is part of the scheme that they 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 216 of 244 
 
brought in to go through emotions and clear.   
They would have said to Denton this guy is our man 
you cannot have findings about our man that will make it 
impossible for us to bring him back.  In fact, to the 
contrary you must clean him up but we know based on the 
version of Ms Daniels however true it is I think she lies but 
if 
we 
carry 
on 
with 
her 
version 
they 
came 
with 
recommendations that was so damning that the Board had 
to take the report and clear it and hide it, it just does not 
make sense. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well of course if the version is true that 
Denton’s came with damning findings against you for 
example and they were that draft was buried as it were on 
would say that could only happen if the Board was part of 
the whole plan and the Board did not want to have 
something that would force them to fire you.  Is it not?            
MR KOKO:   No in this – Chair my weakness is that I am 
an engineer that is a weakness.  In today’s time first to go 
and check the transcripts of Ms Daniels she says that the 
document was sent to me by email so you can trace it.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.    
MR KOKO:   So we do not need to – and this is why Chair I 
am aggrieved that we cannot get telephone records, I mean 
if I say Mr Koko was at Melrose Arch and he makes 
a…[intervene] 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 217 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no you will get telephone records 
that…[intervene]   
MR KOKO:   I apologies for going back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but also other checking of those 
things would happen, ja.  
MR KOKO:   I am simply saying Chair all what you need is 
what they have done it to me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR KOKO:   I know how they have harassed me, I am the 
single person in Eskom whose IT information has been 
10 
checked up left and centre and I am simply saying if this 
report was sent by email why do they just not do to them 
but finally…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that must be checked.     
MR KOKO:   Denton says finally; Denton says we have 
never done that.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let me go back to what you said 
about Mr Linnell you said that he testified that the idea of 
suspensions came from him and I think last time you said 
the same thing and Mr Seleka seems to have agreed with 
20 
you.    
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Now I just want to say in the parts that I 
recently looked at of the transcript of his evidence what I 
came across is not evidence where he says that.   
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 218 of 244 
 
But what I came across is where he says and he 
has asked the question and I may have been the person 
who asked him is he says as far as this meeting of the 6 t h 
of March his meeting with Ms Myeni is concerned he says 
he is not sure whether the issue of suspensions came from 
Ms Myeni or from him.  But what he does say is because of 
the way he works it may have come from him because he 
would not do this kind of investigation while the executives 
remained.  So I am just mentioning that because it is 
important that if we attribute evidence to him we try as far 
10 
as possible that we do so accurately.   
It may well be that later on and it is a part that I am 
not reached of his evidence, it may well be that he is as 
categorical as both of you say he was.  So if that is so I 
would like to get to that point.      
MR KOKO:   Chair let me tell you what I remember him 
saying.  I do not remember him saying suspend executives 
in fact I do not think he said that.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MR KOKO:   I do not think he said that, what I remember 
20 
him saying is that in his experience of doing such work this 
type of enquiry when it is done cannot be done with the 
heads of the department in place that is what his done.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no, no to the extent that that is 
what you say that is consistent what I have read as well.  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 219 of 244 
 
MR KOKO:   Yes, Chair I think I have clarified that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that is fine Mr Seleka are you 
amending your own recollection or not?  
ADV SELEKA SC:  No I was in agreement with Mr Koko in 
so far as he has now clarified it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is as far as it is consistent with your 
explanation now that is exactly what Mr Linnell said so I 
10 
know that is correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  So I know Mr Koko might have 
paraphrased but now he has clarified.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja know that is – the difference is quite 
important.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct, it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  No, it definitely is.  
CHAIRPERSON:   You may continue.  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, the other thing Mr Koko which I do 
not remember is that Mr Linnell would have mentioned that 
one of the reasons crafted for your suspension had to do 
with Sekhasimbi.   
MR KOKO:   Chair there is an eighth memo.  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 220 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I am saying that I do not remember that 
so.  
MR KOKO:   Chair there is an eighth memo.  Now 
Chairman remember I am the affected party. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Pay more attention.    
MR KOKO:   I would pay more attention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR KOKO:   Go and read the eighth memo it is clear in 
black and white. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I will also Chair as you can see I am 
doing in regard to the other ones. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair there was just one thing I know 
we will come back to the emails in due course but you were 
explaining something that I could not get clearly.  So the 
email address of the portal you say it is given to you by Ms 
Daniels.     
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  So when you send the emails like this, 
20 
like print this the is no dear so or hi Suzanne or Dr 
Ngubane.  Who do you say your communicating with?  
MR KOKO:  Chair on that score I knew that the recipient 
on that specific topic would have been Suzanne.  So I am 
saying being this bring it to the meeting with the Chair.    
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 221 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No but it does not have that last part 
bring it to the attention of the Chair.  
MR KOKO:   No I am explaining, I am giving the context, 
the context is everything, print this print this for what. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let just get that right.  Are you 
saying when you send emails to this email address you 
were s far as you were concerned communicating with Dr 
Ngubane?  
MR KOKO:   Correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And Ms Daniels might just be the conduit 
10 
in the sense that she might open the emails and then print 
it and then give it to Dr Ngubane.    
MR KOKO:   Correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are saying from your side the 
addressee even though you might not have identified it was 
Dr Ngubane.   
MR KOKO:   Correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay so all of them all of these emails 
ja, and I am trying to understand is that all of these emails 
20 
are sent to Dr Ngubane…[intervene] 
MR KOKO:   Correct.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  …but they will be opened by Ms 
Daniels.  
MR KOKO:   Correct in fact ja, the Chairman has two 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 222 of 244 
 
executives who was his assistants but on this email by and 
large without fail it was Suzanne.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Now on that note if you go to page 
1087 Eskom Bundle 18.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry before you go there Ms 
Daniels would not have been Dr Ngubane’s PA there would 
have been a PA for Dr Ngubane, is that correct?   
MR KOKO:   Yes, so what happens is that after a certain 
stage and I do not want to mention the date but it was as I 
10 
suspect if I recall around August she was promoted to the 
company secretary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay and then being company 
secretary did that place her in the Chairperson’s office or 
not necessarily? 
MR KOKO:   It placed her in the Chairpersons office.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, alright Mr Seleka.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, I was saying on that explanation 
Mr Koko if you go to page 1087 Eskom Bundle 18, you see 
– you there?  1087, no 1087 Eskom Bundle 18.  
20 
MR KOKO:   1090? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Black numbers.  
MR KOKO:   Ja, the black numbers.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  The black numbers.  
MR KOKO:   Okay, yes.  
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 223 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The email of the 10 t h of December 
comes from Businessman it goes to you.   
MR KOKO:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  You forward that email to Suzanne 
Daniels.  
MR KOKO:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  So how should we understand this? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, so if you look at the timing it is 7:31, if 
you go to my telephone records I have not given you my 
telephone records for December I am happy to give them to 
10 
you.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  You may give them.  
MR KOKO:   I am saying I have not given you my 
telephone records of December but I am happy to give 
them to you.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  You are happy to give them, okay.  
MR KOKO:   Based on what I am going to make.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MR KOKO:   Around five minutes before this I phoned 
Suzanne and she also said when you confronted her with 
20 
this she says she thinks I called her.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  She said what? 
MR KOKO:   She said…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry.   
MR KOKO:   She thinks I called her. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 224 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You called her? 
MR KOKO:   Ja, that is what she says. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay but I have missed something just 
go back to the beginning of your answer.   
MR KOKO:   Oh I am saying if you look at the timing 
its…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, 7:31.  
MR KOKO:   It is 7:31 in the morning, about twenty-five 
past, five minutes before this round about twenty-five past 
I phoned Suzanne and I said Suzanne I have received an 
10 
email that comes from the Chairman it relates to the 
prepayment I am forwarding it to you because you are 
dealing with the prepayment.   
I have not looked at it in details, look at it in detail 
and advise me on how to proceed because I know you are 
dealing with it.  I forwarded it back to the email of 
Chairman where it comes to, of the normal email please 
discuss it with the Chairman because I do not understand 
what is it all about.  And Chair I must tell you that I had not 
read it in detail but when I looked it is a prepayment and it 
20 
is what Suzanne is dealing with it I sent it back to her.  I 
say Suzanne please discuss with the Chairman what she 
sent me because I do not understand what is it, what the 
detail would be you know better.   
And the reason I did not understand because I took 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 225 of 244 
 
the transaction up to the approval stage but the giving 
effect of it was with Anoj, Mr Singh.  That is the only 
reason why this was sent to Suzanne.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, but the email is not about the 
prepayment it is about the guarantee.  
MR KOKO:   That is what I am taking about.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  And the Chairperson was here who 
testified he knew nothing about this guarantee it was 
something they came to learn that it was done by Mr Anoj 
Singh and it did not even come to the Board.  As far as 
10 
they knew they had made a resolution for a prepayment on 
the 
9 t h 
of 
December 
the 
day 
before 
this 
email 
is 
exchanged.     
MR KOKO:   And I must tell you why the Chairman would 
say that, understand why the chairman will say that 
preferably and the reason why I understand the Chairman 
would say that preferably is because I put together the 
submission to the Board and my affidavit tells you that I 
also did not know about the guarantee.  So I am not 
surprised that the Chairman does not know about the 
20 
guarantee.  I was the recipient of this email but I still do 
not know about the guarantee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well from my point of view it seems 
awkward that the Chairman would send you an email 
dealing with these types of issues that are mentioned here 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 226 of 244 
 
simply because I think that these would be matters that 
would be dealt with by the executives and the potential 
suppliers or suppliers and then the Board would be briefed 
at particular intervals but this email seems to be of 
somebody who is very involved in the actual contracts or 
terms of the contract.        
MR KOKO:   I agree with you; I agree with you Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So then what, the question that arises in 
my mind is that why this would not have made you say but 
the Chairman cannot be talking about this thing what is 
10 
going on.  Who is this Businessman because the Chairman 
cannot be talking…[intervene] 
MR KOKO:   Chairman I knew who is the Businessman.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR KOKO:   It was the Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but that is the point namely how 
can the Chairman be talking about these things.  In other 
words, you begin to say but why maybe you would seek an 
explanation because this is not the type of issues that you 
would expect the Chairperson to be involved in.     
20 
MR KOKO:   Chairman now your reasoning makes sense 
but I did not have the reason to do that at that point in 
time, I did not and that is why I sent it to Suzanne I say 
come back to me let me know.  In fact, later in the 
afternoon we met for lunch and I asked her did you receive 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 227 of 244 
 
the Chairman’s emails and she said yes and is aid is there 
anything that I should worry about, should I be worried 
about anything she said do not worry I am handling it.   
And let me tell you my fault if any in many of these 
transactions is probably because I trusted to much, that is 
my fault.  I think I should probably have said but Suzanne 
are you sure this is the Chairman I did not do it, if I am 
guilty maybe I am guilty of that.    
CHAIRPERSON:   So you gave email, this is the email you 
gave to Ms Daniels?       
10 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and you said, you say you had not 
read it, you had a glance.  
MR KOKO:   I had a glance of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR KOKO:   And for me it was very clear that it has to do 
with the transaction that I started.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR KOKO:   That I have delegated to Suzanne to finish off 
that the Board resolved that Mr Singh was finalised.  So I 
20 
said to Suzanne that the transaction that I have asked you 
to conclude this email relates to it and it comes from the 
Chair.  So I cannot ignore an email from the Chair, I cannot 
others I ignore others but this one I cannot please look at 
it, action it let me know if we should go and see the 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 228 of 244 
 
Chairman and when I met her later in the canteen I asked 
are you auctioning it and she says it is fine do not worry 
about it then I left it at that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that where it ended or the whole thing 
was pursued later in terms of these items?    
MR KOKO:   Well that is where it ended but I have later 
now having listened to the evidence of Mr Seleka that the 
whole paragraph was inserted verbatim in the guarantee 
agreement but that I only know now.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair you see Mr Koko the way I 
recall Ms Daniels testimony in regard to her not being able 
to recall whether or not you called her it was about the 
next step that she took because I was asking her when you 
forwarded this email to her what were you expecting her to 
do with it.   
What did you tell her to do with it, what was her 
recollection and she could not recall whether or not you 
telephoned her but the next step was that the contents of 
this very email as you have pointed out to the Chairperson 
20 
they find their way into an email that went to CDH for 
instructions for them to draft an agreement and it is as I 
recall on that day.  They draft an underlying agreement and 
they send it back which on the face of it, it suggest that 
that was the instruction that she had received from you to 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 229 of 244 
 
instruct CDH to prepare that document for the purposes of 
pursuing the guarantee.   
Two, it is precisely strange that you started a 
process that deal with a prepayment.  You have a Board 
decide on the 9 t h because you started this thing on the 8 t h 
maybe a little bit before that but the submission is dated 
the 8 t h.  The Board makes a decision on the 9 t h you get this 
email that now talks about of the guarantee of the same 
amount that was in you submission 1.68 billion that is why 
the Chairperson is asking.   
10 
But would you not say this is strange the Chairman 
of the Board was part of the decision making for a 
prepayment for cash. Why is he sending me an email about 
a guarantee, is this the Chairman? 
MR KOKO:   Ja, Chair two things I will testify here that 
there is absolutely nothing with the transaction of the 1.6 
prepayment.   In fact, it was the only alternative available 
to Eskom.  Now Chair I have listened to the testimony of 
Ms Nteta and I am glad I have the privilege to be here.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair if I may sorry if I may because I 
20 
will come back to that issue…[intervene] 
MR KOKO:   Okay let me answer it directly.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  
MR KOKO:   Okay let me answer it directly.  I at that point 
saw absolutely nothing wrong.  In fact, the prepayment was 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 230 of 244 
 
very topical on that day.  So when I received the email for 
me in that floor everybody should be talking about this 
because it was the single most important thing happening 
at Eskom on that day if anybody 
was focusing on 
something else then he should not have been at Eskom.       
ADV SELEKA SC:   But it would be those who know about 
it.  
MR KOKO:   I beg your pardon.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   It would be those who know about it 
who will talk about it.  
10 
MR KOKO:   Chair if anybody at Eskom was not focusing 
on this problem on that day then he should not have been 
at Eskom.  The 1.6 the prepayment at Eskom on that day 
on that week was the single most important part and that is 
why I want to say to you, you must judge me going forward.   
You must judge me on Eskom memorandum of 
incorporation, you must judge me on Eskom delegations of 
authority, you must judge me on the compliance of Eskom 
directive, you must judge me on Eskom compliance of 
Eskom procedures and most of all having complied with 
20 
that you must judge me on whether my decisions have 
been prudent or not, not whether somebody said this or 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.     
MR KOKO:   So I have no issue, when I received the email 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 231 of 244 
 
from the Chairman dealing with the topic that I thought is 
very important I immediately reacted to it and sent it to 
Suzanne and I said please look at this it relates to that 
important topic I have sent you.  If you need us to go and 
see the Chairman let me know.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well I wanted to say other people at 
Eskom there would have been other people at Eskom who 
have no role to play to – in regard in the prepayment and 
therefore they would they would not have to talk about it.     
MR KOKO:   Most of the time, I am just trying to. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No we do not have to take it further I 
know that you mean it literally.  
MR KOKO:   Yes, you have had two witnesses here 
Chairman, you have had two witnesses here.  You have 
had witnesses who say it is fashionable to disown the right 
things that we have done so that we can be liked by the 
Deputy Chief Justice and by relevant people out there.   
So we have had a lot of witness I mean I sit here 
and listen to Suzanne trying to disown the right thing and 
she looks stupid because she’s trying to disown the correct 
20 
thing.  I will make a submission here to you Chair that 
every single signature on the document before you even 
though the document was prepared by somebody else I 
own the decision; it is my decision.  I am never going to 
disown my decision.  I am never going to say I signed this 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 232 of 244 
 
because Mr Molefe said this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, know it is very important Mr Koko 
that all of us stand by what we believe to be true and right 
and so not move or change.  If you had made a decision 
you believe it is correct you stand by that decision the fact 
that somebody else might think that you were wrong is 
neither here nor there but from your side if you think the 
decision was right and you still think it was right you stand 
by it.   
Of course if having reflected or having heard what 
10 
other people say about the decision you think you may 
have been wrong it is also a good thing to say at that time 
I thought it was right but I have listened to what so and so 
has said and I am able to say I think I may have been 
wrong I think he may be right; she may be right.   
So in the end…[intervene]            
MR KOKO:   Most certainly.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja that is the right thing to do.  
MR KOKO:   Most certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But not to say something is wrong when 
20 
it is right or it is right when it is wrong.  I see we have just 
gone half past six.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   I just saw that as well Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   And…[intervene] 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 233 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you have one or two questions to 
finalise or should we just adjourn now? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me tidy up the last testimonies 
then when we come back the next time we could go straight 
into the transactions.  I have just two more, Mr Koko there 
is another one but I have not given you the bundle so I will 
ask you when you have that bundle.  The other one is this 
that your version both in the affidavit and orally and I see it 
is repeated in the letter Chair which I have handed up to you 
– the letter dated the 3 r d.  Is that Mr Matona telephone to 
10 
you over the weekend prior to your suspension and he would 
have spoken with you again about the Sumi Tomo matter?  
Chairperson on that letter that I handed up that is paragraph 
20 of that letter.  I will just read it out.  That is the letter 
from Mr Koko’s attorneys.  Paragraph 20 says: 
“Mr Koko avers that he had a telephone 
conversation with Mr Matona on Sunday 8 
March 
2015 
during 
which 
Mr 
Matona 
informed him that he had been instructed by 
Mr Tsotsi that Mr Sekhasimbi had to be 
20 
unsuspended.” 
Now I have noticed that this version is not the same as you 
gave the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee.  Do you 
remember that? 
MR KOKO:  Chair no I gave the same – I gave the same 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 234 of 244 
 
version. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You gave the same version.  Okay.  Well 
because you are a man of remarkable memory.  Bundle 15B. 
MR KOKO:  Can I put this away? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  15B  Just push it to the side.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I just want to say something in – with 
respect to what is written in paragraph 20 of the letter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Namely it would a straightforward matter 
for the commission’s investigators to establish whether a 
10 
telephone conversation as Mr Koko alleges took place on 8 
March 2015. 
1. I do not know whether the investigators have checked 
that and what they found if they did but I do know that I 
have been told that telephone records I think for seven 
some of the service providers whether it is Vodacom or 
MTN or whatever I am not sure do not keep records 
beyond three years or beyond five years. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja they keep … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now but I know that what I have been told 
20 
is that where for example the Public Protector had obtained 
certain records during her investigation – certain records 
those are available.  So I am just mentioning to you what I 
have been told. 
MR KOKO:  But Chair I gave the commission my telephone 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 235 of 244 
 
records.  I have nothing to hide.  Twelve minutes – 12.3 
minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  On the 8t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  That was how long the discussion Mr Matona 
and I had on the 8 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  No, no what I am saying is you 
– your attorneys say in that paragraph it would be an easy 
thing for the commission to obtain the records of that 
10 
telephone conversation on the 8 March 2015. 
MR KOKO:  But I have done it for you and I have given it to 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if you have given us that that is fine 
but I am just saying. 
MR KOKO:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From what I have been told it might not be 
so easy if you are talking about something that happened 
more than three years ago or five years ago. 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I have nothing to hide.  I may have 
20 
made a mistake or two that is why I give you my telephone 
records. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  I said Mr Matona called me.  I called Mr Matona. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 236 of 244 
 
MR KOKO:  On the 7t h and on the 8t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  I have highlighted those calls on my telephone 
records. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  And I have given them to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes we will 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have not seen them but I am – I take it 
that the legal team has got them. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja we.. 
MR KOKO:  I can check – it is 2015 so I would have 
anticipated this  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair I believe we have been given some 
documentation this morning.  I have not looked at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But here it is.  Chairperson I gave the 
page number 15B page 1082 Eskom Bundle 15. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do I need to look at it? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes I think it is important Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is very important.  This is Mr Koko this 
will be the transcript of your testimony at the Parliamentary 
Portfolio Committee. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 237 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  B I have got 18B. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  15.  15B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  15B? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.   
MR KOKO:  15. Ja this is 15 the page? 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  1082. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1082? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So this is a transcript from the 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee.  It starts on page 1047 
but – but I just want to deal with the point here under 
consideration.  At the bottom of the page I think Mr Koko 
here was being asked questions by Dr Layenge.  And the 
question was: 
“You alleged that or have an assumption or a 
belief that Mr Tsotsi suspended you for a 
reason that you know.” 
What do you think the reason behind that suspension means 
20 
if it was unjustifiable by Mr Tsotsi?  Then shall leave all that 
Mr Koko has given an answer there.  But let us go to the – to 
the last – from the bottom 1, 2, 3, 4 where he starts with the 
CEO.  From the bottom 1, 2, 3, 4 the third – the fourth line. 
“The CEO of Eskom came to me said Mr 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 238 of 244 
 
Koko you are making a problem for me 
because I have an instruction from the 
Chairman 
that 
you 
must 
suspend 
Mr 
Sekhasimbi.” 
Now you will see you say:  
“He came to me or both of us are going to be 
suspended.  I said but Chief I have kept you 
in the loop.  You know why I did what I did.  I 
will not do it.” 
You said that was on Thursday.  I mean Mr Matona himself 
10 
has confirmed that he met with you in the office where you 
showed him that letter signed by Mr Tsotsi.  So you say that 
was on Thursday.  But here is the part. 
“On Sunday I got a call from the Chief 
Executive’s assistant.” 
Who is the Chief Executive?   Is it still Mr Matona? 
MR KOKO:  No.  The Chief – the assistant of the Chief 
Executive. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No who is the Chief Executive? 
MR KOKO:  It is Mr Matona. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is Mr Matona. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay who is his assistant – was his 
assistant? 
MR KOKO:  Mr Ndou. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 239 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ndou? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   
“So on Sunday I got a call from the Chief 
Executive’s assistant so I will say Mr Ndou 
he said what is happening?  I believe that 
there is an urgent board meeting on Monday 
to suspend you and the Chief.  I said I do not 
know but I heard something similar from the 
Chief.  On Monday I walked into the office I 
10 
went to the Chief.  The PA said that the Chief 
was not there that he was at the board 
meeting.  Mr Koko I think it is about you and 
the Chief.  I left the office and that was when 
I called Ms Daniels.  We were not suspended 
on Monday.” 
So there is different from what you are saying here in your 
letter – the letter repeats your version in the affidavits the 
version that you have said all along at least here before us 
that it was Mr Matona who called you on Sunday 8 March 
20 
2015.  But you told the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee 
that under oath by the way that it was the Chief’s assistant. 
MR KOKO:  No, no, no.  Chair my affidavit is very clear and 
if you want to nit-pick that I used the wrong terminologies or 
whatever I think Mr Seleka is trying to – to make an honest 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 240 of 244 
 
error of memory on my part to suggest that a credibility issue 
is wrong is completely wrong.  When I say it was – there is 
two issues here that I think he trying to bring to our 
attention. Mr Matona came to me so you cannot come to you 
on the telephone.  That is what he is trying to say.  So – so 
he did not come to me.  If fact the telephone records shows 
that I called – I made the call.  I do not – remember on my 
telephone records I can only see the calls that I made.  I 
cannot see the telecom records that I have received.  I 
remember very well having a discussion with the assistant of 
10 
the CE Mr Ndou I remember very well.  I mean I know how 
he speaks.  Chief was going on.  So that happened.  So I – I 
think Mr – and it is up to you to make the decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  But I think Mr Seleka is making a mountain out 
of nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair may I? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me say Mr Seleka and then – you can 
then deal with it or address it.  I thought that the evidence 
20 
that Mr Koko received a call from the CE’s assistant may not 
necessarily have meant that he did not have a telephone 
conversation with the Chief Executive – Mr Koko.  Because 
he says here when speaking to the assistant I do not know 
but I heard something similar from the Chief which may 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 241 of 244 
 
suggest that he had spoken to the Chief Executive.  And the 
Chief Executive had already told him the same thing.  But 
whether that discussion was on Sunday the 8t h or earlier 
might be another issue. 
MR KOKO:  Well I have been talking to the Chief on the 7 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  The telephone records will show extensively. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  So – so I think – but to the 
extent that Mr Koko has provided telephone records that 
show that he had a telephone conversation with Mr Matona 
10 
on the 8t h I am not sure whether if he has provided that you 
would be able to take the point any further at least until what 
you have heard what Mr Matona has to say about that … 
MR KOKO:  My disappointment Chair is that Mr Matona 
denies it.  That is the only disappointment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But he… 
MR KOKO:  But there it is factual. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But he has not – I assume he has not been 
shown your telephone records so it may well be that when he 
is shown your – because he should be shown. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No of course he should be shown Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But we would like to hear what he 
has to say about that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 242 of 244 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We will also have a look at the telephone 
records. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But what I am doing Chair because I see 
Mr Koko [00:13:43] a particular idea on me or view.  All I 
have done is to read what he testified.  He came to me.  He 
said that was on Thursday.  And then he goes on to say: 
“On Saturday I was called by the Chief 
Executive’s assistant.” 
And he does not say the Chief Executive also called me on 
10 
Saturday but he says: 
“On Monday I went to his office and the PA 
said he is not there he is a meeting I believe 
it is about you.” 
MR KOKO:  But I also say I heard from the CE. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry but – yes you see you have to 
explore first his – what he was talking about when he said I 
heard something similar from the Chief. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes and similar Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if for example whatever the position is 
20 
if he has provided proof that there was a telephone 
conversation between himself and Mr Matona on the 8t h I do 
not think – I am not sure that you can take this forward until 
you have heard fully from Mr Matona about … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Of course Chair. 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 243 of 244 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  About that ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Of course I was just saying to him this is 
how he testified. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja because Mr Matona might say oh then 
maybe we did have the conversation and take it from there.  
You know.  So – but it is important that that be investigated. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair.  I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we should… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I think we should stop. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we should adjourn. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  We are going to have to – we will have 
to try and make sure that the date – the date that I will fix be 
a clear day for Mr Koko. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that we can try and finalise his 
evidence.  We will – I will try and determine a date quite 
soon. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  We appreciate that Chair because prior 
dates of the meetings were not canvassed with us at all 
20 
despite the fact that we at all times made it very, very clear 
that we will do our best in all circumstances to be where we 
are requested to be.  But nevertheless simply notices were 
issued to Mr Koko without any prior consultation.  We are 
heading into the fourth terms it makes life difficult.  So we 
12 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 326 
 
Page 244 of 244 
 
would appreciate that courtesy.  Obviously at some stage or 
another you know there has got to be a date and the final – 
final decision lies with you and my learned friend.  But we 
did appreciate the – what you have put on record.  Thank 
you Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no we – my plan is that I will 
allocate a full day for Mr Koko so that as far as possible he 
can complete his evidence.  Thank you to all of you for all 
your cooperation that we have been able to have an evening 
session.  Okay and my Registrar please arrange for that 
10 
meeting that I said I would like to have.  Communicate with 
Mr Seleka, the Secretary and Mr Seleka will tell you who the 
other people should be that should be brought into that 
meeting – coordinate and make all arrangements.  I would 
like to have that meeting before the end of this week.  Okay.  
Thank you very much we are going to adjourn.  We adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 13 JANUARY 2021 
