 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
21 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 288 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 122 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
21 OCTOBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 3 of 122 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 21 OCTOBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
  
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Myburgh, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Good morning Chairperson 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Chairperson we turn now to that part of 
our evidence during this sitting dealing with locomotives.  
A great deal of evidence has been given in relation to the 
10 
acquisition of locomotives by Transnet.   
The evidence that we intend leading relates in 
particular to the 1064 the locomotion acquisition and the 
acquisition of 100 electric locomotives. 
 
You will recall Mr Chairman that in respect of the 
1064 locomotives that was split between diesel and electric 
the diesel award went to GE and China North Rail – CNR.  
The electric award went to Bombadier and CSR – China 
South Rail and that occurred in approximately March of 
2014.   
20 
 
You know and will recall that the contract value was 
an enormous approximately R50 billion.  To date a vast 
number of witnesses have given evidence.  What has come 
to light were irregularities in relation to what was reported 
to the board vis-à-vis the business case, irregularities in 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 4 of 122 
 
relation to the pricing of the locomotives and the tender 
process. 
 
If – there has also been evidence in relation to 
potential irregularities relating to the relocation of the 
OME’s from Gauteng to Durban.  That is the 1064 
locomotives. 
 
In 
respect 
of 
the 
100 
electrical 
– 
electric 
locomotives yes evidence has been given.  You will 
remember that this was an award made on confinement to 
CSR the contract value was approximately R4.5 billion.  
10 
And much of the evidence in relation to the 100 electric 
locomotives 
goes 
to 
irregularities 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
confinement to CSR and how that came about. 
 
We intend to lead two witnesses.  The first witness 
is Mr Laher – the second witness is Mr Callard. 
 
Mr Laher finds his way to the commission as a 
consequence of having been implicated in certain respects 
by Mr Callard in his evidence.  Mr Laher then brought a 
Rule 
3.4 
application 
which 
was 
granted 
by 
you 
Mr 
Chairman and you allowed to submit a statement or an 
20 
affidavit and to give oral evidence. 
 
In his Rule 3.4 statement he makes reference to a 
prior statement and he wants them to be read together so 
it is what I refer to as his main statement will be traversed, 
his Rule 3.4 statement will be traversed and then more 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 5 of 122 
 
recently he has given a short supplementary statement.  So 
he will deal with those three things. 
 
Mr Callard is then due to give evidence in relation 
to two new issues that he has come across subsequent to 
the evidence that he gave before you. 
 
So with that by way of background Mr Chairperson 
may I call Mr Laher? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes please administer the oath or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
10 
MR LAHER:  Yousuf Ismail Laher. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry please will you raise your 
voice. 
MR LAHER:  Yousuf Ismail Laher. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed affirmation? 
MR LAHER:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
20 
else but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and 
say, I truly affirm. 
MR LAHER:  I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You may be seated Mr Laher. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Thank you Mr Chairperson.  The 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 6 of 122 
 
document relevant to Mr Laher ’s evidence are found in 
Bundle 4[a] and 4[b].  Mr Laher do you have Bundle 4[a] in 
front of you? 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Could I ask you please to turn to Tab 
BB4[f].  It should be the last tab in that file. BB4[f].1. 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  May I take you then please to page 221.  
Do you confirm that this is a statement that you gave… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburgh I am still trying to 
10 
– you said the tag is BB? 
ADV MYBURGH:  BB4[f].  The last tab in Bundle 4[a]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not seem to have 4[f].  I have got 
what looks like BB what?  I am not sure.  But the last – the 
statement that comes immediately after the last tag is 
Bierman’s statement on mine. 
ADV MYBURGH:  But then – 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am looking at 4.  I am looking at – oh I 
am sorry it looks like I am looking at 4[b]. 
ADV MYBURGH:  I think you are in File [b]. Yes I am sorry. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Mr Chairperson there are two Bundle 4.  
There is the 4[a] and then 4[b]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  No I think I have been given 
4[a]. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 7 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH:  If one goes to the last tab. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes now I can see it. 
ADV MYBURGH:  In this file which is 4[a]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  There you will find Exhibit BB4[f].1.  And 
then could I ask you please Mr Laher to turn to page 221. 
MR LAHER:  I am there. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And would you confirm that that is your 
statement? 
MR LAHER:  Correct it is my statement. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  And if you turn forward to page 240 do 
you confirm that you signed this statement on the 15 April 
2019? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Attached to that statement was a series 
of annexures which run all the way through to page 500. 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Would you confirm that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And if I could ask you please to now turn 
20 
to Bundle 4[b] that is the slimmer file.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you think we could manage without 
the air conditioner? 
ADV MYBURGH:  I beg your pardon Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you think we can manage without the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 8 of 122 
 
air conditioner? 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes I think we can. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:  At least until it gets hot. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. It makes some noise.  So if you can 
either switch it off or turn it down considerably.  Okay 
alright. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Right Mr Laher … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if in the course of the day becomes 
too hot we can always switch it on. 
10 
MR LAHER:  Thank you. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:  In Bundle 4[b] if I could ask you to turn 
to the first document that is Exhibit BB4[f].2. 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And if you go to page 502 you will see 
that this contains your – your Rule 3.4 application.  As you 
see from the index.  At 502. 
MR LAHER:    Ja I see the index. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:  Could I ask you please – you should 
have a tab which reflects statement – could you turn 
forward to page 504.   
MR LAHER:  I am there. 
ADV 
MYBURGH: 
 
You 
confirm 
that 
that 
is 
another 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 9 of 122 
 
statement by you? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Effectively your Rule 3.4 statement. 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And if you turn forward to page 521 
would you confirm that you signed that statement on the 18 
June 2019? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  This statement… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say 521? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  521 yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  One second.  Yes.  The previous 
statement you did not say it was at 503.4 he?  Because 
that – I have got Mr Callard’s statement there so I suspect 
I have – went to a wrong page.  The one you – you started 
with on this bundle. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Mr Chairman are you in the 4[b] bundle – 
the slimmer one? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 4[b] ja.  The first statement that you 
referred him to on this bundle was it not – did you not say 
20 
it is at 503? 
ADV MYBURGH:  503.1. is the Rule 3.3 Notice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you referred him to the Rule 3.3 
Notice. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 10 of 122 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay not that statement. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So that is the Rule 3.3 Notice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:  That is paginated … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is followed 
with 
Mr 
Callard’s 
statement? 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes all the way to 503.85. 
CHAIRPERSON:  503.85.  Okay. Okay yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then after that there is a flag 504. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  And that is Mr Laher ’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no.  Now I have got it right. 
ADV MYBURGH:  3.4 statement.  I am sorry for the 
confusion as you would have picked up Mr Chairman what 
happened is the 3.3 was issued together with Mr Callard’s 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So it is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then comes Mr Laher ’s 3.4 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Statement.  So that is from 504 up to 521 
and you have confirmed that you have signed that on the 
18 June 2019? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 11 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH:  That too was accompanied by a series of 
annexures that runs up until page 730 would you confirm 
that? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then directly after that at 731 you 
find the Exhibit BB4[f].3.  And if I could take you to page 
733 would you confirm that that is your supplementary 
statement? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And if you go to page 739 that you 
10 
signed that supplementary statement on the 16 September 
2020. 
MR LAHER:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And it too contained a number of 
annexures that run up until page 791. 
MR LAHER:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Mr Chairperson could I then and I deal 
with each of these sequentially if one backs to Bundle 4[a]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  What I refer to as Mr Laher ’s main 
20 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MYBURGH:  You see signed on the 15 April 2019 that 
at page 240. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the one starting at 221? 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 12 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH:  221 to 240.  I would ask you to admit 
that as Exhibit BB4[f].1 
CHAIRPERSON:  The statement by Mr Laher starting at 
page 221 is admitted as Exhibit BB4[f.1].  Is that right?  Mr 
Myburgh did I get it right?  [f.1] in brackets. 
ADV MYBURGH:  In brackets [f.1] yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then if we can turn to Bundle 4[b].  
There you find Mr Laher ’s Rule 3.4 statement at page 504 
running to 521 signed on 18 June 2019.  Could I ask you 
10 
Mr Chairperson to admit that as Exhibit BB4[f.2]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is in brackets? 
ADV MYBURGH:  BB4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  In brackets [4f.2] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  The statement by Mr Laher 
starting at page 504 is admitted as Exhibit BB4[f.2]. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then finally Mr Chairperson in the 
same bundle the supplementary statement of Mr Laher 
running from or commencing at 733 signed on the 16 
20 
September 2020 could you please admit that as Exhibit 
BB4[f].3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The supplementary statement of Mr Laher 
starting at page 733 is admitted as Exhibit BB4[f.3]. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Laher as I 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 13 of 122 
 
mentioned in my opening remarks you find your way here 
as a witness as a consequence that having been implicated 
by Mr Callard and having brought a 3.4 application 
attached to which was a statement and I will refer to that 
as your 3.4 statement, the second one in the chronology.  
 
In that statement you sought leave to rely on your 
initial statement which I will refer to as your main 
statement and for them to be read together.  And then more 
recently you have provided a supplementary statement.  So 
main statement, rule 3.4 statement and supplementary 
10 
statement. 
 
Before we get to the – the heart of your evidence 
which is really your response to Mr Callard’s implication of 
you let us deal with your main statement which you gave 
before then. 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Now as I have explained to you and as 
you know this commission has heard a great deal of 
evidence in relation to locomotives and it certainly is not 
our intention to rehash that here today more than needs 
20 
be. 
 
So if you turn please to your main statement at 
Bundle 4[a] page 221.  Are you there? 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  I have asked you in the course of our 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 14 of 122 
 
preparations to highlight and to focus in on what you 
considered to be key issues. 
MR LAHER:  Right. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And I am going to take you to those key 
issues 
in 
your 
main 
statement, 
key 
issues 
in 
your 
supplementary statement and that will effectively bookend 
your Rule 3.4 statement and then we will go to that. 
 
So let me start off by asking you in relation to the 
1064 locomotives what role did you play in the tender 
process? 
10 
MR 
LAHER: 
 
Morning 
Chair. 
 
Thank 
you 
for 
this 
opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Morning. 
MR LAHER:  To present my evidence to the commission. 
The role I played in this particular transaction for 1064 was 
I was involved in the evaluation team – the cross-
functional evaluation team finance which did the evaluation 
of the financial elements of the tender.  I was also then 
involved as part of the finance support team during the 
negotiations 
supporting 
the 
Chairpersons 
of 
the 
20 
negotiations for the 1064 transactions.  Primarily those are 
my main involvements in this transaction. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So there you were involved as part of the 
finance 
evaluation 
team 
and 
you 
were 
part 
of 
the 
negotiation team? 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 15 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV 
MYBURGH: 
 
In 
relation 
to 
the 
100 
electric 
locomotives what was your role there? 
MR LAHER:  In the 100 negotiations I was involved as part 
of the negotiating team at the very last minute so I was not 
actually appointed into the team but I was asked to go and 
attend the negotiations. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So different to seems all the other 
witnesses that have testified in relation to the locomotives 
you have first-hand knowledge of what happened during 
10 
the course of the negotiations in relation to the 1064 
locomotives and the 100 electric locomotives? 
MR LAHER:  Correct I am the eyewitness. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Now your main statement which we will 
go through now I would just ask you to confirm it deals 
exclusively with the 1064 locomotives.  It does not deal 
with the 100 electric locomotives? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So if you go to page 221 you have the 
heading Locomotive Tender and you then deal with the 
20 
business case all of this the commission has already heard 
about but I would like you to address these in particular 
paragraph 13. 
MR LAHER:  Chair during the negotiation process which 
was around February/March 2014 I advised Mr Singh very 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 16 of 122 
 
specifically that this proposed transaction was going to 
increase or was going to exceed the ETC that was 
approved by the board.  At that point in time Mr Singh told 
me he would deal with it.  With the [00:21:20] I was not 
involved in the actual ETC process or the approval 
process.  I only got told at the start so towards start of the 
negotiations this is what the board has approved in terms 
of the ETC. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Then you go on to deal with preparation 
of financial evaluation criteria.  Over the page stage 2 pre-
10 
qualification evaluation of bids received. Then at page 226 
stage 6 evaluation of bids received.  And it is there that 
you have indication to me that you wish to focus on 
paragraph 30 at page 228 that being under the heading 
Stage 6 Evaluation of Bids Received.  Is that correct? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Please go ahead and deal with that 
paragraph? 
MR LAHER:  So Chair as part of the evaluation team we 
prepared two reports – one for the electric tender and one 
20 
for the diesel tender.  Those reports were addressed to Mr 
Jiyane for him to take to the locomotive steering committee 
and to get approval of our evaluation.   
 
Within that report just before I start within the 
report.  There were six of us in the evaluation team.  
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 17 of 122 
 
Myself and five of my colleagues.  Within the report we 
highlighted a number of risks and a number of matters we 
wanted to be taken up to the steering committee and also 
in certain instances to the board to make them aware that 
our risks with evaluation and what you will see is the risks 
that we raised in that report effectively came home to roost 
when the pricing finally was finally agreed to.  
 
If I can go into more detail then – and start just 
talking about what risks here is.  So on 30.1 so firstly the 
report said the – that these risks must be communicated to 
10 
the 
SC 
committee 
and 
or 
the 
Transnet 
board 
and 
considered prior to final award of the contract. And we had 
some risks and I think I am going to highlight the main 
risks from that report. 
 
So the first risk we highlighted was when we did the 
evaluation on price specifically the evaluation was done on 
the basis of not including hedging costs and escalation 
costs. 
 
The evaluation criteria that were handed to us said 
that 
we 
must 
evaluate 
including 
hedging 
costs 
and 
20 
escalation 
costs. 
 
Whilst 
we 
were 
conducting 
the 
evaluations a number of bidders responded.  Some bidders 
responded with hedging costs and escalation costs, some 
bidders did not respond with hedging costs and escalation 
costs. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 18 of 122 
 
 
So we went back to Supply Chain Services, Supply 
Chain Services were charge of the process.  Mr Jiyane and 
Ms Mdletshe were in charge of Supply Chain Services.  We 
went back to them to say as a team we cannot evaluate 
this tender from a price perspective because we cannot 
evaluate apples with apples.  Some were giving us with 
hedging and escalation and some were giving us without 
hedging and escalation – what do you want us to do? 
 
Their response was do the evaluations without the 
hedging and escalation costs.  Our view as a team before – 
10 
before we reached that point was we wanted to go out and 
clarification.  So we did request from Supply Chain 
Services that we go back to all of the risks and request 
that they clarify what the cost of hedging and escalation 
would be so that we could evaluate with the price including 
hedging and escalation. 
 
For us as a cross-function evaluation team we 
believe that would be a fairer way of doing evaluations.  
The advice given to us by Supply Chain Services was we 
do 
not 
want 
to 
go 
out 
and 
clarification 
Mr 
Jiyane 
20 
specifically and the reason he said he does not want to go 
out and clarification is because it opens up the tender to 
bidders changing their prices, also extends the time frame 
of the evaluation and creates a possible further ambiguity. 
 
Based on his response or Supply Chain Services 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 19 of 122 
 
response to us we then agreed to as a team to do the 
evaluation without hedging and escalation costs with the 
proviso and that proviso is captured in our report with the 
proviso that that point or that matter or – and that risk we 
brought to the attention of the board and the Transnet 
steering committee so that they note the importance of 
that. 
 
Our view was that cost of hedging and escalation 
could have a material impact on the price and we raised 
that risk right up front with – with the steering committee 
10 
and we wanted it to be escalated to the Transnet board. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Then the second risk at 30.2. 
MR LAHER:  Chair we raised a number of risks and the 
second risk we raised – and I think these – I want to bring 
this as evidence to the commission because I think it is 
important to understand that these risks were raised right 
up front. 
 
The second risk that we raised in our report to the 
steering committee was around the evaluation being done 
on a full batch of 1299 locomotives for electric tender and 
20 
a full batch of 465 locomotives for the diesel tender. 
 
It was done on a smaller batch and the risk that we 
wanted to raise is we wanted to – board or the committee 
to consider this because if the batch size gets reduced 
then the price of the locomotive will change.  And if the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 20 of 122 
 
price of the locomotive changes it affects the evaluation.  
So the evaluation results will not be – will not be 
consistent but will not be fair or transparent because it is a 
different basis.  When you buying 100 cars versus buying 1 
car you going to get a different price and that is what we 
were trying to bring to the attention to say, please consider 
this because if you do decide to make the decision to cut 
the batch size it is going to affect the price and therefore it 
is going to affect the evaluation. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then you indicated to me that you 
10 
wanted to highlight one further risk in the main and that is 
at 30.3. 
MR LAHER:  Yes.  You see the third risk – and you will see 
we raise a number of risks.  But I want to focus on these 
three specifically in interest of time.  The third risk we 
raised that we wanted escalated as well and wanted the 
steering committee to consider was with regard to the price 
that we used for the evaluation was normalised to exclude 
the cost of Transnet Engineering TE from the price. 
 
What we wanted to raise was that if the price had to 
20 
be utilised with TE it could be a different price and we do 
not know what that price is. 
 
The – in our view it would have been better and 
fairer to rather go in with a price including TE because 
then you evaluating with the price that you know you going 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 21 of 122 
 
to finally contract on.  The price excluding TE was a price 
that was not going to be finally contracted upon.  So it was 
not – we wanted to raise this risk that that price will 
change.  And if the price changes it changes the evaluation 
result.  And obviously if the evaluation result changes we 
could be awarding the contract to the wrong bidder who did 
not meet the criteria to be you know the bidder. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Now Mr Laher if you go back to page 227 
to paragraph 27 you say CFET Finance what does that 
stand for? 
10 
MR LAHER:  Cross-functional evaluation team finance. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And this is the – the committee that you 
were part of? 
MR LAHER:  It was a team ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  A team I beg your pardon.  And there 
reference is made to two evaluation reports dated the 10 
December one for diesel, one for electric and you attach 
them as Wild 6 and Wild 7.  Are those the reports that you 
speak about at paragraph 30? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:  Perhaps you could just identify them for 
the Chairperson.  Could I ask you please to go – and keep 
your finger at 228 turn forward to 274.  Is that the report 
you speak of in relation to electric locomotives? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 22 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then at 316 there is a similar looking 
report but would you confirm that this now deals with 
diesel locomotives? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And those risks are highlighted in that 
report? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  If we then go forward to page 229 of your 
affidavit you deal with best and final offer and the next 
heading you deal with approval to split the batches which 
10 
is something that you’ve already touched on.  In our 
preparation, you indicated to me that you feel that this topic 
is better dealt with in your supplementary statement. 
MR LAHER:   Yes, it is.  Ja.  There are two issues I want to 
raise on the particular ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Well, let us go.  Let us leave 
this open.  And now let us turn to your supplementary 
statement.  That is at Bundle 4B, page 733.  And you deal 
with the splitting of batches at 735.   
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  You want to address that 
topic? 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You can deal with both statements.  
You do not have to deal with only one as long as you identify 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 23 of 122 
 
for the Chairperson exactly where we are. 
MR LAHER:   Alright.  So what is capturing paragraphs 15 
and 16 is an anomaly in the memos that were submitted to 
the board where the results of the Costs Functioning 
Evaluation Team was misrepresented to the board.  So 
specifically...  must I ... I will go and deal ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think I actually want to direct your 
attention to paragraph 17. 
MR LAHER:   17, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR LAHER:   I thought so.  We will come back to this Chair, 
if you do not mind.  So paragraph 17 specifically – and this 
relates to a caucus that was held during the negotiations 
sessions.   
 
So now we are skipping forward from the evaluation to 
the negotiations sessions.   
 
So during one of the caucuses that was held during the 
negotiations sessions, specifically involving that caucus 
were Mr Singh, Mr Jiyane, Mr Smit.  I think Ms Mdletshe and 
Transnet Internal Audit were in the room during that caucus.   
20 
 
At that specific caucus, I raised with Mr Singh and 
Mr Jiyane that the... we communicated pricing to the bidders 
during that negotiation session earlier and we raised a 
number of issues with the bidders and we told... 
 
One important thing that we told the bidders during that 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 24 of 122 
 
day is that your price cannot change for a cut in the batch 
size.   
 
Now with the background being that the approval for the 
cutting of batch sizes already made by the Transnet board 
before the negotiations.   
 
So when we get into the negotiations, Mr Singh 
announces to us that the board has approved the splitting of 
the batches which took me by surprise because, you know, 
firstly, we warned them that if we are going to split the 
batches it is going to impact the price. 
10 
 
And if you are going to split the batch, devaluations 
need to redone.  This is what we warn in our report.   
 
We come then to the caucus and in the caucus I raised 
with the people in caucus and then Mr Singh and Mr Jiyane 
that the mandate that were provided, the draft mandate that 
we were provided, said that the price cannot change for the 
reduction in the batch. 
 
So I warned them and I said we cannot allow for the 
bidders to change their prices.  It is against the mandate.  It 
is not allowed.   
20 
 
And there was responses from them and I think the 
responses are captured in the transcript.  I understand that 
Mr Callard has done that transcript of that particular caucus 
and we can go through the transcript of that caucus in more 
detail to talk about what happened in that particular caucus. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 25 of 122 
 
 
Because there were other issues that I raised in that 
specific caucus as well which are very important. 
 
And I think the Commission needs to understand that 
these issues were raised.  They were raised to the highest 
level that I could raise them in that point in time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you say at the end of paragraph 18 
that you were advised that an official transcription is in the 
process of being obtained.  Now that transcription, if you 
turn please to page 914, it is to be found there.  It is a short 
transcription, 914 to 920.  Have you had an opportunity of 
10 
reading this? 
MR LAHER:   I have not had the opportunity of reading this 
one.  Is this now Mr Callard’s one?  Is this another one? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This is the official transcription. 
MR LAHER:   Okay.  I have not read the official transcript, 
no. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Well, let us go through it. 
“Negotiation 
Team 
meeting 
at 
Transnet 
on 
7 February.  Extract from video recording of 1064 
Negotiations.” 
20 
 
So Mr Callard provided a best effort transcript.  His own 
one.  This is the official one. 
MR LAHER:   Alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It accords with what his best effort 
was but could you please take the Chairperson through.  If 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 26 of 122 
 
you need some time to reflect on this, you can.  But could 
you take the Chairperson through what transpired here? 
MR LAHER:   Sure.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So this is a caucus.  Is that correct? 
MR LAHER:   Yes, correct.  It is a caucus ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you are reflected as being 
present. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Together with Danie Smit.  Who is he? 
MR LAHER:   Danie Smit was the Deputy Treasurer at the... 
10 
in the Treasury Office at Transnet and he was part of the 
Finance Support Team for the negotiations.  So the Finance 
Support Team was made up of two individuals.  And the two 
individuals being myself and Mr Danie Smit. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Also present was Mr Jiyane.  He is 
someone who you have mentioned already.  What was his 
role? 
MR LAHER:   Mr Jiyane was the Chief Procurement Officer 
at that point in time.  The Chief Procurement Officer of 
Transnet Freight Rail. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And also present was Mr Singh. 
MR LAHER:   Correct.  Mr Singh was the Group Chief 
Financial Officer of Transnet at that point in time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You want to go through this transcript? 
MR LAHER:   Sure.  So Chair, maybe we can start with page 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 27 of 122 
 
915.  And maybe paragraph 20 to the bottom of page 195 
where I say... the background being...  
 
I am giving payback in terms of what we told the bidders 
during that day in the morning session or the afternoon 
session.  This caucus is happening towards the evening.   
 
So I say:   
“We spoke them through...   
 
This them being the bidders.   
“... all the finance issues and basically what we 
thought we would get through in two days, we got 
10 
through in one day with all bidders.  And that is 
because we have basically told them what our 
issues were and we told them to come back to us by 
next week Wednesday on the results there.” 
 
So we explained to them the issue we have around 
escalation and we told them that escalation quotes by the... 
what they provided are too expensive and they need to come 
back with better escalation.   
 
We then explained to them the issues around break 
pricing and contractual requirements around break pricing.  I 
20 
think it was only CSR who really had a few questions around 
break pricing. 
 
But the big one was batch pricing where they nearly all 
fell off their chairs and the reasons being, what we told them 
is that the price we evaluated on and the price that we want 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 28 of 122 
 
is the five ninety-nine price or the four sixty-five price. 
 
Now that we are reducing the batches by 50%, we want 
the same price and if we do not keep the same price then we 
have got a big problem, a sort of deal breaker.  So 
...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry.  Before you carry on.  Could 
you just explain, perhaps remind the Chairperson who no 
doubt has already heard this, but what is the difference 
between break pricing and batch pricing? 
MR LAHER:   So my understanding of batch pricing.  And 
10 
these concepts, more or less, came to like during the 
negotiations.  So batch pricing was where you reduced the 
size of the batch which you were going to contract for.   
 
Break pricing was where you enter into a contract for 
however number of locomotives but say halfway through the 
contract you break and you say I do not want any more 
further locomotives.   
 
So you effectively breaking the terms of the contract and 
there would be clauses, contractual clauses relating to 
breaking that contract.  That should be right up front.  You 
20 
are only entering into a contract for, call it 50% or whatever 
the number is.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So here ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the difference between the two that, in 
regard to the one, there is going to be no change of the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 29 of 122 
 
number of locomotives that you are buying? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whereas, with regard to the other one, it 
leaves room for the possibility that you might reduce the 
number of locomotives that you want to buy? 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MR LAHER:   Correct.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So with regard to the batch pricing, the 
price would remain the same, I guess. 
10 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With regard to the break pricing, then the 
price could change. 
MR LAHER:   The price could change.  So halfway through 
execution of the contract ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR LAHER:   ...you would tell the supplier:  Sorry, I wanted 
five ninety-nine.  Now I only want hundred.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR LAHER:   So then the price would change. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  So you had 
ended off by saying a sort of deal breaker at line 10. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Please continue. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 30 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:   Mr Singh then intervenes and said:  Well, I 
would have a problem with that.  And I said, for obvious 
reasons:   
“Our mandate says...  
 
And this is an important bit.   
“Our mandate says we must get it.  We must get rid 
of the batch pricing because we must get the same 
price.” 
 
And I said:   
“I hope Brian has not yet signed of the mandate.” 
10 
 
Because at that stage it was still a draft mandate.   
 
And Mr Singh responded:   
“We have not yet given it to him.”   
 
And Mr Jiyane’s response:   
“No, I do not think.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry.  Mr Laher, based 
on your explanation to me of the distinction between batch 
pricing and break pricing.  That sentence does not seem to 
make sense to me.   
“We must get rid of this batch pricing because we 
20 
must get the same price.”   
 
I thought with batch pricing you get certainty in terms of 
the price but with break pricing you do not get certainty with 
the price.   
 
But here you say:   
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 31 of 122 
 
“We must get rid of this batch pricing because we 
must get the same price.”   
 
Can you explain that to me? 
MR LAHER:   Sure.  What I mean Chair there is, that the 
bidders during the day prior to that was saying that... I 
mean, we told them you cannot cut... you cannot change 
your price for a reduction in the batch size.   
 
They will come back to us.  And they were again and 
said it is impossible.  We have to change our price for a 
batch cut because for obvious reasons.   
10 
 
And what I meant to... what I was... what I meant when I 
said this, our mandate says we must get it.  We must get rid 
of the batch pricing.  What I meant was, we cannot allow the 
bidders to change their pricing. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So when you said the same price, 
would that have been the same price per unit on the 
assumption that one bidder was awarded the contract for all 
1064 locomotives? 
MR LAHER:   For all five ninety-nine or for four sixty-five. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
20 
MR LAHER:   Yes.  It must get the same price per unit that 
we evaluated on that was finally agreed to as part of the 
evaluations. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if you awarded smaller batches, 
must the price go up or down? 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 32 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:   Ordinarily you would expect the price to go up 
but the mandate said the price cannot go up.  And that is 
what I was warning them that you cannot allow.  You must 
get rid of the batch price and we cannot allow the bidders to 
push the price up because that is not in terms of the 
mandate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I would have expected you to want that 
pricing if you want certainty on the price.  Am I missing 
something? 
10 
MR LAHER:   Yes, we would want batch pricing and that was 
the... that was the decision taken by the board that they 
want certainty on the price and they want smaller batch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR LAHER:   So when I say get to the batch price, I do not 
mean get rid of the concept of batch pricing.  I mean 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR LAHER:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because that is what I get. 
20 
MR LAHER:   Ja, ja.  So not the concept of batch pricing but 
more get rid of this notion from the bidder that they are able 
to change their price for the reduction in the batch.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So what you meant was.  We must prevent 
them from changing the price in the context of batch pricing? 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 33 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:   Correct.  Hundred percent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because changing the price does not 
apply in batch pricing? 
MR LAHER:   Changing the prices against ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It should not apply. 
MR LAHER:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Carry on with the 
transcription please. 
MR LAHER:   Mr Jiyane then responds: 
10 
“No, I do not think.  But that is just a wish, you 
know.  In fact, some would laugh you off and think 
you are smoking something.” 
 
I responded to say: 
“Ja, but you see, we have a big issue then.” 
 
And this is again my warning to them. 
“Because if we do not get that...” 
 
And then I was interrupted. 
“If we do not get that price ...[intervenes]  
 
And then I was interrupted by Transnet Internal Audit.  
20 
So the unknown female speaker is from Transnet Internal 
Audit.  She said: 
“Sorry, I have to do my duty.” 
 
Because there were other people in the room at that 
point in time who were not part of the Evaluation Team and 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 34 of 122 
 
she did not want them in the room.   
 
So she wanted to ask them to leave the room.  I think it 
was two or three people in the room.  So we sort of waited 
for those people to leave the room and then we continued. 
 
I am going to continue then... okay the unknown speaker 
said: 
“Who are they?  Okay go and sit in the other room.  
There is another room opposite.  Sorry, guys.” 
 
And then one the person that were in the room said: 
“I just heard.  Mention my initials.  It is CSR.  And I 
10 
am thinking what I have done?” 
 
And the lady from the TIA, Transnet Internal Audit says: 
“You know the rules.” 
 
And then we continued.  So then I continued to say: 
“The issue we have around that and it now comes 
back to evaluations because they provided us.  If we 
have to go back on it, it is critical that they give us 
the right advice because if it is not, some of the 
other bidders give us better pricing on a smaller 
batch.” 
20 
 
So now I am referring back to the evaluation report 
where we said... and I am making them aware that you cut 
the batch size, bidders that you have excluded from these 
negotiations, presumable were, give six or seven on electric 
and four on diesel.  They were only negotiating with two and 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 35 of 122 
 
two.   
 
Now you have excluded two on the diesel and you have 
excluded another, I am going to say five for want... I think it 
was five.  
“You have not allowed them to cope for a smaller 
batch.  So how do you know you have evaluated 
properly?” 
 
And this is what I am raising to them that the 
evaluation...  
“You need to go back and re-evaluated.” 
10 
 
This is the point I am trying to make here.  Mr Jiyane 
then responds to me.  He talks me down and says: 
“No, but Yusuf we never had batches and I think we 
must not confuse the thing.” 
 
Singh then also responded and said: 
“Ja, we never evaluated on batches.” 
 
Mr Jiyane then responds again and says: 
“We never had batches and/or what we ask for.  We 
asked for a break.  For break pricing.” 
 
I said: 
20 
“Hundred percent so.  Yes, in the tender response 
we asked for break pricing, we did not ask for batch 
pricing.” 
 
But I think they are confusing the issue by talking about 
these things.  Mr Jiyane responds: 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 36 of 122 
 
“But they cannot use that we evaluate the batches.” 
 
And I say: 
“Hundred percent because you cannot because that 
is break pricing.” 
 
And the responds again to say: 
“So no bidders have given us information to say if 
we have given the half of the quantity, this is my 
price.  So there I do not have a problem.   
So as far as that is concerned there is no other 
price that we have gone on accept the prices that 
10 
we had for the total quantity.” 
 
So accepted his explanation at that point in time when 
he was senior.  Way above me.  He was the expert.  He was 
the Chief Procurement Officer and I had to accept this 
explanation based on the issue I raised at that point in time.  
So I say: 
“Fair enough.  Let us hope they come back with the 
right price.” 
 
Then Mr Jiyane responded to say: 
“Look, the quantity makes a huge difference.” 
20 
 
Then Mr Singh responds: 
“Let us put it this way.  It is not up to... I cannot see 
how they will.  I think it is good that you have asked 
but there is no way they are going to come back with 
the same price.” 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 37 of 122 
 
 
Mr Smit then asked the question: 
“There is no ways that they will come in at the same 
price?” 
 
Mr Singh responds.  It says: 
“Yes, it cannot be.  I mean, the whole evaluation is 
already immediately different.  You allocated over 
600 and now you are allocating over 300.  It cannot 
be.” 
 
Again, this is another crucial point I raise here in my 
next question.  So I posed the question to them.  Just a 
10 
question. 
“Should we not have gone pre-award back to all the 
bidders and said give us a price for 80 %...” 
 
It is not 80%.  It should be 50%.  I said 50%.  And said: 
“Give us a price for 50% of the batch.” 
 
Again, I am telling them.  You got to go back and re-
evaluate for 50% of the batch because then the process is 
transparent and it is fair and it is allowing all of the bidders 
to quote for a lower price. 
 
As 
you 
know 
from 
previous 
testimony 
at 
the 
20 
Commission, the impact of the batch price was significant on 
the price.  And what I am bringing as an eye-witness to the 
Commission is, that I did raise this issue and I warned them 
twice now about the impact on the batch and the price.   
 
Obviously, they gave me reasons and provided reasons 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 38 of 122 
 
why they thought it was still a fair process.  I will continue. 
Mr Sing then responds to me to say: 
“It is too late now.” 
 
I do not know if that is an adequate response but 
anyway, that was his response.  And Mr Jiyane said: 
“We still do not know what it is going to be.  It is 
60^, depending on the negotiations.  Some get 60%.  
Some get 40%.  We do not know.” 
 
I responded to say: 
“But anyway, be that as it may.  That was a flaw.  A 
10 
flaw down discussion.” 
 
And I continued to then explain what we spoke about.  I 
continued to say we then spoke about warranty and the cost 
of extended warranty and they will come back to us.  We 
spoke about options.  So Mr Singh to say: 
“So we may put it all together.” 
 
Mr Jiyane continues and he says that: 
“The only one thing, okay, that you would not know 
about the issues around the escalation things.  It 
was not part of the evaluation.” 
20 
 
Mr Singh then responds to say: 
“By that time... but they put that on the table and we 
are getting that from Regiments.” 
 
So he is talking about getting the escalation benchmark 
calculations from Regiments.  So Mr Jiyane responds to say: 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 39 of 122 
 
“Whatever they gave us on the thing, that they gave 
us, actually you must ignore.” 
 
And I said: 
“Ja, I think.” 
 
And Mr Jiyane responds: 
“The less you say about it, the better.” 
 
And I respond to say: 
“Ja.  And thank goodness we have evaluated 
excluding escalations.” 
 
Chair, the reason why I said that particular statement 
10 
there:  “Thank goodness we have evaluated excluding 
escalations.”  Again, if you go back two or five hours in that 
particular day whilst we were doing the negotiations with 
CSR.  CSR threw a real curve ball at us. 
 
Now the curve ball they threw at us was, we told them 
during the negotiations that escalation costs in the initial 
quote that they provided was too expensive and that it needs 
to be a lot lower. 
 
They responded to us and they basically told us – and 
this was the curve ball.  That when they responded on the 
20 
escalation costs as part of the tender.   
 
So the initial tender, which is four, five months prior to 
that when whilst we were doing the evaluations.  They only 
quoted for one year worth of escalations.   
 
That is a critical statement made by CSR during the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 40 of 122 
 
negotiations which took as aback because effectively what it 
means was.  What they supplied during the evaluations was 
not a true reflection of escalations over the full term of the 
escalation period. 
 
I then responded like this to say:  If we did evaluate, 
including escalations, that evaluation would have been 
completely wrong and we would have paid with CSR because 
effectively, they only gave one year worth of escalations 
whereas all the other bidders who we asked and supplied 
escalations costs... 
10 
 
Remember, not all of them supplied escalation costs.  All 
of the other bidders or some of the other bidders would have 
given us escalation for the full period, which would have 
been five or six years’ worth of delivery. 
 
And that is why I made the comment to say:  Hold on.  
Thank goodness we did not evaluate because we would have 
been completely wrong with the evaluation. 
 
I continue with the... Mr Jiyane then responds: 
“Ja.  And then our escalations and on the heading 
stuff?” 
20 
 
I responded: 
“On heading, they must come back on Monday 
because we told them that they must come back on 
Monday with their quotes for hedging” 
 
And then Mr Jiyane responds to say: 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 41 of 122 
 
“And Danie.  Well, explain.  But the Chinese, they 
do not understand.” 
 
Mr Singh says: 
“They understand what I want.  I want them to give 
me a letter from someone to say that they are going 
to put... 
 
Sorry for the word. 
“...the s-h-i-t in place.  That is what they are going 
to tell us on Monday.” 
 
I responded to say: 
10 
“I do not think the Chinese...” 
 
And then Mr Smit intervenes.  And he said: 
“That we did not... we did not ask them, you know.  
We said they must come forward with an innovative 
hedging strategy.  But Anoj, I have no doubt they 
will come with a letter from the bank because they 
themselves cannot do that.” 
 
Now Mr Singh responds to say: 
“I do not want that.  I want them to tell me that here 
is my counterparty.  I agree that I will give you 50% 
20 
exposure 
and 
I 
will 
cover 
you 
from 
an APG 
perspective and performance point.  That is what 
they must give me.” 
 
Mr Jiyane responds: 
“No, that they can give.” 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 42 of 122 
 
 
And Mr Danie Smit then concludes this part of the 
recording.   
“We have more than ...[indistinct]” 
 
So 
I 
think 
the 
important 
bits 
of 
this 
particular 
transcription were the warnings that sounded again around, 
you cannot touch the batch price because it is against the 
mandate. 
 
Sorry.  You need to go out and re-evaluated because it 
is two things.  Let me rephrase that.  Number one.  It is 
against the mandate.  You cannot accept a price from the 
10 
bidders that are against the mandate. 
 
Number two.  You need to go out and re-evaluate for 
bidders... because now you have cut the batch and you do 
not know whether the evaluations is fair and transparent 
anymore.   
 
And those are the two issues I have raised and 
obviously the responded as you can hear. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  If we can go back please to 
your main statement, Bundle 4A, back to page 230.  If you 
have regard to paragraph 35.  Was there a time when the 
20 
board then approved of this splitting of batches? 
MR LAHER:   Yes, Chair.  The board approved the splitting 
of batches on 17 January 2014.  Supply Chain Services 
made that submission to the Transnet Board.  I was unaware 
at the time of the details of the submission.   
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 43 of 122 
 
 
We were told later that the board had approved the 
evaluation process and also approved the splitting of the 
batches.   
 
I, at that point in time, did not have sight of these 
approvals but I got them sometime later.  And attached to my 
statement are the approvals that came through from the 
board as Annexures YL10 and 11 and the minutes thereto as 
YL12 and 13. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And then at 36. 
MR LAHER:   The splitting of the batches Chair, would have 
10 
had an impact on the price of the locomotives and this was 
communicated to the CF... in the CF, the finance report by 
dated 10 December as detailed in paragraph 29 about so. 
 
What I am saying there is.  We warned them but the 
board still made the decision to cut the batches.   
 
And there is one misrepresentation in that submission to 
the board what the CEF ET finding said but that is covered in 
my supplementary statement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at page 231, you deal with 
negotiations.  You have indicated to me that there are a few 
20 
paragraphs in that section that you wish to highlight.  The 
first of them is at paragraph 49 at page 233.  Please deal 
with that. 
MR LAHER:   Thank you.  Chair, paragraphs 49 and 50, 
essentially, talks about what I have just explained now in 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 44 of 122 
 
terms of the warnings I gave for the mandate.  It is 
essentially putting into my words what I showed in the 
transcription.  So I do not know if you want to go any further 
into that? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say that: 
“During the Negotiation Team caucus, I raised 
...[intervenes]  
MR LAHER:   I am sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At 49. 
MR LAHER:   Sorry, Mr Myburgh.  You are right.  Sorry, I 
10 
should raise it.  Sorry, Mr Myburgh.  Chair, 49 we have not 
dealt with.  So during the Negotiations Team caucuses, I 
raised the issue that the escalation costs seem too high.   
 
I raised these issues specifically with the bidders and I 
raised it during the team caucuses, during the escalation... 
during the negotiations sessions. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what do you mean by escalation 
costs? 
MR LAHER:   So escalations costs would be.  You have a 
price for a certain item today.  If that item needs to be built 
20 
over a period of time, the escalation costs would be the 
costs of inflation, et cetera, over the period of time that that 
item needs to be build.   
 
To lay the costs of labour is X but next year it will be 
higher and the following year it will be higher.  So that is 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 45 of 122 
 
escalation costs.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And who would have been present 
during the Negotiations Team caucuses? 
MR LAHER:   During the caucuses Chair, Mr Jiyane would 
have present.  Mr Singh would have been present.  Mr Smith 
would have been present.  Transnet Internal Audit would 
have been present.   
 
In some instances, the Internal Legal Team, Transnet 
Internal Legal Team would also be present.  And in some... 
well, in most instances... well, in all instances, Supply Chain 
10 
Services would have been as part of the caucuses as well.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You then mentioned to me that you 
also wish to highlight paragraph 50. 
MR LAHER:   Yes, Chair.  So Chair, this is specifically with 
regard to the escalation costs again.  And again, I do not 
think this has been brought through to the Commission 
before.  As an eye-witness, I can bring this through to the 
Commission. 
 
So I raised my concerns about escalations directly with 
Mr Singh as well.  I was uncomfortable with the value that 
20 
escalations, that the bidders were quoting.   
 
And I think Mr Smit was also very uncomfortable with the 
value of the escalations that the bidders were quoting.  So I 
entered into a debate with him in terms of why I thought it 
was too high. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 46 of 122 
 
 
Mr Singh then responded to me to say that bidders built 
in 
a 
risk-premium 
into 
their 
pricing 
to 
cater 
for 
unpredictable... the unpredictable nature of future costs.  
And that explanation was not unreasonable to me because 
you will built in a risk-premium for future costs. 
 
And he explained to me also that it is a negotiations 
process.  The negotiations process, the final price is what is 
important in the context of negotiations. 
 
And the pricing, the overall pricing was acceptable in 
light of the vigorous negotiation process.  So what he was 
10 
getting at is, it is a give and take.   
 
So maybe you think the escalation costs are too high but 
we will gain somewhere else.  So in his view, he believes 
that the pricing, the overall pricing for these locomotives 
were acceptable. 
 
I accepted his explanation that he provided to me at that 
point to this particular issue that I have raised with him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you indicated to me, over the 
page at 234, that you wish also to highlight paragraph 52 but 
that seems to me something that we have already dealt with.  
20 
The batch pricing.  
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The next paragraph that you want to 
deal with, as I understand, is paragraph 73.  And that relates 
to the concerns that you raised about the relocation of 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 47 of 122 
 
assembly facilities to Durban. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps I could ask you to just deal 
with the whole of this section, please.  Starting at paragraph 
71.   
MR LAHER:   Sure.  Thank you.  Chair, in June 2015, this 
was after the contract was already signed.  Approximately 
just over a year after the contract was signed I was 
instructed by Mr Singh to review proposals related to the 
pricing for the move of the assembly facilities for these 
10 
locomotives from Koedoespoort in Gauteng to Durban for 
two OEMs very specifically, that was for Bombadier 
Transportation and for CNR.  I received those proposals 
from Ms Mdletshe and those proposals are attached as 
annexures YL18 and YL19. 
 
Chair, I then commented on these proposals and 
maybe we should go to my emails on my comments there 
and my concerns from a financial point of view.  I 
articulated in those emails and those emails are dated 21 
June and 22 June respectively and these emails attached 
20 
as YL20 and the emails were addressed to Mr Singh, Mr 
Jiyane, Mr Pita, Mr Selinga from our Transnet legal team 
and Ms Mdletshe. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let us go to those emails.  You will 
find YL20 at page 471.  That is from an email, at the foot 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 48 of 122 
 
of page, from yourself sent on the 21 June 2015.  To whom 
did you send it? 
MR 
LAHER: 
 
 
Chair, 
I 
sent 
this 
email 
specifically 
addressed to Ms Mdletshe from the supply chain services 
team and I cc’d Mr Singh, Mr Pita, Mr Jiyane and Mr 
Selinga.  My review comments or specific instruction from 
Mr 
Singh 
to 
review 
the 
proposals 
and 
provide 
my 
responses.  My responses are captured in the email, Chair.  
I will go through my responses in a bit more detail.  The 
first response was – so there is quite detailed responses, 
10 
got quite detailed proposals that were received from the 
bidder.  The specific response I am going to talk about now 
is with regard to the CNR proposal. 
 
The first issue I raised was I said – I told him that 
the increase in the team size does not make sense 
considering that the learning curve will mitigate this 
requirement within a short time.   
So 
CNR 
wanted 
to 
increase 
the 
number 
of 
personnel involved in the transaction and I said it does not 
make sense because with the learning curve you should 
20 
actually be able to learn a lot quicker so you do not need 
extra personnel for the move to Durban.  Why would you 
need extra personnel for a move to Durban, let us try and 
get that. 
The second point I raised with was negotiating with 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 49 of 122 
 
suppliers or eliminating inflationary costs related to the 
additional four months.  In any case material costs 
generally do not increase on a monthly basis thus the 
impact should not be as large as – I think it is 1.8%, it is 
not very clear here. 
Also, 1.8% for four months does not equal 5.5% but 
rather 7.2% which is excessive.  So I am pointing out that 
this cost is excessive in the quote.  The next bullet 3: 
“From the explanation provided the incremental cost 
of procurement does not relate to the move to the 
10 
Durban.  This should not be charged.  In any case, 
9% interest is excessive.” 
So the point I am making there, Chair, is they wanted to 
charge additional costs for procurement because they are 
moving the facilities from Johannesburg to Durban and I 
am saying but that does not make sense because you 
should have already incurred the cost in your original 
quote when you were doing it in Johannesburg, so that 
should not be charged. 
 
And then they quoted for interest which is 9% and I 
20 
said no, the interest rate of 9% is excessive and nobody 
charges those type of rates.   
 
Item 4, they quoted for additional technical support 
required in Durban and I said the additional technical 
support requirement in Durban does not make sense.  The 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 50 of 122 
 
cost of this technical support should have already been 
included in the original price of the locomotives.  So again 
I am saying it does not make sense, you cannot ask us – 
you cannot charge for this. 
 
Point 5 I said: 
“On-site 
service 
technicians 
should 
have 
been 
included in the original price.” 
So 
CNR 
quoted 
additional 
costs 
for 
on-site 
service 
technicians and I am saying it should have already been 
included in the original price so you cannot charge for it 
10 
again, in other words.  Also, they charged R31.5 million for 
travel and relocation and I said R31.5 million for travel and 
relocation seems excessive. 
 
Then I asked the question, we are a transport 
company, why do they need to use other transporters to 
transport goods down to Durban?  We are a rail company, 
surely we can use our own rail and that was the point I am 
making in point 6: 
“Can the task not be done by TFR, Transnet Freight 
Rail via rail containers?  If so, then insurance costs 
20 
would also be minimal as we would be internally 
insured.” 
As you can see there is a number of detailed responses I 
am raising here.   
 
Point 7 I say that – they wanted to charge for 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 51 of 122 
 
shelving and I responded to say R11 200 per square metre 
per shelving seems excessive, as Siya(?) should research 
this, there needs to research what the real cost per 
shelving is in Durban. 
 
Point 8, the point I am raising here is they wanted 
to establish a warehouse in Durban and I am asking has 
consideration been given to a Transnet property or a TFR 
property warehouse as we can use our own warehousing.  
Why must we go and use someone else’s warehousing, we 
can save costs on that basis. 
10 
 
I also asked in point 9, they quoted for additional 
forklifts and I asked why the additional forklifts, you should 
have – in other words, you should quoted for forklifts in 
your original quote now why because you are moving to 
Durban it does not make sense that you need more forklifts 
because you are in Durban. 
 
Point 10, this is not very clear on my copy, Chair.  It 
looks like it something how much is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
How 
much 
of 
the 
incentive 
and 
relocation cost per staff member. 
20 
MR LAHER:   Yes, yes, I am asking the question how much 
is that because that was not counted and on my copy I 
cannot see 11 as well.   
CHAIRPERSON:   11 is not legible. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I will ensure that page is replaced, 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 52 of 122 
 
Chairperson.  I am going to move on to 12 then, Chair 
person. 
MR LAHER:   Point 12 that I raised is the labour inflation 
rate applied at 5.5% for the full year whereas the move 
was only for four months.  I said how can you charge 5.5% 
for the full year which is where should only be four months 
and I also pointed out that there was an error in the 
formula in their sheet there, cell E23 in the staff sheet.   
I pointed out in item 13 they would have already 
quoted for aging costs, so the additional costs to roll over 
10 
the hedge must be checked by our treasury department to 
confirm whether it is reasonable or not. 
Now point 14, I also said that the additional bond 
costs must be checked by our treasury department to 
confirm if it is reasonable.   
Point 15, Chair, I raised there that they have 
included a cost for contingency risk of 4% and a risk 
provision of 9% as part of their price and I raise there that 
this contingency risk of 4% and the risk provision of 9% is 
unexplained and seems unjustified.  It is unexplained and 
20 
seems to be additional profit, sorry.  This seems excessive.  
So again they are charging us profit for something they 
should not be charging for. 
Point 16, I asked that a detailed list of suppliers 
being used in Durban must be obtained versus those in 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 53 of 122 
 
Jo’burg so that we can explain why they would need – why 
there would be additional cost? If there are already 
suppliers in Durban, there should not be additional costs 
for those suppliers in Durban for transportation. 
Point 17 I raised was the cost of the long term 
maintenance consulting does not relate to the move to 
Durban.  This should not be charged as it should have 
already been included in the original price. 
And then lastly I raised that in their calculation they 
double counted the labour inflation in those particular 
10 
cells.  So as you can see, Chair, I raised a number of very 
pertinent and important issues with regard to the pricing 
that came through with regard to move to Durban by CNR 
specifically. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairman, I see that it is quarter 
past eleven. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, let us take the tea adjournment 
and we will resume at half past.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us proceed. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Laher, 
we were at page 471, 472, those were your points you 
raised in respect of CNR’s relocation proposal.  If you go 
to 473 you find a similar email dated 22 June from you to 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 54 of 122 
 
the same people and my understanding is that then in turn 
addresses 
Bombadier ’s 
proposal. 
 
These 
are 
your 
comments. 
MR LAHER:   Correct, Chair, these are my comments 
regarding the Bombadier proposal.  Chair, the Bombadier 
proposal did not provide adequate information from which 
to do a financial evaluation.  So I am not going to go 
through the entire email suffice to say that the gist of my 
email was that Bombadier 
did not provide sufficient 
financial numbers so that we can do any evaluation and 
10 
that that was it, so I do not know if you need to go through 
it, the rest of it? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, I see your conclusion just 
before you say:  Best regards, Yousuf, is: 
“The BT cost information is limited and does not 
allow for a detailed analysis of their costing.” 
Was that the conclusion that you came to on the basis of 
the preceding points? 
MR LAHER:   Correct, correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you go back then please to your – 
20 
the text of your main affidavit at – or statement or 238.  We 
have now dealt with paragraph 71, 72.  73, that is 
essentially a list of the concerns that you have already 
mentioned in relation to CNR. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 55 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   74, can you pick up there please? 
MR LAHER:   Chair, I received a revised CNR proposal on 
the 23 June from supply chain services.  I reviewed the 
revised proposal and I responded then on the 25 June that 
the proposal that I received had not changed from the 
previous proposal except for a new offer of payment terms.  
So basically nothing changed except for the payment terms 
and that was in my response in YL21, I think. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at 75 you deal with Bombadier, 
BT. 
10 
MR LAHER:   Yes, it goes back to BT did not provide the 
detailed costing of each item, it makes up the additional 
cost and the BT cost information is limited and does not 
allow for a detailed analysis of the costing. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And did you subsequently receive 
any further proposal from BT? 
MR LAHER:   Chair, I did not receive any further proposals 
from BT or CNR after that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Mr Laher, that then completes 
your main statement, the things you wanted to highlight.  
20 
Could we then please go to your supplementary statement.  
As I explained to you, we are going to deal with the main 
statement and the supplementary statement and then we 
will deal with your rule 3.4 statement. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 56 of 122 
 
 
Your supplementary statement you find in bundle 4B 
and if I could ask you to turn up page 733.  Some of this 
we have already dealt with but could I take you to 
paragraph 12.  Would you deal with that please? 
MR LAHER:   Chair, I have included paragraph 12 into my 
submission to give a view of what the reporting lines were 
during the evaluation stage and the negotiation stage, 
those are depicted in annexure YL39. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, well let us go to YL39 and 
that you find at page 741. 
10 
MR LAHER:   Chair, if I can talk through YL39.  Sorry, if I 
could start with the bottom right block.  Those are the 
reporting lines during the evaluations so there were three 
teams essentially for the valuations.  There was the CFET 
finance team which was myself and five other individuals.  
Then there was the CFET technical team which evaluated 
the technical part of the tender made up with a different lot 
of individuals. 
 
And then there was the cross-functional evaluation 
team that evaluated local content supply development and 
20 
BBBEE, so three separate teams.  We evaluated each of 
our sections separately and then we provided our results 
through to supply chain services.  Supply chain services, 
we reported in to supply chain services essentially for the 
evaluations.  Supply chain services then would consolidate 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 57 of 122 
 
all of the results and then report in to the steering 
committee and obviously the steering committee would 
report in to Transnet Exco in to the board.  The decisions 
were obviously made at the steering committee and board 
level. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you were part of the CFET 
finance team. 
MR LAHER:  Correct.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At the bottom on the left hand side. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then that relates to 
evaluations and the position during negotiations? 
MR LAHER:   So during the negotiations, Chair, the top left 
hand side block, there were a number of teams that were 
part of the negotiations so it was the finance support team 
which was two of us, myself and Danie, then there was the 
legal team made up with internal legal and external legal, 
so we had an army of lawyers with us, quite few 
individuals.   
 
Then there was the supply chain services support 
20 
team effectively made up of Ms Mdletshe and Mr Jiyane 
and then there was Transnet internal audit who are also 
part of the negotiation sessions. 
 
We 
reported 
in 
to 
the 
chairpersons 
of 
the 
negotiating team.  The chairpersons of the negotiating 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 58 of 122 
 
team were Mr Singh and Mr Jiyane, co-chairperson, so on 
the days Mr Singh was not there, Mr Jiyane would chair, 
the most senior person would normally chair and then the 
chairpersons would report in to the steering committee or 
the subcommittee of the steering committee.  There was a 
subcommittee of the steering committee, the subcommittee 
of 
the 
steering 
committee 
was 
made 
out 
of 
three 
individuals which is Mr Singh, Mr Molefe and Mr Gama. 
 
The decision-making happened at the subcommittee 
of the steering committee so any decision that had to be 
10 
made around this particular tender and negotiations, 
including price, payment terms, etcetera, was made at that 
level. 
 
Our role was purely a support role with no decision-
making capabilities. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, so if you go back to page 
734 of your supplementary statement.  We have dealt with 
paragraph 12.  You also highlighted previously at page 
736, you have dealt with paragraph 17 and what I would 
ask you to deal with now – and perhaps you can deal with 
20 
the 
whole 
of 
this 
section 
under 
the 
heading 
Final 
Consolidation and in particular the issue of hurdle rates, 
which is a new thing, as I understand it. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you could deal with paragraphs 19 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 59 of 122 
 
to 28 please? 
MR LAHER:   Sure.  Chair, post the negotiation process Mr 
Singh requested that I put through a final consolidation of 
the numbers as well as assist him in making edits to a 
memorandum that needed to go through to the board 
requesting for the increase in ETC from the board-
approved 38.6 initially through to the 54.5 billion including 
the options.  The evidence I present here was – is with 
regard to the NPV calculations that needed to be done for 
the 
memorandum 
to 
the 
board 
and 
specifically 
this 
10 
evidence I have put into my supplementary statement 
because I identified it recently whilst I participating in 
giving evidence at the SAICA disciplinary case against Mr 
Singh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So let us just break this down.  We 
are talking about hurdle rates used for NPV calculations.  
What does that stand for? 
MR 
LAHER: 
 
 
NPV 
stands 
for 
net 
present 
value 
calculations and a net present value calculation would then 
determine whether a capital investment is viable or not.  If 
20 
it is positive it is viable, In other words. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what is a hurdle rate? 
MR LAHER:   A hurdle rate would be the interest rate used 
to discount the cash flows for the NPV calculation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And do I understand you to have 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 60 of 122 
 
said that you gave this evidence about the hurdle rate used 
for the NPV calculations at Mr Singh’s SAICA inquiry? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Please carry on? 
MR LAHER:   I am at paragraph 20 now.  So as part of 
obtaining the required inputs for the memo Mr Singh 
requested that I contact Mr Callard in order to obtain an 
updated net present value number as Mr Callard had 
performed original net present value calculations. 
 
As instructed, I contacted Mr Callard on the 21 
10 
March.  Mr Callard responded on the 23 March essentially 
indicating that if the hurdle rate for the original NPV 
calculation that was presented to the board of 18.56% was 
used the NPV would become negative which effectively 
meant that the whole project is not viable. 
 
Shortly thereafter – obviously Mr Singh saw this, Mr 
Singh told me that the hurdle rate actually changed from 
18% to 15% and that the NPV would become positive if the 
new hurdle rate of 15% is used and adjusted. 
 
So I then – Mr Gama sent an email to ask the 
20 
question why is the NPV negative?  I responded to Mr 
Gama in a nutshell to say that the Transnet hurdle rate has 
been changed from about 18% to about 15%, it changed 
last week, I think, based on what Mr Singh told me, so just 
relaying the message – and a copy of that email is 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 61 of 122 
 
attached. 
 
The background behind is that the policy owner for 
the WACC rate or the hurdle rate is the General Manager 
Group Financial Planning wanted to get that right, the 
General 
Manager 
Group 
Financial 
Planning 
and 
the 
General Manager Group Financial Planning at Transnet 
reports in to the Group CFO so effectively he reported in to 
Mr Singh and this policy sponsor for the WACC rate was Mr 
Singh as he was the Group CFO. 
 
So at that point in time I was not involved in 
10 
developing or utilising the WACC rate so I did not know 
that there was going to be a change in the WACC rate and 
I took his word for it and explained to Mr Gama that a 
reduction from 18 to 15% was what is coming and 
obviously sent that Mr Callard to ask him to update his 
calculations based on the revised hurdle rate. 
 
The final WACC policy was actually only signed off 
on the 20 May 2014, way after that, backdated to 31 March 
2014.  So the evidence I am bringing forward to the 
Commission, which I do not think has been brought to the 
20 
Commission before, is that it is possible that Mr Singh 
deliberately influenced such that the hurdle rate should be 
reduced in order to ensure that the NPV remains positive. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Then that ends off on what 
you wanted to deal with in your supplementary statement.  
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 62 of 122 
 
Could we then go to your Rule 3.4 statement but perhaps it 
is most convenient first just to look briefly at the Rule 3.3 
notice that you received.  That you find at the beginning of 
the file.  If I could ask you please to go to page 503.1.  
This is the 3.3 notice that you received?  Would you 
confirm that? 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And at paragraph 5 you were 
advised that the evidence of Mr Callard which implicates 
you or may implicate you in the above allegations is set 
10 
out and there is only five paragraphs, 60, 64, 67, 197 and 
211 and you were then provided with a copy of that 
statement and you were told that the relevant annexures 
were 17, 18 and 18A, is that right? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I would like just to place the 
evidence that you are going to give now in context.  I 
would like to go to those five paragraphs in Mr Callard’s 
statement starting with paragraph 60 which you find at 
page 503.17.  Are you there? 
20 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So in this paragraph:  Mr Laher (sic) 
says that: 
“On 21 March 2014, I and colleagues in finance 
received 
an 
email 
from 
Yousuf 
Laher 
with 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 63 of 122 
 
spreadsheets of the final cash flows as at 17 March 
2014.  I was shocked and astounded to note that 
the advanced payment guarantee for the CSR 100 
was 30%, the design review 30%, payment on 
acceptance per locomotive 37% and retention 3%.  
This translates to a 60% upfront payment before a 
single locomotive is received.” 
Now paragraph 60 then appears to relate to the 100 
locomotives, is that correct? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Not to the 1 064. 
MR LAHER:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And it relates to spreadsheets 
dealing with cash flow on the 17 March and in particular 
the upfront payment. 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is 60.  If we go to paragraph 
64 Mr Laher (sic) says that: 
“On 15 April I was asked by Laher to assist in 
updating a memorandum from Molefe to BADC on 
20 
the increase in the ETC of the acquisition of the 
100 21E locomotives.  The memorandum requested 
a recommendation by BADC to the board for an 
increase in the ETC of the 100 locomotives from 
3.871 billion to 4.840 billion.  The increase was 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 64 of 122 
 
approximately a billion rand or 25%.” 
So this also relates to the 100 electric locomotives? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And here, whereas the first issue 
related to the upfront payment this issue relates to the 
increase in the ETC. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then if I can take you please to 
paragraph 67 Mr Callard records: 
“Subsequent interrogation of the memorandum from 
10 
Laher 
however 
raised 
the 
following 
question.  
Paragraph 5A of the memorandum states foreign 
exchange rates, the rand has depreciated by 10.7% 
against the Japanese yen, this has impacted the 
expected 
price 
of 
the 
locomotive 
as 
per 
the 
business case and ultimately the ETC as approved 
by the board by approximately 10.74%.  This is 
most unusual as the Japanese yen would be 
associated with Mitsui, a Japanese company and 
not CSR, a Chinese company.  Further, the cash 
20 
flow spreadsheet reflects USD for CSR.  From the 
ownership of these documents and spreadsheets, 
Singh and Laher should talk to this anomaly.” 
So this is really – or, let me ask you, it seems again 
relates not to the 1064 but to the 100 electric locomotives. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 65 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And this is really an issue relating to 
exchange rates. 
MR LAHER:   Correct, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And currency. 
MR LAHER:   Currency, ja. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Currency. 
 
So 
those 
three 
paragraphs, 60, 64 and 67, electric locomotives.  Let us go 
then forward please to paragraph 197. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page or paragraph? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon, page 503.54, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   There one finds paragraph 197.  197 
records that: 
“I was part of a team…” 
This is Mr Callard. 
“…that primarily comprised Yousuf Laher, Mohamed 
Moeller, Executive Manager Finance Freight Rail.  
Others participated but in a secondary role.  Our 
20 
brief was twofold.  To show conclusively that forex 
hedging 
and 
escalation 
were 
included 
in 
the 
business case and reconcile the 38.6 billion of the 
business case to the contracted amount of 49.55 
billion.” 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 66 of 122 
 
This was a task that you undertook together with Mr Laher 
(sic) and it related to whether a correct report had been 
made to the board. 
MR LAHER:   Yes, correct.  Initially report to the board in 
2013. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  Now you take – I mean, I do 
not suppose are implicated here, you are simply mentioned 
as being part of this team and you accept that you were 
and you undertook the work. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So 197 is not particularly important.  
Let us then go to the final paragraph where you are said to 
be implicated and that is paragraph 211 at the foot of page 
503.58.  Just for the sake of completeness, paragraph 197 
now deals with the 1 064 locomotives. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 211: 
“Laher is the primary author of these two Excel 
spreadsheets of 17 March 2014.  Laher is a 
signatory to the BAFO valuation of 15 January 2014 
20 
and was furthermore, a member of the negotiating 
team for the 1 064 locomotives comprising inter alia 
Molefe, Singh, Gama, Pita, Jiyane, etcetera.” 
Is that correct? 
MR LAHER:   Correct, ja. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 67 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is what you are allegedly 
implicated on that basis.  Now these spreadsheets of the 
17 
March 
2014, 
we 
are 
dealing 
here 
with 
1 
064 
locomotives. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now although you are said to be 
implicated in paragraph – or sorry, 211.  If you have a look 
at paragraph 208 at page 503.57, Mr Callard says: 
“On examination I could not credit that the figures 
in the spreadsheet were a true reflection of the real 
10 
cost of the locomotives for the following reasons.” 
So at 211 Mr Callard contends that you are the primary 
author but importantly, and I raise this because it is 
something that you then quite correctly deal with in your 
Rule 3.4 statement, not only does he say the primary 
author but at 208 he is then critical of the content of those 
spreadsheets.   
211 has a subparagraph which you find at page 
503.59, it would also appear that you were implicated here, 
it is something that you deal with: 
20 
“With this knowledge I was disappointed that the 
exercise undertaken in January 2018 was in good 
faith but Laher, with full knowledge of the pricing 
details and negotiations, chose not to share his 
knowledge 
including 
the 
spreadsheets 
and 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 68 of 122 
 
evaluation reports with the members of the team to 
arrive at an honest and accurate assessment of the 
increase in ETC from 38.6 billion to 49.55 billion or 
54 billion, if options are included.” 
So there the contention is that you did not share your 
information.  That relates also to the 1 064 locomotives. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So with that then by way of 
background, let us turn to your Rule 3.4 statement which 
you find at page 504.  Are you there? 
10 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if I could direct your attention to     
paragraph 6 at 505, you state: 
“In the Commission’s notice I was advised by the 
Commission that paragraph 60, 64, 67, 197 and 211 
of Mr Callard’s statement implicate me.” 
We have dealt with that. 
MR LAHER:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then I want to take you to the 
heading at the foot, towards the foot of page 506, is the 
20 
heading there 100 Locomotive Tender.  Do you see that? 
MR LAHER:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what you say over the page at 
paragraph 18 that: 
“I deal with paragraph 60, 64 and 67 of Mr Callard’s 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 69 of 122 
 
statement in the paragraphs that follow.” 
Because those were the three paragraphs that implicate 
you in relation to the 100 locomotive tender. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what you do then in this part of 
your statement is you start out with the heading Pertinent 
Facts Related to the 100 Locomotive Deal.” 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if I could then take you forward 
in that.  When you get to paragraph 35 you then deal with 
10 
paragraph 64, Mr Callard’s 64. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then if I could take you please to 
paragraph 36, the next paragraph, but go over the page to 
511, it is in that paragraph that you deal with Mr Callard’s 
paragraph 67. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if you go over the page to 
512 you will see at 42 you deal with Mr Callard’s paragraph 
60. 
20 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So this section running from 19 to 42 
you set out pertinent facts relating to the locomotives and 
in that context you deal albeit it not sequentially and 
numerically 
but 
you 
deal 
with 
all 
three 
of 
those 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 70 of 122 
 
paragraphs, 60, 64 and 67. 
 
Could I then ask you please to take the Chairperson 
briefly through this section and in the process of doing so 
address those three paragraphs. 
MR LAHER:   Sure.  Thank you, Chairperson.  So I will 
start with paragraph 19 now, Chairperson, this is with 
regard to the pertinent facts which provides some context 
to the 100 locomotive deal and my specific involvement.   
 
So during the 1 064 negotiation process which took 
place in February/March 2014 I was asked by Mr Singh or 
10 
informed by Mr Singh to help Mr Jiyane with the finance-
related negotiations for this 100 locomotive deal and he 
also told us at that stage that the board had approved a 
confinement for 100 locomotives to CSR. 
 
At that point in time it took me by complete surprise 
because we were involved with 1 064 negotiations and I am 
wondering why do we need an extra 100 locomotives?  But 
in any case, he said it was approved by the board, we need 
an extra 100 locomotives, it has been confined to CSR. 
 
So we provided the financial support to Mr Jiyane.  
20 
These negotiations took place in the same place where the 
1 064 
negotiations 
took 
place. 
 
I 
was 
not 
officially 
appointed, it was just Danie, you and Yousuf, go to that 
room and help Mr Jiyane. 
 
So it took place at Webber Wentzel’s offices in 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 71 of 122 
 
Illovo, it was recorded, TIA were involved in the entire 
negotiation, in our process.  At the same process the co-
chair – we were reporting to the co-Chairperson, the co-
Chairperson was report to the steering committee.  That 
steering committee is the committee that makes the 
decisions including pricing as well as the payment terms.  
We were just a support team to Mr Jiyane. 
 
Mr Singh and Jiyane ran the overall process of 
negotiations.  During the negotiations we would respond to 
bidders directly if we had issues to raise but most of the 
10 
time the responses would be through the chairpersons. 
 
As 
I 
said, 
the 
negotiations 
included 
Transnet 
internal audit as well as supply chain services in those 
sessions the co-chairpersons. 
 
The negotiation process, like any other negotiation 
process, is offer, counter-offer and it went along those 
lines.  So whilst we were busy with the negotiations Mr 
Singh asked me to prepare a reasonability calculation for 
these particular locos.   
 
So in 2012 we purchased locomotives from CSR, 
20 
which was a year or two ago, and we knew what the pricing 
for the locomotives were.  So what he asked me to do is to 
say, okay, if you know what the pricing for that locomotive 
is in 2012, you do your own calculation and you tell me 
what you think the pricing for this locomotive now in 2014 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 72 of 122 
 
should be.  
 
I conducted the calculation accordingly, I went and 
did some research to see what the pricing of that 
locomotive and I came to a figure of R41 million for that 
particular locomotive.  My calculation is referenced in 
annexure YL24. 
 
My calculation was primarily based on the – should 
we go to YL24 just to show the movement? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, we will deal with the 
paragraph first and then we can go there. 
10 
MR LAHER:   So my calculation was primarily based on 
taking the price of the 20E locomotive that was purchased 
in 
2012, 
knowing 
what 
the 
exchange 
rate 
for 
that 
locomotive was in 2012 and adjusting for the change in 
exchange 
rate 
between 
2012 
and 
2014 
as 
well 
as 
increasing the cost of that locomotive for escalations 
between 2012 and then, for inflation, etcetera. 
 
Then I would add in items that were provided to us 
by CSR which is items we did not know about.  This was a 
higher spec locomotive so it was not exactly the same 
20 
locomotive as a 20E, it was a bit more powerful locomotive. 
 
So there would have been additional design costs, 
additional variations and I think there were additional 
hedging costs and setup costs.  So I added in those costs 
into the calculation to get to my 41 million, that was the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 73 of 122 
 
only way I could rely on this information, was the 
information I got from CSR.  That calculation is in YL24. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  So YL24 you find at page 548.  
Is that the calculation? 
MR LAHER:   That is the calculation yes Chair.  So 
essentially what is reflected on this calculation is the base 
price for the 20 locomotives in 2012 was R28.8million.  The 
exchange rate used in 2012, on the 22 n d of October 2012 
was R8.635 to the US Dollar, the exchange rate whilst we 
were doing negotiations in February 2014 was 10.9, so 
10 
essentially I calculated the exchange impact based on 
those parameters as well as calculated the escalation for 
the South African portion and the US Dollar portion of that 
locomotive and then added in the additional items as per 
the CSR quote for variations adding hedging costs and 
duties and I also took out R1.5million for the set-up costs 
because my view was a set-up costs should have already 
been included using they’re using the same production line 
and that’s how I got to my price of R41million.  I then 
presented that R41million – I’m back in my statement, 
20 
Chair I’m back at my statement, I then presented my 
calculation to Mr Singh and Mr Jiyane as a benchmark to 
use 
for 
the 
negotiations. 
 
When 
we 
started 
the 
negotiations, Mr Jiyane pitched at the price of R38.5million 
so he told CSR we want a price of R38.5million for these 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 74 of 122 
 
locomotives, 
CSR 
disagreed 
and 
wanted 
a 
price 
of 
R49million, it was a to and fro, to and fro for a long period 
of time and eventually we never agreed to anything but 
they didn’t want to budge on their promise and obviously 
we didn’t want to budge on our price.  A day or two later, 
Mr Singh comes in to us and says, Mr Molefe has approved 
a price of R44million for these locomotives, so there 
obviously 
must 
have 
been 
some 
other 
negotiations 
happening 
in 
the 
background 
and 
based 
on 
that 
I 
responded to him to say that, but the Mitsui quote was 
10 
cheaper and he responded to me to say it had already 
been approved by the Board that we’re going to go with 
CSR so it doesn’t matter what the Mitsui quote was, that’s 
on Graph 29. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, can I just ask you, this CSR 
tender was that done on confinement? 
MR LAHER:   It was done on confinement, correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson we heard all the 
evidence about, initially there was an award to Mitsui, then 
there was a change of confinement and ultimately it went 
20 
to CSR. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, when you say here, pointed out 
to Mr Singh, is that the Mitsui quote was cheaper, it’s in 
that context. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 75 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The total context. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, carry on, what were you told? 
MR LAHER:   Sorry, I forgot to mention in paragraph 28 
that, Mr Singh told us that Mr Molefe approved the price of 
R44million as well as the payment terms which is what Mr 
Callard request be the payment terms and he instructed the 
lawyers to draft the contract accordingly.  On paragraph 30 
I raised with the bidders, in my view, the pricing was – you  
10 
know pointing out the R49million was excessive and it was 
too high and I also raised my concerns that they were 
using the incorrect exchange rates to determine their 
prices.   
Subsequent to that, I also raised, with Mr Singh that 
– and I particularly pointed out to him that CSR were using 
the incorrect exchange rate to determine their price and 
because they were using the incorrect exchange rate they 
were adding an additional R2.4million per locomotive to the 
price.  His response to me, to what I raised with him there 
20 
was, this again is a process of negotiation and you win 
some you lose some and it’s the overall price that’s 
important 
in 
his 
view 
the 
price 
of 
R44million 
was 
reasonable, considering the risk that that CSR were willing 
to take …[indistinct 3.57]. In light of Mr Singh’s seniority 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 76 of 122 
 
and expertise and experience I deferred to his explanation 
that he provided to me.   
Continuing further, post the negotiation process, 
Chair I just want to raise that Mr Singh was very senior at 
that point, I was two levels below him at that point in time 
and I had to respect his opinions and respect his views.  If 
I continued it would have been insubordination to him, he 
was a member of the Board etcetera, etcetera.  I don’t 
even know if you know that, in those days he was awarded 
CFO of the year in South Africa award, so he was a man of 
10 
stature.  So, when he spoke it was authoritative and he 
spoke – he knew what he was saying so you had to respect 
what he was saying, it’s the context in terms of why I 
accepted what he had said to me, it wasn’t unreasonable 
what he was saying at that point in time. 
 
Post 
the 
negotiation 
process 
Mr 
Singh 
then 
explained to me, principle elements he wanted included in 
a memorandum that needed to go to the Board to request 
for an increase in the ETC from the initial pricing, I think it 
was R3.4 I could be wrong with the price to the R4.4million 
20 
and detailing the reasons for the increase in price.  He 
also then explained to me the detail of the format he 
wanted the numbers presented in for this particular memo 
to the Board and he requested that I typed it up into a draft 
memorandum that was already prepared.  I received the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 77 of 122 
 
draft 
memorandum 
from 
Transnet 
Group 
Capital 
Department, so this is not my normal function, it was not 
what I normally do, it was done by another department. so 
they prepared the draft memorandum, they sent it through 
to me, Mr Singh then made edits to that and there’s his 
handwriting, there’s evidence about the edits that he made, 
I think the handwriting is captured in one of the Annexures, 
I’m trying to see what Annexure it is, oh sorry, YL 15, YL 
15 is the handwriting. 
 
Over a period of time – Mr Singh was very pedantic 
10 
with the wording of this particular memorandum and he was 
very pedantic with the 1064 memorandum as well and over 
a period of time, one or two months he made numerous 
changes and he asked me to type up those edits into the 
memorandum for him.  I don’t understand why he asked me 
because I have another job to do, at that point in time I 
wasn’t working in his office but he used to call me to – 
come to my office today, you know, spur of the moment, 
you couldn’t really say no to him because he was the big 
boss, drop whatever you are doing and go and do whatever 
20 
he wants to do. Handover what you’ve done and move over 
again, so I even questioned, why am I doing this because 
it’s clearly a secretarial function.  I can put the numbers 
together which is what I did but the – typing up handwritten 
notes was – I don’t see why I was doing it.  
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 78 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Whilst we’re on that Mr Laher, you 
talk about some handwritten notes of Mr Singh which you 
say are attached as Annexure YL15 well that YL15 to your 
main statement? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps we could just go back there 
because they may be of significance, so if you could go 
back to file or Bundle 4A and if you can turn, all the way 
please, to page 402, that’s – sorry under the last tab, there 
you should find Annexure YL15, are you there? 
10 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This series of handwritten notes, 
firstly on Weber Wentzel’s notepad and then some on plain 
paper, what are these notes? 
MR LAHER:   Chair, these are the handwritten notes of 
what Mr Singh wanted incorporated into the memorandum 
that would go to the Board.  These notes incorporated his 
notes on both the 1064 memorandum that went to the 
Board as well as the 100 memorandum that went to the 
Board.  I think, specifically Chair, I want to point out, 
20 
specific evidence, and maybe if we can go to page 408 and 
409 where you can see wording around the interest in ETC 
has resulted for the following reasons and then he explains 
the reasons.  So, to show that he’s thought this through, 
and these are his reasons for the increase in ETC and 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 79 of 122 
 
basically this is what he wanted me to capture into or type 
up into the memorandum.  If you go to the next page, 
which is 409, and Chair I’d like to refer to the actual 
memorandum and you’ll notice that word for word what is 
written here, it’s word for word in the actual memorandum 
and we can go to the actual memorandum I don’t know 
which actual Annexure it is. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, we’ll come to that. 
MR LAHER:   So what he says there, sorry Chair,  is the 
first wording as so that we can remember when we get to 
10 
the actual memo, Financial Risk Management Framework, 
FRMF 
approved 
by 
the 
Board, 
does 
not 
permit 
the 
accepting 
forex 
exposure 
on 
committed 
transactions…[intervenes]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right, Mr Laher, let’s leave that 
page open for the moment at page 409 in the file – the 
Bundle 4A.  Let’s go back to your supplementary – sorry 
your Rule 34 statement at Bundle 4B page 510, you’ve 
explained to the Chairperson at paragraph 34 how this 
happened, you’ve referred now to the notes and ultimately, 
20 
I take it that, a memorandum was then produced. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you say a copy of this 
memorandum, dated 23 May 2014 is attached to this 
statement as Annexure YL25, let’s go to that, you find it at 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 80 of 122 
 
page 550, is this the memorandum? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you look at it, it’s says it’s to the 
Board of Directors and it’s from Brian Molefe. 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You had been preparing it though on 
behalf of Mr Singh.  
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I see, and the purpose of the memo 
is recorded at paragraph one for the BOD to note or to 
10 
note of the reasons for the increase in the ETC and then to 
request that body to approve the increase.  
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   From R3.871billion to R4.840billion. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you turn forward, this is quite a 
lengthy document, it concludes at page 563 and that was, 
ultimately, the recommendation. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It was recommended by Mr Singh 
20 
and Mr Gama and then signed by Mr Molefe. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You wanted to tell the Chairperson, 
if you still have open page 409 of the handwritten notes in 
Bundle 4A, do you want to cross-refer? 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 81 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:   Thank you.  So, Chair, if you look on page 
555 bullet point number 25. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LAHER:   Okay so, bullet point number 25 if you cross 
reference page 409 of the first Bundle to page 555 of the 
second Bundle, specifically bullet point number 25, the  
wording, Financial Risk Management Framework, FRMF, 
approved by the Board does not permit Transnet accepting 
forex exposure on committed transactions word for word as 
you can see in his handwriting.  The second paragraph, 
10 
SARB also does not permit ...[indistinct] to accept open 
exposure on foreign currency contract, you can see its 
word for word. The third – then there’s another paragraph, 
where 
it 
says 
consequently 
which 
is 
bullet 
28, 
consequently the cost of foreign currency edging to 
mitigate and protect the company against foreign currency 
devaluation is an inherent cost of the transaction.  So, 
those are all – I’m not going to go through all of them, 
Chair, but you can see it’s word for word.  He basically 
wrote it out and all I did was, secretarial function of typing 
20 
it in. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, now we come to the 
important paragraph, 35 in your Rule 34 statement at page 
510.  This is where you now deal with paragraph 64 of Mr 
Callard’s statement, please take us through that. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 82 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:   So, paragraph 35, Chair, on page 510, Mr 
Singh then told me to contact Mr Callard and request that 
he update the net present value number that was required 
for the memorandum.  I sent the draft memo to Mr Callard, 
this is the memo…[intervenes]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    Just so that I understand, this is 
then before the memo was completed?  
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, YL25 is the completed memo? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 35 deals with the process 
of completion? 
MR LAHER:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, carry on. 
MR LAHER:   This is the memo that Mr Callard refers to in 
paragraph 64 of his statement.  Mr Callard prepared the 
NPV for the original business case and then duly provided 
the NPV for the memo.  Mr Callard raises issues there but 
the issues he raised in his statement, at no stage did he 
raise those issues with me or raise any queries about the 
20 
draft memo or its contents, including the issues he raises 
in his statement at the Commission about the use of the 
Yen to …[indistinct] and the price, the increasing ETC or 
the pricing…[intervenes]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just hang on a moment.  Mr Callard, 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 83 of 122 
 
in paragraph 64 simply deals with the increase by a billion 
rand of the ETC, that’s what he’s dealing with.  Now 
insofar as he’s implicating you, what is your response to 
that? 
MR LAHER:   Sorry repeat that question again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Callard seems, in some or other 
way, to be implicating you in relation to the increase in a 
billion rand of the price, what is your crisp response to 
that? 
MR LAHER:   So, number one, I would not have approved 
10 
the price, number two, I didn’t have the delegation to 
approve the price, number three, it was approved by the 
steering committee.  So, I cannot be responsible for 
something I cannot approve and number two is, where it 
relates to the increase in price, I raise the issues, as 
you’ve heard in my statement, I raise issues about pricing 
to Mr Singh and during the negotiations where I voiced out 
that I was not happy with the price myself.  I was provided 
with a reasonable explanation at that point in time and 
therefore my view is, that question in terms of the price 
20 
should be asked to the steering committee, in terms of why 
they accepted the price and remember that negotiation was 
done, not where I was present.  So, I don’t know how the 
price was agreed to, we were told afterwards, this is the 
price that was agreed to. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 84 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And insofar as you were involved in 
the production of the YL25 memorandum, do you consider 
that significant in any way? 
MR LAHER:   Obviously, if the pricing – ja the memo is 
significant in the sense that it requests an increase in ETC 
from the Board, so ja. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
And 
was 
that 
your 
own 
memorandum? 
MR 
LAHER: 
 
 
No, 
it 
wasn’t 
my 
memorandum, 
the 
memorandum – it started at the Transnet Group Capital 
10 
Department, it’s part of a standard process.  The normal 
process in requesting an ETC, there’s a department that 
deals with it, it’s called the Transnet Capital Department, 
they deal with all the approvals required for a request in 
the ETC and it would go through the normal approval 
channels.  The normal approval channels would be to go 
through Investment Committee etcetera, etcetera.  They 
prepared the draft memorandum so I received the draft 
memorandum from the Transnet Group Capital Department 
first then I was asked to update or insert edits to that 
20 
memorandum that I’d received and also obtain information 
from other parties.  So, I got information from Mr Callard, 
specifically for the NPV and whoever else needed to buy 
inputs 
into 
that 
memorandum. 
 
The 
bulk 
of 
the 
memorandum was Mr Singh basically, saying what goes 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 85 of 122 
 
into the memorandum.  The inputs I provided was the walk 
forward part which we will come to in the particular 
memorandum where I did the calculation of the walk 
forward from R34million to the R44million. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right, do you have anything else to 
say in answer to Mr Callard’s paragraph 64? 
MR LAHER:   So, in terms of 64 I cannot be held 
responsible for the price where it was not my accountability 
and also, I was not involved I never made the decision.  
So, it’s completely wrong where he’s trying to hold me 
10 
accountable for something, I cannot be held responsible 
for. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, then at paragraph 36 you 
have a lengthy paragraph which culminates then in an 
answer to Mr Callard’s paragraph 67, can you deal with 
paragraph 36 please. 
MR LAHER:   Sure, so Chair, this is the issue Mr Callard 
raised about why was the yen rate used to do the walk 
forward of the pricing as well as an explanation of what a 
walk forward is.  So, here are two things, I’ll go through an 
20 
explanation of what a walk forward is in terms of the 
definition of a walk forward because when Mr Callard was 
presenting he was presenting the definition of a projection 
not a walk forward.  There’s a difference between a walk 
forward and projection.  If I can explain, a walk forward 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 86 of 122 
 
starts with two givens.  You have the first given which is 
the price of R34million which was in the memorandum we 
referred to earlier and we can go back, and I’ve highlighted 
it in the memorandum. It is the final price that was agreed 
to of R44million, those are two givens fait accompli, you 
cannot change those.  That was presented to the Board 
and signed off, this is what was contracted for.  A walk 
forward would then say, okay you’ve got R34million, you’ve 
got 
R44million 
how 
do 
you 
get 
from 
R34million 
to 
R44million, that’s a walk forward.  A projection is you have 
10 
a starting point and then you need to project into the future 
into what it’s going to be, we don’t know what the future 
outcome is.  This is, you already know what the future 
outcome is because you’ve been given the final number.  
So that’s the difference between a walk forward and a 
projection, I think that was the confusion whilst he was 
presenting.   
The second thing around, specifically, the walk 
forward, so the walk forward would entail taking the 
R34million and walking it forward to the R44million.  It 
20 
would entail taking the elements that make it up, so for 
example, the elements that would make up R34million to 
the R44million, similar to what I’ve presented earlier in my 
own calculation would be the escalation cost, the hedging 
cost, the variations etcetera, etcetera.  I would take each 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 87 of 122 
 
of those elements and I would walk it forward from 
R34million to R44million.  The reason why the yen rate was 
used – and let me just go a bit more slower, through the 
process, in my statement then I’ll come to the reason why 
the yen rate was used.  So, Mr Singh asked me to prepare 
that walk forward from the business case price and I 
explained what the walk forward was about.  Mr Singh also 
then explained the assumptions used in the business case.  
Chair, the reason why I point that out is because I was not 
involved in the business case.  So, I don’t know what the 
10 
assumptions were, I don’t know how they go to that 
number, I came cold because I was given this right at the 
end to say, here’s the business case number, now do the 
walk forwards. 
So he told me what the assumptions were, he told 
me how they got to the business case price and he asked 
me to walk forward the price for the business case through 
to the information – based on the information that CSR 
provided through to the final R44million. 
The method that he asked me to do the re-base 
20 
lining or the walk forward was not unreasonable, it’s a 
normal financial way of doing things.  He explained to me 
the assumptions, also, the assumptions that were used in 
the business case.  So, for example the assumption used 
in the business case was a yen/rand rate of .098823 and 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 88 of 122 
 
that’s, as I said fair to the company, it’s in the business 
case, it’s written it’s not something you cannot change. So, 
he explained to me, this, in the business case and pointed 
it out to me in the actual wording of the business case.  He 
also explained to me that the business case was basically 
yen and that the price must really be escalated in yen 
because the business case is based in yen.  That’s not 
unreasonable as well, it’s normal financial principles.  
You’re given something, you work with what you’re given 
you don’t make assumptions to change it because that 
10 
exposes the calculation to unnecessary complication and 
risk of miscalculation. 
Then, whilst he was pointing all of this out to me, I 
asked him the question, surely there’s more than one 
currency involved, his response to me was, no the 
business 
case 
was 
based 
on 
yen 
therefore 
do 
the 
calculations 
based on the yen rate.  Accordingly, I 
complied and did the walk forward calculation based on the 
yen rate.   
So, from that perspective, I think Mr Callard, when 
20 
he presented his evidence, he didn’t understand how to do 
it financially, he didn’t – well I’m putting words in his mouth 
but my view is he didn’t understand how did the financial 
walk forward and there’s a difference between a walk 
forward and a projection.  Chair, if you allow me, maybe I 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 89 of 122 
 
can put it in simpler terms because he was saying why not 
use the dollar it’s a Chinese company why are you using 
the yen?  My response to that is, I don’t know why they 
used the yen rate in their business case I wasn’t there, I 
wasn’t involved in the business case, that was done way 
before I got involved.  So, that question must be asked of 
the people that put the business case together.   
The second question is, okay, even if that’s the 
case then why did you continue to use the yen and I’m 
saying it’s not unreasonable to use the yen because that’s 
10 
how you would do it when you are given a fait accompli, 
you’re given something, you can’t change it. If I can give 
you a simple example, if Johnny is asked to – or you’re 
told, Johnny ran a race, Johnny ran the race, it started at 
10am it finished at 11am and the race was 10km long.  You 
are asked to calculate a speed that Johnny travelled at. 
Because you’re given kilometres and you’re given time, 
your answer is going to be kilometres per hour. Now if you 
are told the race is meant to be in Johannesburg but 
Johnny eventually ran the race in England, where they use 
20 
miles per hour, why would you change your calculation, 
your answer is still in kilometres per hour.  If you had to do 
it in miles per hour – because that was the brief, the brief 
was, give me the answer in kilometres per hour. If the brief 
was given in miles per hour, then you would go and try and 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 90 of 122 
 
do a recalculation but obviously doing a recalculation you 
convert kilometres to miles which then complicates the 
whole transaction.   
So, always stick to the brief and do the calculation 
with the inputs that you are given. There’s no need to go 
and complicate the calculation by using another currency 
and doing a cross-currency conversion because you’re not 
going to get the correct answer and for me this is a 
reasonable basis of doing it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, what Mr Callard said at 67 in the 
10 
second part is that this was most unusual as the Japanese 
Yen 
would 
be 
associated 
with 
Mitsui 
the 
Japanese 
company and not CSR, the Chinese company, you’ve 
answered that. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then it says further, 
“The cash flow spreadsheet reflects US Dollar for 
CSR”. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And he says, 
20 
“From 
the 
ownership 
of 
these 
documents 
and 
spreadsheets, Singh and Laher should talk to this 
anomaly. 
MR LAHER:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What do you say about the fact that 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 91 of 122 
 
the cash flow worksheets reflect US Dollar for CSR? 
MR LAHER:   So, the cash flow worksheets are based on 
what was finally agreed to with CSR.  So that’s post 
negotiation, remember the business case is pre-negotiation 
it’s something that is fait accompli it’s given to you already 
in yen.  Cash flow is now after you’ve already negotiated, 
and these are the cash flows for the locos that CSR are 
going to deliver.  When CSR provide the cash flow they 
give it to you in US Dollars and that’s why you have a US 
Dollar cash flow and then the business case is in yen.  As I 
10 
said, I can’t answer as to why it was in yen but that’s what 
was given to me.  Correctly, if it was done properly, 
whoever created the business case should have said we’re 
contracting with a Chinese company, it should be in yen or 
in dollars but this was not done, so you can’t go and 
change what’s already on a piece of paper, signed off by 
the Board, it’s there already. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then you – at the end of 
paragraph 42, at page – sorry at paragraph 42 at page 512 
you 
deal 
with 
paragraph 
60 
and 
that’s 
the 
upfront 
20 
payments.  You want to move towards that, is there 
anything else that you want to deal with, you’ve dealt with 
paragraph 36, you’ve provided your explanation or your 
answer, as far as you’re concerned to Mr Callard’s 
paragraph 67, do you need to deal with 37 and 38 or can 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 92 of 122 
 
one go to the heading, “Advanced payments”?.  
MR LAHER:   We can move on. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, so, let’s go to the heading, 
“Advance payments”, at page 512 which culminates in the 
statement that you make at paragraph 42, do you want to 
deal with that please? 
MR LAHER:   Yes Chair.  Chair, so if you move on to 
paragraph 39, so I’ll deal with the paragraphs 141 to 152 
as well because what Mr Callard raises in paragraph 60, he 
raises as well under 1064 paragraph 141 to 152 even 
10 
though he doesn’t implicate me in the paragraph 141 to 
152 and I just want to provide further input on – with 
regard to the advanced payments.   
So, it’s common knowledge that the management of 
Transnet’s long-term and short-term funding and cash flow 
is a function of the Transnet Treasurer and the Transnet 
Treasurer reported into the GCFO, at that point was Mr 
Singh, I can’t recall who was the Transnet Treasurer at that 
point in time.  Also, I was not involved in the management 
of Transnet’s cash or funding, during the 1064 and the 100 
20 
locomotive transaction, Mr Singh who was, effectively in 
charge of the Treasury Department told the negotiating 
team that Transnet had the funding available and that the 
advanced payments were affordable to Transnet.   
I 
did 
not 
have 
the 
delegation 
to 
accept 
the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 93 of 122 
 
advanced payments proposals from bidders.  The sub-
committee 
or 
the 
steering 
committee 
accepted 
the 
advanced payment terms, and they accepted the pricing of 
the locomotives.  I agree, the quantum of the advanced 
payments would put a stain on Transnet’s funding and cash 
position.  Should the real volumes, as envisaged in the 
marketing strategy not materialise.  So, in conclusion, I 
don’t know why Mr Callard is directing that question at me 
because I was never accountable for Treasury function.  
There is a Treasurer that deals with it and its part of the 
10 
negotiating, Mr Smit was the representative as well.  Mr 
Singh was the overall accountability for the Treasury 
function and the overall accountability for Transnet’s cash 
flow position.  So, he would be accountable, and he needs 
to answer that type of question. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now this advanced payment 
guarantee, 
was 
that 
something 
dealt 
with 
in 
the 
memorandum that you had prepared on behalf of Mr Singh? 
MR LAHER:   I can’t recall. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is it part of the contract or is an 
20 
advanced payment guarantee is that something that comes 
afterwards, is it a separate negotiation? 
MR LAHER:   So, the guarantee is a document which the 
bidders would sign to say, we guarantee the advance 
payment, 
normally 
a 
bank 
would 
issue 
the 
advance 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 94 of 122 
 
payment and guarantee. The advance payments which Mr 
Callard refers to is the actual payment that was made.  So, 
you know, rands or dollars paid to the suppliers and those 
payments 
would 
be 
made 
before 
delivery 
of 
the 
locomotives. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Callard says, at paragraph 60 
that he was shocked and astounded to note that the 
advanced payment guarantee for CSR 100 was 30%, what 
is your simple answer to that? 
MR LAHER:  Mr Singh said they were affordable and that 
10 
Transnet 
had funding to 
– to 
afford those 
advanced 
payments firstly and secondly the advanced payments were 
agreed to as part of the package deal if I can call it by the 
steering committee. 
 
So when Mr Singh told us at the steering committee 
accepted the price of R44 million they accepted – he also 
said they accepted the price of R44 million with the 
advanced payments that go with it.   
 
So those are decisions that were made at that level 
in terms of the – the advanced payments. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:  So were you involved in making this 
decision? 
MR LAHER:  No not at all. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Now Mr Callard at paragraph 60 this stems 
from the fact that he and some colleagues received an email 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 95 of 122 
 
from you with spread sheets of the final cash flow. 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So he gets this from the spread sheets of 
final cash flow. 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Just address that issue – did you populate 
those spread sheets? 
MR LAHER:  So with regard to the cash flow spread sheets 
we would have received cash flows from the bidders but Mr 
Danie was also involved with the populated cash flow spread 
10 
sheets whilst we were busy with the negotiations.  And he 
needed those in order to work out what the cost of the 
foreign exchange hedging would be.  So he would have 
populated those spread sheets for the cash flows. 
 
And in some case maybe I would have helped him 
populate the spread sheet and the population would have 
been done based on what the bidders submitted to us saying 
these are the cash flows. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So let us then move on.  So those are the 
three paragraphs 60, 64 and 67 relating to the 100 electric 
20 
locomotives.  You have explained to me during consultation 
that you can actually a line above the heading 17 March 
negotiations spread sheet at the foot of 512. 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Because from here onwards you now 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 96 of 122 
 
dealing with the 1064 locomotives. 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Whereas previously you have been dealing 
with the 100 electric motor – locomotives.  You say:  
“At paragraph 43 at the foot of 512 that in 
the 
paragraphs 
that 
follow 
I 
deal 
with 
paragraphs 
206 
to 
215 
of 
Callard’s 
statement.” 
 
Now we know that paragraph 211 then falls in 
between that.  And 211 you will recall deals with your excel 
10 
spread sheets of 17 March.  This is different from the cash 
flow spread sheets.  These are your excel spread sheets of 
17 March relating to the 1064 negotiations.  He says you 
were the author. He says the information contained in – he 
finds it difficult to believe that it is true and correct and also 
there is then a criticism of you not sharing this information in 
time. 
 
So this section then deals head on with the March 17 
negotiations spread sheets. And if you turn forward to page 
512 you will see that at paragraph 49 you actually then 
20 
address paragraph 211.  And further on in your statement at 
page 515 at the foot you start dealing with paragraph 208.  
56 you deal with 208.1 that is where he questions the 
accuracy of the information.  57 you deal with 208.2.  58 – 
208.3 and so you go on all the way to 62. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 97 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Where you deal with 208.7 and then you 
come back to paragraph 211 and then over the page at 64 
you deal with 211.1 and we can then stop above paragraph 
85.  Is that correct? 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So what then remains for you to do is to 
essentially take the Chairperson through paragraphs 43 to 
64 dealing with this – this issue. 
MR LAHER:    Sure.  Thank you.   Chair if I can move to 
10 
paragraph 44 on page 513.  So the explanation I think there 
is a lot of context in that background at Supply Chain. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So you moving to what paragraph? 
MR LAHER:  44. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  A lot of explanation and background which 
with regard to the spread sheets that needs to be provided.  
So firstly there is two spread sheets.  There is one for diesel 
and there is one for electric. 
 
The second part to understand is these spread 
20 
sheets were created over a period of time.  So within a 
spread sheet if you understand a spread sheet there are tabs 
at the bottom which we call work sheets.  So within the 
spread sheet for diesel and electric they will need tabs at the 
bottom of the spread sheet. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 98 of 122 
 
 
And those tabs if I can name them one would call –
one would be called base cost, one would be called base 
cost excluding TE. Another one will be called negotiations 
and each of them had different calculations within them. 
 
So let us start with the tab marked base cost.  So to 
understand – oh sorry before you even get to the – to the tab 
marked base cost.  Understand there were many spread 
sheets prepared.  So even though there are two which are 
dated 17 March prior to the two dated 17 March there are 
many spread sheets before that. 
10 
 
So whilst the negotiations were on-going we prepared 
spread sheets as and when pricing – new pricing came in.  
So for example and I know there is an annexure for that I 
think it is Annexure YL26 where I give you a view of the 
numerous number of spread sheets which were prepared 
over a period of the evaluation and negotiations. 
 
I do not know Chair if you want to go to YL26 now or 
should we come back to it? 
ADV MYBURGH:  We will come back to that. 
MR LAHER:  Okay.  So – so understand there is many 
20 
spread sheets firstly.  Secondly within the spread sheets 
there is a number of tabs.  If I explain further if you look at 
the tabs within the spread sheet a tab marked base cost that 
is – that tab’s spread sheet or work sheet was prepared 
during the evaluation phase.  So that was prepared in 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 99 of 122 
 
November 2013 where there were six people evaluating. 
 
Each of those six people had access to that tab.  And 
each of those six people would capture information within 
the tab.   
 
The information that is captured within the spread 
sheet comes from bidder submissions.  It is not something 
we cal – it is not something we would pluck from the sky.  
There would be documentation and that is again attached in 
my Annexure YL27 where I provide the evidence of the 
bidder documentation that correlates to the numbers in the 
10 
spread sheets. 
 
So I know it sounds a bit complicated but very simply 
a number of spread sheets, tabs within the spread sheet.  
The base cost tab was prepared during evaluations  The 
base cost excluding TE tab was prepared during the 
evaluations.  Then the tab marked negotiations was prepared 
during the negotiations.  The tab marked negotiations there 
were many spread sheets that were prepared for that. 
 
The spread sheet Mr Callard refers to are the final 
spread sheets that were finalised on the 17 March.  So just 
20 
to give you some background behind it. 
 
Chair I think I have dealt with 44 and 45. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Just before you move on you wanted to 
take the Chairperson to YL26.  That you found at page 565.   
MR LAHER:  Chair on page 565 that is a screen shot of the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 100 of 122 
 
spread sheets that were created during the – during the 
tender.  And you will notice there are a number of spread 
sheets there.  This is only one of the – a section of the 
portion of the hard drive that contained these spread sheets. 
 
So if you note there is – so 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 down there is 
a file called Negotiation Diesels 5 March.  Then there is 
another file called Negotiation Diesels 10 March.  Then there 
is another file Negotiation Diesels 12 March.  Then there is 
another one Negotiation Diesel 17 March that would be the 
final one.  Also there is another one called Negotiation 
10 
Diesels 18 February and 27 February.   
 
So we created these spread sheets as and when we 
were getting new pricing proposals from the bidders.  And 
these spread sheets were effectively a recordal of what the 
bidders were giving us in terms of the pricing whilst the 
negotiations were going on. 
 
Thanks Chair that is YL26. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And you have told the Chairperson if one 
goes back to page 513 at paragraph 46 that these spread 
sheets referred to by Mr Callard the March 17 spread sheets 
20 
were then the final version of them. 
MR LAHER:  Correct ja they were the final version of these 
spread sheets.  I think I have explained paragraph 47 Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Can I take you to 48 and ask you. Who 
was responsible then for populating and keeping these 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 101 of 122 
 
spread sheets? 
MR LAHER:  Okay.  So we start with the evaluations.  There 
were six people responsible for populating the – that spread 
sheet.  Do you want me to name them or is it fine? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR LAHER:  Okay so the members of the team the cross-
functional evaluation team finance evaluations were Mr 
Muller, Mr Valli, Mr Traletsi, Mr Danie Smit, Mr Thabo Siaphi 
and myself. 
 
So we in total we would have populated the sheets.  
10 
Any one of us had access and any one of us would have 
populated those sheets within the spread sheet. 
 
That relates to the sheets we populated doing the 
evaluations i.e. the sheets marked base costs and base 
costs TE.  Continuing for the sheet marked negotiations 
there were two of us involved myself and Mr Danie Smit and 
either one of us could have populated the information into 
those sheets. 
 
Chair on paragraph 49 to also understand that the 
master version of these spread sheets were stored on a 
20 
master computer and that master computer was kept by Ms 
Mdletshe.  We did not have the password to that master 
computer.  They would log - a Supply Chain Services would 
log us in at the start of the day and they would log us out at 
the end of the day. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 102 of 122 
 
 
So it is clear Chair in response to Mr Callard’s 
statement in paragraph 2.1 that I was the primary author is 
completely wrong.  I was not the primary author I was one of 
the authors from a team of six in evaluations and a team of 
two in the negotiations. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So I understand this term author.  From 
what you have explained it does not seem that there was any 
author it was more a data capturer function, is that correct? 
MR LAHER:  Correct 100%.  And when I go through YL 27 I 
will explain – but I will explain that portion. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes please carry on. 
MR LAHER:  So now we are at paragraph 50 Chair.  So as I 
was saying the information that is captured on these spread 
sheets were obtained directly from bidder submissions.  That 
was not something we plucked from the sky and I will show 
you the evidence in – when we get to Annexure YL27 in 
terms of where the information comes from. 
 
Paragraph 51 deals with the same thing I said earlier 
in terms of the information on the negotiation work sheet 
were also obtained from bidder submissions and when I get 
20 
to – I take you through YL27 I also show you how the 
information correlates to the information from the bidders. 
 
I think paragraph 52 is important Chair in that it is 
not the spread sheets that determine the final price.  The 
spread sheets were the recordal.  At the determination of the 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 103 of 122 
 
final price was based on the outcome of the negotiation 
process in terms of what was approved or what was 
accepted by the sub-committee of the steering committee for 
the locomotives. 
 
So Mr Callard had it incorrect when he talks about 
the spread sheets determining the final price.  They did not 
determine the final price.  It was merely a recordal of what 
was given to us during the negotiations to keep track.  And 
the recordal was to keep track.  So you have to keep track 
daily of what is happening.  So we recorded so we can even 
10 
manage what is being provided for us over a period of time.                          
ADV MYBURGH:  Alright so in paragraph 50, 51 and 52 you 
refer to the series of annexures they starting with 27.  You 
mentioned 27, 28, 29 and 
30 in all three of those 
paragraphs, correct? 
MR LAHER:  Yes correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Can I ask you and I – I understand this is 
what you wish to do.  By way of example go to Annexure 
YL27.  That you found at page 567.   
MR LAHER:  I am ready. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes please go ahead. 
MR LAHER:  Chair if you look at paragraph – oh page 567 
you will notice bidder 1 Bombardier is the bidder we 
specifically referring to here which is the first column on the 
– or the third column from the left.  It says: Bidder 1 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 104 of 122 
 
Bombardier un-escalated.  You will notice that this was 
prepared during the evaluations and if I take you then with 
your finger still on page 567 because this is a spread sheet 
Mr Callard refers to where he says that the numbers are 
incorrect.  With your finger on page 567 to move to page 
578.  Chair as background you will notice and sorry to be 
running you around like this on all the pages.  There is a 
number of pages here.  The.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is hardly legible he?  At 578 except 
for the numbers on the right. The middle column. 
10 
MR LAHER:  Yes.  So let me start at page 569 to give 
context. 
CHAIRPERSON:  569? 
MR LAHER:  Ja.  So on page 569 you will notice Chair this 
is a submission from Bombardier dated 21 November 2013 to 
Transnet.  This was the submission from Bombardier as part 
of the tender evaluation process. 
 
So they would have submitted this document and we 
would have evaluated this document.  This was the document 
we used for the evaluations.  
20 
 
As we move on through the pages they submitted 
many items in this document and page 570, 571, 572 are just 
responses to clarification questions we asked specifically to 
Bombardier. 
 
If we move on right through to page 578.  Page 578 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 105 of 122 
 
was the original documentation that was received from 
Bombardier as part of their tender submission. 
 
So I want to show you how the numbers correlate.  
So these – just to prove that these numbers are not made 
up. The first number you see on the top there in Row number 
1 on page 578.  28788150.  That number correlates exactly 
to page 567 under Row number 1 base price as per technical 
specifications.  28788150.  The next line, line 2 engineering 
support costs ties up exactly 619100.  The next line special 
tooling 3762 ties up exactly 3762.  You will note that the 
10 
fourth line which is 491240 on page 578 does not correlate 
exactly to line 4 474880 and for that there is a specific note 
in terms of why that number does not correlate.  And I will 
take you to that calculation.  I must just try and find it in this 
batch Chair.  Oh so if you looked at page 568 Note number 
1.1 this is the – this is the actual spread sheet we used.  
This is part of what the evaluation team wrote – this is with 
the notes for my workings.  The note says? 
“The 
capital 
spares 
were 
reflected 
as 
491240”  
20 
Which is the number you see on page 578. 
“This included both schedule A and schedule 
B spares.  Schedule B was removed and 
price changed to 474880.” 
We had to remove Schedule B because Schedule B was not 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 106 of 122 
 
meant to be part of the spares for these locomotives.  And 
that is how we got to the number of 474880. 
 
Continuing Chair you will notice that the remaining 
numbers should tie up 45302 it ties up.  12382 and it ties up.  
27405 ties up.  And then 309550 ties up.   
 
You will notice that on the original bid Bombardier did 
quote for hedging costs but the evaluations were not done 
with hedging so we just exclude it from here. 
 
The 
option 
realignment 
was 
– 
is 
captured 
on 
Annexure YL35 and there was a specific calculation in terms 
10 
of how to realign the options but I am not going to go 
through that detail. 
 
With regard to the exchange rates that you see 
quoted there.  So you will note on Bombardier’s proposal 
they quote an exchange rate of – or the number that we 
calculated on the top there 32722350 on page 567.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR LAHER:  That is the – ja.  That number if you multiply 
that by the declared import percentage of 30.2% which is 
further down the page then you divide that by the exchange 
20 
rate as provided in the declared import percentage you get 
to Euro 979069 this was a calculation done by the evaluation 
team at that point in time. 
 
So that is your – basically the numbers on the base 
cost sheet come out.  Mr Callard also then refers to another 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 107 of 122 
 
sheet.  Now I am going to move on to show you where the 
remaining numbers come from.   
 
Chair if we can go to page 579 then.  Sorry Chair still 
with your finger on page 567.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR LAHER:  You will note that this spread sheet or this work 
sheet is base cost excluding TE.  This was also put together 
during the evaluations by the team of six and these numbers 
again correlate exactly to what I would have showed you 
earlier and the only difference is when we did the second 
10 
sheet which is cost – or base cost excluding TE we would 
have excluded the cost of TE based on the decision taken by 
Supply Chain Services there for us to do the evaluation 
excluding TE – the point I mentioned earlier on. 
 
So if you look at the letter from Bombardier which in 
on page 584.  You will note the letter dated 4 December 
2013 and specifically towards the bottom of the letter under 
point 1 where we asked – where Transnet asked Bombardier, 
what would the impact – what would the rand be impact on 
your price per locomotive [00:21:58] if you did not use TE as 
20 
a local subcontractor for 599 Koko but used an alternative 
local private sector subcontractor and you note they quoted 
a figure of 1905514. 
 
So what your figure – with your finger still on the 
original page 567 you would note that the number there was 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 108 of 122 
 
32722350 right on top there – the first line.  That will then 
correlate if you go to page 579 there is a note on the right 
hand side in handwriting which is called C.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR LAHER:  So if you look at the note it is called C 
32722350 correlates minus the 1905514 which is the number 
that was quoted by Bombardier in the letter I just showed 
you now and that equals a number of 30866836 which is the 
number on this sheet which correlates the number 30866836. 
Again proving that these numbers all come from somewhere.  
10 
They are not made up and – there is science behind it.  And 
it comes from – it is the recordal of what has been given to 
us. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Right I – Mr Laher I would like to move on 
if I may?  It might have been that you could have presented 
this evidence in a slightly clearer way.  The Chairperson 
might very well ask you for a schedule now. 
MR LAHER:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Where you put out the figures and then 
you cross-refer for us where you find it.  Are you able to do 
20 
that? 
MR LAHER:  I can do that. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So that we do not need to jump around 
from one document to the other.  I am going to afterwards 
ask you to provide us with that schedule.  But the long and 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 109 of 122 
 
the short of your evidence is that there was no manipulation 
– this was a data capture exercise and the figures were 
taken from original documents. 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Proposals made by the bidders. 
MR LAHER:  Correct 100%. 
ADV MYBURGH:  That is what you are saying? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And let us then go please to page 514 
paragraph 52 you have dealt with that.  Is there a need to – 
10 
to deal with anything else before we get to paragraph 208?  
Paragraph 53 is something which I know is featured in other 
of your affidavits.  Is it something you want to reiterate? 
MR LAHER:  I think it is important Chair I would like to 
reiterate … 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes please go ahead. 
MR LAHER:  Just to overall the impression I gained during 
the negotiations was that the co-chairpersons Mr Singh and 
Mr Jiyane were very much focussed on the overall price 
whereas Mr Smit and I were very detailed [00:25:02] were 
20 
more focussed on the detail pricing.  So items like 
escalation, 
batch pricing etcetera they 
were not very 
focussed on those. 
 
So even though a detailed elements may have been 
spoken about at various times during the negotiations it was 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 110 of 122 
 
not their main focus.  The effect of this was that as much as 
these components were self-standing components of the 
negotiations in the end it was the overall price that the 
chairpersons focussed on.  And then the sub-committee 
made the decision on the final – final pricing. 
 
My – my view I would have preferred if we focussed 
on the details so that we could you know debate those 
properly but that was not their focus. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Can we then move to paragraph 56. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes please. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  So I have already explained to you that Mr 
Callard’s paragraph 308 must be read together with 211.  
Because in 208 he really in effect queries various of the 
figures and information contained in the spread sheets.  And 
he does that over the space of seven sub-paragraphs. 
 
From paragraph 56 to 62 you address those seven 
sub-paragraphs.  Now it seems to me that ultimately your 
answer is the same for all of them.  Is that correct? 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And what is that?  So if Mr Callard says 
20 
well here is a potential query or an inaccuracy in relation to 
A, B, C, D?  What is your answer – your overall answer? 
MR LAHER:  The overall answer Chair is you have seen from 
the evidence I prepared is that the spread sheets were a 
recordal of information we received from bidders.  There was 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 111 of 122 
 
no manipulation of the numbers within the spread sheet.  I 
think the principle point is the pricing was not determined by 
a spread sheet.  The pricing was determined by the 
negotiation process and what was agreed to by the – by the 
steering committee.  Now – and it is not the spread sheet 
that you should picking on you should be – it is throwing 
stones in the wrong direction in other words. 
 
Yes there might have been issues with the pricing 
and yes I also raised similar issues as I explained earlier.  I 
raised issues about escalations.  I raised issues about the 
10 
batch pricing.  So my view is Mr Callard may have a point 
yes which is the same points I raised with my superiors.  I 
voiced my concerns.  But it is not the spread sheets that are 
the problem.  The spread sheets were just a recordal.  So 
again he is throwing stones in the wrong direction. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So at 56 you say: 
“With 
reference 
to 
paragraph 
208.1 
of 
Callard’s 
statement” 
And 
there 
he 
was 
raising the issue of cost escalation.  You say: 
“The cost escalations as captured in the 
20 
spread sheet were obtained directly from the 
bidder submission.” 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then four lines if you go – page 516 
four lines from the end of that paragraph you say: 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 112 of 122 
 
“To the extent that Mr Callard is insinuating 
that the escalations were inflated I never 
inflated any escalations I simply recorded the 
breakdown etcetera.” 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And paragraph 57 then deals with 208.2 
this time a query about foreign exchange component and you 
essentially 
make 
the 
same 
point 
and 
you 
rebuff 
the 
insinuation. 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  Paragraph 58 deals with the costs of 
reduced batch sizes.  You make the same point and you then 
contest the insinuation. 
MR LAHER:  Correct.  Chair with the background that I did 
also raise the same issues during the negotiations with my 
superiors. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And 59 and 208.4 deals with the local 
content requirement and so you explain that and you contest 
the – or you deny the insinuation. 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:  208.5 deals with the side bar calculation.  
Essentially your evidence is the same. 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  208.6 deals with negotiation price recon.  
Your evidence is the same. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 113 of 122 
 
MR LAHER:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And 208.7 re negotiation work sheet. 
MR LAHER:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  You deal with that and you dispute the 
insinuation. 
MR LAHER:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Then at paragraph 63 you say that – or 
perhaps I can ask you to deal with it. 
MR LAHER:  So paragraph 63 Chair deals with again the 
insinuation that I was the primary author. And as I have 
10 
mentioned earlier there were two of us involved in the 
negotiations from a finance perspective and six in the 
evaluations.  So again I deny that I was the primary author.  
I was one of six and one of two. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then finally this is the last paragraph 
that you say you want to deal with and I would like to get it 
done before lunch so that you could be released.  Paragraph 
64 deals with Mr Callard’s 211.1 where he says that you 
were not forthcoming with information.  Would you deal with 
that please? 
20 
MR LAHER:  Sure.  So on paragraph 64 Chair and I am – 
with regard to Mr Callard’s insinuation that I deliberately and 
without just cause withheld information from him.  I think it is 
important to understand that firstly as part of a normal 
tender process within Transnet the rules are you sign a 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 114 of 122 
 
confidentially – confidential agreement.   
 
The rules are and it is part of a standard tender 
process you do not provide any information around that 
tender to anybody that has not received express permission 
to get that information. 
 
Unless that person has also signed a confidentiality 
agreement.  At that point in time when I was dealing with Mr 
Callard which was in 2018 I was just following the rules in 
terms of standard Transnet confidentiality rules.  I signed the 
agreement.  If I did give him any information which is 
10 
confidential information to Transnet I could be held to 
account. 
 
So that is the first reason I could not give it to him.  
The second reason I could not give it to him is because I did 
not have it.  How can I give him something I did not have? 
 
I did not have the evaluation reports at that point in 
time.  You will note in my evidence I asked for the 
information in June 2018 which is six months after that and I 
only received it then in June 2018. 
 
So Chair I mean that is my response.  I mean I told 
20 
him I cannot give you confidential information and you need 
to ask for it through the right channels. 
 
Eventually he got it through the right channels.  And 
in the evidence I lead and I think it is YL34 I even provide an 
example of where we asked for the information from Supply 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 115 of 122 
 
Chain Services. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Alright and as I understand it you did not 
want to deal with anything further after the end of paragraph 
64? 
MR LAHER:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Mr Chairman with your leave could Mr 
Laher be released and then return tomorrow at ten o’clock so 
as to afford him an opportunity to study the evidence given 
by Mr Callard in reply to his Rule 3.4 statement?  There is of 
course a transcription of that and I will then ask him 
10 
questions in relation to that tomorrow morning at ten o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  So you will be 
released Mr Laher and then come back tomorrow at ten 
o’clock to deal with the rest of the issues.  
MR LAHER:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much for coming. 
MR LAHER:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are excused.  Mr Myburgh what is the 
situation after lunch? 
ADV MYBURGH:  Well the situation is that we do have Mr 
20 
Callard on standby. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  I have raised with you Mr Chairperson 
whether you wish to hear from Mr Callard or simply to admit 
his affidavit.  You will recall that Mr Callard has frequented 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 116 of 122 
 
this commission on more than one occasion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  He puts evidence about two things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  The one is the video and transcription that 
Mr Laher has already dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  The rest of his new evidence relates to 
what he describes as the Regiments price walk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  That – that is all he will testify about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  If you allow that and it apparently as I 
understand it he will not be more than an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH:  We could fit him in tomorrow if that is 
more convenient for you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if you are inclined that it should be 
enough to admit his affidavit I would be inclined towards the 
same thing.  Because as you say he has given evidence 
20 
quite a few times. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And of course if anything later arises that 
we did not foresee we can always be in touch with him. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Would it then be necessary for you to 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 117 of 122 
 
admit it – it is part of our – our bundle or what does your – 
what is the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  My – I am sure it can be admitted as part 
of one of these bundles if that is – that is convenient but ja I 
think there should be no problem [talking over one another]. 
ADV MYBURGH:  It is – yes it is Bundle 4[b] Chairperson.  It 
is the second last tag. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Exhibit BB4[h]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got it. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  And you will see that it is a short affidavit.  
There are some annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  It was signed by Mr Callard on the 14t h 
day of September.  If your – the Chairperson requires us we 
could call Mr Callard simply to confirm that this is his 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And then it could be formally admitted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja let us do that.  You are excused Mr 
20 
Laher.  You are excused. 
ADV MYBURGH:  I know I might be getting ahead of myself I 
do not know if he is here.  I know he is coming here at two 
o’clock I am not sure if he is still here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay maybe then we can adjourn and 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 118 of 122 
 
then come back at two. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And deal with it on that basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And deal with it on that basis.   
ADV MYBURGH:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  We will adjourn for lunch and 
resume at five past two.  We adjourn. 
 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I forgot that I had said we would resume 
at five past two, so I was ready at two o’clock but somebody 
reminded me.  Okay are we ready? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes we are thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson this is Mr Francis Callard 
who has testified before you on a few occasions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon, Mr Callard. 
MR CALLARD:   [Microphone not working] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Thank you for coming back. 
20 
MR CALLARD:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  H’m?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Callard, could I ask you to turn to 
the second last tab of 54B?  Mr Chairperson, I do not know if 
you... if it is necessary for Mr Callard to take the oath? 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 119 of 122 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes.  Let him... ja, let us do that. 
REGISTRAR:   Please your full names for the record. 
MR CALLARD:   Francis Quinton Callard. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR CALLARD:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR CALLARD:   I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence you will give, 
10 
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth?  If so, please raise up your right hand and say, so help 
me God. 
MR CALLARD:   So help me God. 
FRANCIS QUINTON CALLARD:  (d.s.s.) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  You may be seated. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Callard, 
would you go to the second last tab of Bundle 4B, please? 
MR CALLARD:   I have that.  BB4(h). 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So can you then turn please to page 
20 
795? 
MR CALLARD:   795. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is document headed:  Fourth 
Supplementary Statement.  Is that the statement of yours? 
MR CALLARD:   It is. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 120 of 122 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I ask you please to turn forward 
to page 802? 
MR CALLARD:   802.  Sorry.  I am there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you sign the statement under oath 
on the 14t h day of September this year? 
MR CALLARD:   I did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And attached to your statement is a 
series of annexures.  They are set out and listed at page 803 
to 804.  And those annexures then run from 805 all the way 
to 920.  Would you confirm that? 
10 
MR CALLARD:   I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairperson, with your leave.  I 
would ask that Mr Callard’s fourth supplementary statement 
commencing at page 795 be admitted as Exhibit BB4(h). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  And for the sake of 
completeness.  You confirm Mr Callard that the contents of 
this fourth supplementary statement are to the best of your 
recollection true and correct. 
MR CALLARD:   Sorry, Mr Chair.  I... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you confirm the correctness of the 
20 
contents of your fourth supplementary statement? 
MR CALLARD:   I confirm the correctness thereof, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Myburgh, it is BB4, F 
point...? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   BB4(h), Chairperson. 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 121 of 122 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Only? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  The fourth supplementary 
statement by Mr Francis Quinton Callard, starting at page 
795 is admitted as Exhibit BB4(h). 
FOURTH SUPPLEMENTARY STATEMENT OF MR FRANCIS 
QUINTON 
CALLARD 
HANDED 
UP 
AND 
MARKED 
AS 
EXHIBIT BB4(h) 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Mr Callard.  I hope 
10 
we will not need to ask again.  [laughing]   
MR CALLARD:   [laughing]   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [laughing]   
CHAIRPERSON:   You have been coming here for too many 
times.  But if there are compelling reasons, we will ask you 
but I hope not.  But thank you very much.   
MR CALLARD:   I am always available.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  You are excused. 
MR CALLARD:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then tomorrow Mr Myburgh, we have 
20 
Mr Laher at ten, who might take how long, do you think? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He will not take long.  I do not suspect 
Mr Chairperson.  And after that, the next witness we have is 
Mr Mhlango who is due on Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Okay.  Okay alright.  Okay we 
21 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 288 
 
Page 122 of 122 
 
will then adjourn for the day and we will resume tomorrow at 
ten.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 22 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
  
