REDACTED COPY 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 299 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 148 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 3 of 148 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 05 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
  
Good 
morning 
Ms 
Hofmeyr, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We are indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Let us continue. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Myeni can I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Sorry. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni can you hear me? 
MS MYENI:  I can hear you Chairperson, good morning, 
thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning to you.  The oath you took 
yesterday will continue to apply today you understand 
that? 
MS MYENI:  I do understand that Chair – Chairperson 
thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Good morning Ms Myeni can I just 
20 
confirm that you can hear me clearly? 
MS MYENI:  Morning Ms Hofmeyr I can hear you clearly 
yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Ms Myeni where we left 
matters off yesterday was dealing with the Pembroke 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 4 of 148 
 
transaction which has colloquially over time been called 
the Ten to Ten transaction and you will recall we got to the 
end of it and I had indicated to you that members of the 
board had taken your misrepresentations to the Minister 
very seriously and I wanted to understand from you 
whether you were aware of the concerns that they were 
raising in early 2014? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I am not going to answer the 
question being asked for the fear of incriminating myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni I would like to go to the letter 
10 
that they wrote to you.  This was six members of the board 
on the 28 January 2014.  It is a letter they wrote to you 
and which was copied to the Minister.  And you will find 
that in the bundle we were working with yesterday that is 
Bundle DD34[b] and you will need to pick it up at page 
1332 – 1332. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say that is 34[b]? 
MS MYENI:  I have it Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [b]? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  34[b] yes Chair at page 1332.  It should 
20 
be under.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay no I was – I think you said 1332 
and I was looking at 103 something. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh not today Chair thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  1332. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 5 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let me get there.  Yes I am there. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So Ms Myeni do you have that document 
in front of you? 
MS MYENI:  I do. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  What you will see… 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I do sorry. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  It is a document that 
commences at page 1332.  It is addressed to yourself and 
you will see cc’d to the Honourable Minister of Public 
10 
Enterprises Mr Malusi Gigaba.  And then if you go over a 
few pages to page 1341 you will see the six directors who 
signed this letter.   
MS MYENI:  I have the letter Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And at page 1341 it commences  
“Sincerely, concerned SAA non-executive 
directors.” 
And then below that we have the name of six directors and 
signatures against their names.  I read those into the 
record.  Mr Andile Khumalo, Ms Nonhlanhla Kubeka, Ms 
20 
Raisibe Lepule, Mr Andile Mabizela, Mr Bongisizwe Mpondo 
and Ms Carol Ross Kruger, do you see that? 
MS MYENI:  I see it Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And what this letter details Ms Myeni and 
I am going for now just to paraphrase broadly is a number 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 6 of 148 
 
of concerns about your leadership on the board.  If you go 
back to page 1332 which is where the letter commences 
you will see there that it is dated the 28 January 2014 and 
this is entitled  
“Re Leadership Challenges in Relation to 
the Chairperson of South African Airways 
SOC Limited SAA.” 
If at any point you want me to go to a particular paragraph 
feel free to ask me to do so or to read the specific aspects 
I am now going to paraphrase.  But the essence of the 
10 
letter I suggest to you Ms Myeni is the following: 
They refer to a meeting – a board meeting that was held on 
the 22 January 2014 which you did not attend.  And they 
recount to you and to the Minister that they wanted to 
discuss your conduct at that meeting.   
They registered the fact that this was an issue that 
required attention.  And so they decided to call a special 
meeting thereafter so that you could attend.  They had 
concerns that you were not there for a discussion about 
your conduct so they decided to call a special meeting 
20 
which you could attend and that was set for six days later 
on the 28 January 2014.   
But you had sent them an email saying that you 
would not attend.  Do you recall those events Ms Myeni? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson may I not respond to the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 7 of 148 
 
question?  May I invoke the privilege of not responding and 
answering this question in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The first issue that they highlighted in 
this letter is actually the manner in which you conducted 
yourself in relation to the Pembroke transaction that we 
looked at yesterday.  Were you aware that they had 
expressed this concern to the Minister in this letter? 
MS MYENI:  I do not answer Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
They 
said 
that 
you 
had 
grossly 
10 
misrepresented the facts to the Minister.  Do you remember 
them making that very serious allegation against you? 
MS MYENI:  May I not respond to the question Chairperson 
in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  They also explained that your efforts to 
change that resolution the one that was taken on the 27 
May that we looked at yesterday had delayed matters with 
Pembroke such that the timelines for the delivery of the 
A320’s was delayed by four months.  They calculated the 
impact of that… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am terribly sorry Ms 
Hofmeyr.  There seems to be some sound or noise. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From somewhere.  It seems to be on my 
right.  I do not know.  There seems to be some – some 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 8 of 148 
 
stabbing sound. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We will investigate Chair if we can. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. I am sorry okay let us 
continue.  Just maybe start your question again? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  What they went on to explain after they 
registered 
their 
concern 
about 
your 
gross 
misrepresentation to the Minister was the impact of that 
misrepresentation.  Because they said that it resulted in 
10 
the delay of the Pembroke transaction such that the 
timelines for the deliveries of the A320’s was delayed by 
four months and they calculated the impact of that on SAA 
as being a cost of about R800 million.  And they added that 
that then had a knock on effect that SAA had to increase 
its borrowing requirements with lenders.  Are you aware of 
that? 
MS MYENI:  May I not respond Chairperson so that I do not 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You are aware that you did respond to 
20 
this in a letter that you wrote later, is that not so Ms 
Myeni? 
MS MYENI:  May I not respond Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The other thing that they were very 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 9 of 148 
 
concerned 
about 
was 
that 
you 
were 
instigating 
investigations against fellow board members.  Do you 
recall that? 
MS MYENI:  May I not respond Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  They described a situation in which they 
were being managed with fear and intimidation.  Do you 
remember that allegation against you? 
MS MYENI:  May I not respond Chairperson in case – so 
avoid incriminating myself. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And they concluded their letter by saying 
that you had repeatedly transgressed the requirements of 
good governance.  That you had a leadership style that 
would potentially expose all board members to liability for 
breaches of fiduciary duties.  Do you recall that that was 
the level at which they pitched their concern about your 
conduct? 
MS MYENI:  What is the question Ma’am? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Do you remember that that was the level 
– the serious level at which they recorded their concerns 
20 
about your conduct. 
MS MYENI:  With respect Chairperson may I not respond to 
the question in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Now Ms Myeni we looked at the 
signatories to the letter a moment ago.  The letter was 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 10 of 148 
 
signed by six board members.  You will recall that their 
signatures appear at page – this is DD34[b] page 1341.  At 
the – on the board at the time as I have it there were a 
total of ten members.  It was the six who had signed the 
letter and then in addition to those six it was yourself, Ms 
Nkosi Thomas, Ms Kwinana and Mr Naithani.  Is that also 
your understanding of the constitution of the board at the 
time? 
MS MYENI:  May I not respond Chairperson to the question 
to avoid incriminating myself. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Do you accept that this was a letter that 
the Minister of Public Enterprises ought to have taken very 
seriously?  A majority of the members of the board of SAA 
were writing to him and to you to notify him of what they 
regarded as your grossly reckless management of SAA.  
Should that have been taken seriously by the Minister? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I wish the Minister that is spoken 
about or any other Minister Chairperson would have taken 
20 
the matter of the collapsing of South African Airways 
during the tenure of Coleman Andrews who sold the fleet of 
South African Airways putting it into the deepest challenge 
which a decision that they took then and the decision that 
they took then up until today in 2020 was wrong then it is 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 11 of 148 
 
wrong today.   
But if then I am hearing that the Minister took 
something seriously that was written by board members but 
none of the Ministers that I reported to took the matter of 
corruption at SAA took the matter of all the investigations 
that were done in terms of losses – financial losses in the 
organisation as well as onerous lease agreements that 
exist at SAA.   
I would be in a position to respond to this question 
therefore Chairperson I am saying this I am not going to 
10 
respond to this question and I did appreciate the fact that 
the Chairperson is allowing me to be given that right not to 
incriminate myself.  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  As I understand it you responded to that 
letter and your response Ms Myeni you will find in the same 
bundle.  You will find it under Tab23 and it is at page 1545.  
Do you have that? 
MS MYENI:  Getting there Ma’am.  I have it Chairperson 
1545. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.  Before you proceed Ms 
Hofmeyr can I just ask a question to Mr Myeni?  In terms of 
the response that you gave a few minutes ago did I 
understand you correctly to say that none of the Ministers 
to whom you reported when you were chairperson of the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 12 of 148 
 
SAA board took issues of corruption SAA – at SAA 
seriously?  Did I understand you correctly? 
MS MYENI:  I can repeat what I said Chairperson so that it 
is clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  For you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  First I am saying the evidence leader is saying 
the Minister took the letter from – that was written by the 
board members very seriously.  I am then saying I wish 
10 
that any other Minister or every Minister that we reported 
to as South African Airways took the matters of South 
African Airways as seriously as it is being emphasised 
about this matter the issue of Coleman Andrews the then 
CEO of South African Airways under the leadership of a 
board 
under 
the 
leadership 
of 
other 
structures 
like 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee then the Minister the 
issue of selling the tools of trade selling – sell – the selling 
and the listing of the aircrafts that belonged to South 
African Airways and registering that he is telling – turning 
20 
the airline around and it is profitable.   
I am saying the same energy and the same 
seriousness that is being emphasised today has never 
been a – the same energy and seriousness that has been 
demonstrated during my tenure as a board member at SAA 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 13 of 148 
 
and during my tenure as the chairperson of the board.   
I have reported about onerous contracts.  First 
aircraft leases that are leased – that are dolarised in terms 
of their leases.  Secondly I have also raised issues of an 
untransformed state entity.   
So I am saying then Chairperson the corruption at 
SAA has been one of the issues that we have dealt with.  
We decided as the board to conduct investigation into 
financial 
losses 
at 
South 
African 
Airways. 
 
I 
have 
presented the reports.  I am – I am sure you are seized 
10 
with those as well Chairperson in this commission.   
But the same seriousness that I am hearing today 
from Ms Hofmeyr about a certain Minister who took the 
letter from the board members who signed.  Who of these 
board members never raised any issue about ever getting 
contracts at SAA 90% of contracts being for predominantly 
white companies and only 2% of the total procurement 
spend of R30 billion going to black people?   
I am commenting Chairperson it was not an answer 
but it was a comment to say I wish that had happened 
20 
during my tenure as a board member and during my tenure 
as the chairperson.  Ngiyabhonga emswaneni Chairperson. 
[African language] I have to bhonga emswaneni.  Thank 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  We – you may have to tell 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 14 of 148 
 
everybody 
what 
bhonga 
emswaneni 
is 
because 
as 
somebody who speak Isi-Zulu I know what it means but not 
everybody knows and it is important that at least the 
evidence leaders also.  Do you want to try and … 
MS MYENI:  Thank you very much Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want to try and… 
MS MYENI:  And also I have an understanding Chairperson 
that – I have an also understanding that it could be 
provincial language even – even another black person 
might not understand Bhonga emswaneni. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.   
MS MYENI:  But Chairperson I would do it for the other 
people because Chairperson I can – I can use – do a 
dramatic 
expressions 
in 
English 
and 
Afrikaans 
and 
Chairperson my background as a teacher has always been 
a wish that Ms Hofmeyr understands just one indigenous 
language.   
I am not – I am not saying directly to Ms Hofmeyr 
but I am just saying that as a teacher I wish [00:21:00] 
basic education can cut across Chairperson to every other 
20 
person so that we do not always translate because the 
majority of South Africans must also hear about issues that 
are taking down responsible and citizens like myself as an 
adult to be in that – to get all these indictments all the time 
in the media challenging my moral – my moral standing in 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 15 of 148 
 
the society.   
Like yesterday Chairperson when I was asked about 
fraud and at my level Chairperson and at my age that is a 
belief that a black person and a woman leader would never 
have morals.  But a certain grouping in South Africa has 
morals. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but Ms Myeni I do not want… 
MS MYENI:  So ngiyabhonga emswaneni Chair [African 
language] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MS MYENI:  With your permission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  [African language] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  I do not know in English the direct translation 
part.  It is touching and going. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MYENI:  Touching the subject but leaving it.  And not 
really going and delving more into that subject. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MS MYENI:  Perhaps Chairperson you can assist me with 
the legal term? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja well – well you – your translation 
seems to – seems to suggest to me you might have been 
tendered [African language]. [Chair and Ms Myeni talking 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 16 of 148 
 
over one another].  I think [African language] means 
something else.  So I think you meant you wanted to just 
touch on that subject and not go deep into it.  Is that right?  
That is what you wanted to say? 
MS MYENI:  It is correct – it is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you very much for assisting me 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr I am sure you are not – I 
wanted to make sure… 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Nobody is left behind.  Well I must say 
that I always feel ashamed by my inability to speak other 
African languages.  Isi-Sotho, Isi-Tzwana always feel 
ashamed about that.  So – so I am one of those who need 
to do something to make sure I can understand and speak 
other languages.  So yes okay alright.  No I think that was 
the part that I wanted to – to make sure Ms Myeni clarifies 
in terms of the Zulu term that she had used.  Okay alright. 
MS MYENI:  My apologies Chair I took your time. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is alright.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Myeni I do need to 
just clarify something.  In my question to you which you 
have been answering for some time now I did not convey 
that the Minister had taken the letter seriously.  I – my 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 17 of 148 
 
question was actually to ask you whether you thought he 
should have taken the letter seriously.  Do you have a 
response to that? 
MS MYENI:  I have no response to that in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So we were looking at your response to 
that letter which I indicated commences at page 1545 of 
the Bundle DD34[b].  You will see there Ms Myeni it is 
addressed to the non-executive directors and it is entitled 
“Response 
to 
the 
letter; 
leadership 
10 
challenges.” 
And then if you go to the last page of that letter which you 
will find at page 1556.  Do you have that? 
MS MYENI:  I have it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  There is a signature at the bottom of the 
page can you confirm whether that is your signature? 
MS MYENI:  Yes it is Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And this is a letter that it is not clear to 
me whether it was also sent to the Minister because it 
seems only to have been addressed to the non-executive 
20 
directors. Do you recall whether you also sent it to the 
Minister? 
MS MYENI:  May I not respond Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Now again I am going to paraphrase but 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 18 of 148 
 
as I read this letter you respond to that letter from the six 
board members oh I should add – it seems to have been 
dated by hand at the top of page 1454 as the 13 February 
2014.  It also bears what seems to be a faxed transmission 
recordal on the left hand side of the page indicating the 
date of 14 February 2014.  Can you confirm that that was 
about the time that you signed this letter? 
MS MYENI:  May I not confirm Chairperson.  May I not 
answer to avoid incriminating myself Chairperson? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well you previously answered to confirm 
10 
that you had signed the letter so could you confirm the 
date at which you signed it? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson where I say I signed the letter. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
Well 
the 
question 
was 
you 
have 
confirmed you signed it and I want to just locate that in 
time because there seems to be a date of the 13 February 
and the 14 February.  Can you confirm for us that you 
signed it either on the 13 t h or the 14 t h? 
MS 
MYENI: 
 
I 
stand 
by 
the 
answer 
I 
have 
given 
Chairperson. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You are refusing to confirm that a letter 
that you have indicated under oath you did sign was signed 
either the 13 t h or the 14 t h February because you believe 
that that question is going to expose you to a criminal 
charge, is that right?  So your answer to that question is 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 19 of 148 
 
going to expose you to a criminal charge, is that correct? 
MS MYENI:  I do not have the letter that I wrote with me.  
If I had my original letter I would state exactly the date and 
everything.  I do not want – excuse me – I do not want to 
respond to that question because somebody listening will 
say, I said the 13 t h or I said the 14 t h and all I know is that 
it is better for me not to answer in case I incriminate 
myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni as I read this letter what you 
do in response... 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe Ms… 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe Ms Hofmeyr can I put it this way 
Ms Myeni?  Are you able to say you are not sure of the 
date when you signed the letter but you think it would have 
been some time in February, are you able to say that? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson with respect to you I will say it 
was in February sometime. The reason why I prefer not to 
specify dates is because I was out of the country.  I 
needed to send the letter back. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  To the office of the Company Secretary.  So 
that is an elaborate answer that I would give you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  But Chair it is better. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 20 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  To say it was in February. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  So as I read your response 
you say that the criticisms made of you in the letter of the 
six co-directors was a witch hunt.  You said that it was a 
contrived attempt to demean you.  And then you deal with 
your conduct in relation to the Pembroke transaction.  Are 
you – can you confirm that that is – was your response to 
the letter that they had written addressed to yourself and the 
10 
minister.   
MS MYENI:   May I not answer Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And your response on the Pembroke 
Transaction actually commences over the page at page 
1546.  That is the second page of the letter but on our 
referencing, it is in Bundle DD34-B at page 1546.   
 
You will see where the heading there in bold...  Well, 
against the paragraph 2 it says the “challenge”.  And then 
below that at 2.1 there is a heading, Undermining the Narrow 
20 
Body Fleet Financing Process.   
 
That is where, as I understand it, you are responding to 
their concerns about your gross misrepresentations about 
the board resolutions and the impact that it had on South 
African Airways’ finances.   
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 21 of 148 
 
 
Do you read your letter in the same way that that is what 
you are dealing with at paragraph 2.1? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer Chairperson to ensure that I 
do not incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now you will recall that this letter, we 
have established was written sometime in February 2014.  
And then yesterday we looked at an affidavit that you had 
deposed to before the Companies Tribunal which you 
deposed to quite a number of years later in 2017.   
 
And in that affidavit, you said to the companies tribunal 
10 
that the finding of the Commission against you in relation to 
these resolutions and the representations were unfounded 
because you had made a genuine mistake.   
 
You had misunderstood that, you thought in your mind 
that the board had gone from ten to two but you accept that 
that was an error.  Do you recall that in your affidavit that we 
looked at yesterday? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer the question Chairperson?  I 
do not want to incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, what I then looked for after I had 
20 
seen that you, in a sense, if I take you at the word of your 
affidavit deposed to before a commissioner of oaths, is a 
quite frank admission that a mistake had been made.   
 
So I looked at this letter for that same admission.  Your 
response to the board – the board was very worried about 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 22 of 148 
 
your gross misrepresentation.   
 
And so I looked here for where you may appear to the 
board that you had been mistaken as you did later to the 
Companies Tribunal.  I could not find that anywhere in the 
letter.   
 
Do you recall having indicated your mistake in this 
letter? 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond Chairperson to avoid 
incriminating myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, what you did say which does not 
10 
involve a mistake is at paragraph one, five, four...  Sorry, at 
page 1546 where we were a moment ago at paragraph 2.1.3.  
You say the following.   
 
You are responding to the four attempts that the board 
members in their previous letter had identified as your 
efforts to change resolutions of the board without any 
authority to do so.   
 
And at paragraph 2.1.3 you say the following.  You say: 
“As to the fourth attempt, I have no knowledge of 
what you allege.   
20 
However, what I do confirm is that when I was 
required 
to 
sign 
a 
Section 
54 
notice, 
I 
was 
presented with, at the same time, two contracts.  
One for each of the two specified aircraft that we 
were committed to.   
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 23 of 148 
 
I was not going to sign conflicting documents 
without referencing this anomaly with the company 
secretary.  Once that was clarified, I signed the 
document presented to me.” 
 
Okay.  Can you help me to understand what you are 
seeking to convey there?  Because I, certainly in our 
investigations, 
we 
have 
not 
been 
able 
to 
find 
two 
contradictory contracts for two aircraft.   
 
Because of course, as you indicated to the Companies 
Tribunal later in 2017, there was never a resolution in 
10 
respect of two aircraft.  So what were you conveying here? 
MS MYENI:   I cannot help you Ms Hofmeyr.  May I not 
answer your question so that I do not incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now Ms Myeni, after you wrote this letter, 
the other board members asked for the company secretary at 
the time, to do a report on the effectiveness of the board.  
Do you remember that? 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond Chairperson so that I do not  
incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You will find his report which he did at the 
20 
time in the same bundle, DD34-B at page 1363.  If we could 
go there? 
MS MYENI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry, I should give you the starting page.  
The first page of that report that the company secretary did, 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 24 of 148 
 
you will find at page 1360.   
MS MYENI:   I do have it Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now this is a document commencing at 
page 1360 and concluded at page 1365.  It is... and it is 
signed by Sandile Dlamini, the Company Secretary of SAA.  
And if you go back to page 1360, you will see that it is 
addressed to the SAA Board of Directors.  It is from the 
company secretary and it is dated 29 May 2014.  Do you see 
that? 
MS MYENI:   I do. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And again, I am going to highlight some 
aspects of this report that the company secretary did.  Let us 
look at the purpose.  Mr Dlamini...   
 
Well, let us deal with the heading first.  Report on the 
Functioning 
and 
Effectiveness 
of 
the 
Board 
and 
its 
Structures.  That is at page 1360.   
 
And the purpose of the document is identified as: 
“The purpose of this submission is to report to the 
board on matters which impact on the functioning 
and effectiveness of the board.” 
20 
 
And it goes on to look at specific matters over the page 
at 1361.  It deals with a board evaluation that was being 
done by the Institute of Directors and what they have found. 
 
If you go over the page to page 1362, you will see at 
paragraph 4.2 there is a heading, Board is not a coherent 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 25 of 148 
 
team.   
 
And then if you go over to page 1363 at paragraph 4.4, 
there is a heading, Moratorium on Board Meetings.  And 
Mr Dlamini 
records 
there 
that 
in 
two 
instances 
the 
chairperson tried to impose a moratorium on meetings of the 
board. 
 
The first incident was last year in December on a day 
preceding the meeting of the Social Ethics Governance and 
Nominations Committee and she instructed the manager in 
our office to place a moratorium. 
10 
 
And in the second incidence, he said was on the 
6t h of May 2014 and the instruction was given through the 
CEO.  Do you recall giving those instructions to impose 
moratoriums on meetings of the board? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question Chairperson?  
ADV HOFMEYR:   We are going to come back to the second 
imposition of the moratorium which is the one dated the 
6t h of May 2014 because that will become relevant later in an 
aspect about what was going on at court.   
 
Right. 
 
So 
in 
summary, 
he 
concludes 
that 
your 
20 
leadership style was divisive.  That you tried to impose those 
moratoriums on board meetings. 
 
And as a consequence of the board having received this 
report, they then called for a meeting with the minister to 
discuss governance issues.   
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 26 of 148 
 
 
And that was granted by Minister Gigaba at the time but 
as I have that, you did not attend that meeting.  Is that 
correct? 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself?  Sorry, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes-no, that is fine.  Let me just mention 
something that maybe I should have mentioned it yesterday 
but I am sure it is something that your legal team would have 
mentioned to you or may have mentioned to you.   
 
You certainly are free to exercise any right that you have 
10 
that applies in proceedings of the Commission.  That is the 
first point. 
 
The second point that I want to make is.  The 
Commission wishes to get all perspectives from different 
role-players in regard to the matters that it is investigating 
so that when it makes it report and makes it findings, it does 
not do so on the basis of the perspective of maybe second 
people only and no other people. 
 
So it seeks to try and obtain the perspectives of 
everybody so that it can have a well-balanced view of the 
20 
situation.   
 
Of course, what this does mean is that while the 
Commission might be seeking to do that.  If a particular 
person or witness exercises their right not to tell their side of 
the story or not to answer certain questions, it does mean 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 27 of 148 
 
that in respect of those matters, the Commission will have to 
deal with the matters without the benefit of that witness’s 
side of the story on those issues. 
 
And when it makes its report and when it makes its 
findings, it will do so only on the basis on the evidence of 
those who put evidence before it and who answered 
questions. 
 
The fact, of course, that a particular witness or a 
particular person might not put their side of the story or 
might not answer certain questions, does not mean that the 
10 
Commission would not be able to make findings in the end. 
 
It simply means, it would have to make findings on the 
basis of the evidence that it has, which means, if for 
example, you have Witness A, Witness B, Witness C giving 
evidence, say about you, saying whatever they have said 
about you. 
 
And you have not given your side of the story, you have 
not put your perspectives to it, the Commission will make its 
findings only on the basis of the evidence that it received, 
namely those of Witness A, Witness B, Witness C. 
20 
 
That does not mean that the Commission will accept 
everything that evidence Witness A, Witness B, Witness C 
say.  The Commission will evaluate their evidence.   
 
We could well have a situation where the Commission 
evaluates a particular witness’s evidence and does not 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 28 of 148 
 
accept it even if the other person did not respond.   
 
But what it does mean is, when it evaluates the 
evidence, it will do so without that other person’s input or 
her side of the story and then it would make findings. 
 
So I am just mentioning that.  As I say, it may be 
something that your legal team may have explained but just 
in case that did not happen. 
 
So as you exercise your right that may apply to the 
proceedings of the Commission, I just want you to appreciate 
that.  In the end the Commission would make its report, 
10 
make its findings based on the only evidence that it has.  
You understand? 
MS MYENI:   I do understand Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS MYENI:   I appreciate what the Chairperson has clarified.  
Chairperson, my apprehension – if I may respond? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   If you may allow me to respond Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MS MYENI:   My apprehension Chairperson was that I come 
20 
before this Commission, trusting the leadership, trusting 
your position but trusted the journey you traversed to the 
level at which you are in the country. 
 
So I came before this Commission mainly to hear that I 
am a culprit.  I am a criminal.  I came before this 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 29 of 148 
 
Commission because I also do not want to be in contempt.  
And I risk to ensure that while in isolation I still present 
myself.   
 
Now to come back to what the Chairperson is saying.  I 
appreciate what the Chairperson is saying because there has 
been a narrative Chair that a certain grouping(?) is guilty. 
 
Or – not you Chairperson – but your investigators, 
together with your evidence leaders may be doing something 
that you are not aware of.  Assisted by the media.  
 
I myself Chairperson I need to – in response to what the 
10 
Chair, the comfort you have shed just now or the clarity you 
have given.  Let me not say the comfort because I am not 
here to be given any comfort but I am here to state the side 
– my side of the story. 
 
I feel Chairperson that there is a certain sectional group 
that is being hunted.  There are certain people that you 
Chairperson might not be aware of that are denied to come 
and present some evidence of corruption but because it does 
not suit the narrative of today, they are not allowed to come.   
 
I have been one of those wished to come and present to 
20 
the Commission but when I started the mood – when I 
started the occurrences were ...[indistinct] the Commission, 
Chairperson. [distortion present – speaker cannot be heard 
clearly.] 
 
When I started, some pronouncements by the media.  
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 30 of 148 
 
Then I realised that I – it is not a winnable attempt.  I am 
sitting here Chairperson.  I asked yesterday that:  Am I on 
trial or not?   
 
Because Chair, I sit here and be wanted.  I sit here as 
somebody who stole money somewhere.  I sit here as 
somebody 
who 
defrauded 
some state 
entities 
or 
who 
captured state entities but in court there was no shred of 
evidence of any money taken by me.   
 
In South Africa [speaking vernacular].  I felt Chairperson 
big(?) before you, to lead(?) me or actually assist me to 
10 
ensure that I tell somebody [speaking vernacular] that I am 
guilty by association of Jacob Zuma. 
 
I needed a mamma(?) somewhere who is in my church 
who believes the way.  Be, there is people that have assisted 
in Richards Bay that I have trained, assisted, register their 
companies, led(?) at the Deputy President of the Zululand 
Chamber of Commerce to understand that I am not guilty of 
anything but I am guilty by association of President Zuma. 
 
He had never told me why he has been hunted down.  If 
I had a choice to reverse decisions I made.  Chairperson, I 
20 
would have not taken the position of being the Chairperson 
of the Jacob G Zuma Foundation because in my journey as a 
successful 
businesswoman, 
an 
award 
winning 
businesswoman. 
 
There has never been any black spots in my leadership. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 31 of 148 
 
[Distortion present – speaker unclear] ...but there has been 
so much conspiracies that are political.  I am not a politician 
Chairperson.  I am a solid businesswoman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS MYENI:   And then Chair.  If then sitting here before 
you...  A practical example.  I am asked Chair if I understand 
the role of a chairperson and a CEO.  I have highlighted(?) 
CEO Chairperson.  I have interviewed CEO’s.  I have given 
then contractual agreements.   
 
I cannot give you ...[indistinct] certain things Chair and I 
10 
cannot not just simplify(?) but I cannot be asked at my level 
and at my age where I know the role of a chairperson and 
the role of a CEO.   
 
I have learnt in the continent(?) Chair as the president in 
the African space.  Now Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   ...I am not an example.  As the last example – I 
want to make maybe two more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   Was the issue of my CV.  I offered to give you 
20 
my CV yesterday.  Unbeknown to me Chair, when I page 
through a few pages, I find my CV that was submitted at the 
Public Enterprises in 2012. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   I am being asked a question before you 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 32 of 148 
 
Chairperson.  You have my CV.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   It clearly states that reasons why I did not do 
my last – my majors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   It states clearly.  But the question that is being 
asked so that we fit the narrative to the media. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   That I am a liar.  I am a criminal.  And I have 
moral inferiority(?) complex.  And a believe that if you are 
10 
black, you are a criminal.  A believe that a certain fraction of 
the society in South Africa that is associated with President 
Jacob Zuma is corrupt.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   And Chair, lastly.  When I was asked about a 
definition of fraud, if I understood that fraud is bad.  Do I 
know whether fraud is bad or not.   
 
I would not have unearthed(?) corruption at SAA if I did 
not know fraud is bad.  That is one.  Two.  There have been 
people that have been vague(?) given platforms.   
20 
 
Not because they had genuine complaints but they are 
hiding their own criminal activities by coming to the 
Commission to state certain things Chair that we cannot 
reverse.   
 
Books have been written about us.  Certain things have 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 33 of 148 
 
been said about us.  Certain names have been given to us 
as cheap women just for association.   
 
Chair, if I had a choice, I would wake up the next day 
being a Ms White or a Ms Lilly(?) or a Ms Van der Merwe 
because that name would give me credibility in my own 
country Chairperson.   
 
And know that I said more but I am saying it Chair so 
that you understand that even the Rule point...  Sorry, the 
Rule 3(3) that gets sent to us.  It is not you Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MS MYENI:   You do not know, perhaps, what gets sent to 
us.  You get Rule 3(3) maybe three pages of something that 
is so big but you are made to believe that this is what has 
been said to you.  When you go through a document as I 
have been given an opportunity now to go through these files 
that are before me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   Last night, Chairperson, I slept at four o’clock 
in the morning because I was reading some interesting(?) 
things that, Chair, one day this report that you will be 
20 
compiling about this Commission.  When it is taken for a 
review, it will be only you Chair.  Not the evidence leaders 
whom I respect.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   Not your investigators whom I respect.  But 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 34 of 148 
 
yesterday Chair, you said you did not know – you did not 
give permission to OUTA to use your documents.  You might 
Chair, innocently be trusting people that are doing your 
work, which all of us Chair believe in you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   I believe in you.  I have a high respect of you.  
I know you before you knew me when you were at the 
...[indistinct] office Chair.  So I have high respect for you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   But I think I am before you Chair with the 
10 
people that have come back who are aggrieved, who have 
been made to say:  Go say something about anyone 
associated with Jacob Zuma.   
 
So Chairperson, I am saying.  If I could, I would reverse 
some of the decisions that I took.  I did not know some of the 
things about President Zuma in his political space.   
 
And that is not my space.  But I am found being 
associated with somebody in the political factions Chair that 
is being hunted by this Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MS MYENI:   And I am hoping that the Commission will, as 
the Chairperson has said, give us the opportunity Chair to 
tell the nation about certain journeys, certain things that 
have been said, certain experiences that we have that have 
created some of the pain to us. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 35 of 148 
 
 
Like Chair, the last question – the last example that I 
said I would make.  One evidence...  Oh, sorry.  Submitted.  
One person comes there.  He is being ...[indistinct]  He is 
called Mr X.   
 
He says things.  He is covered.  He has been trusted.  
Why he is being trust?  He is covered.  He does not show his 
face.  Because he fears for his life.   
 
How do you fear for your life when you are involved in 
criminal 
activities 
yourself? 
 
People 
that 
have 
stolen 
somewhere run to the Commission.  Some, not all.  Run to 
10 
the Commission to tell the names of certain people, certain 
groupings.   
 
A practical example Chair that I have discovered 
yesterday.  I was...  This Commission has been told that I 
bought a house in 2015.  It is believed that I did buy a house 
in 2015.  It is also believed that the Jacob Zuma Foundation 
was established in 2001.   
 
Now Chair, what I can try and say.  The media has a 
position and a narrative that says by association with Jacob 
Zuma, Dudu Myeni is a criminal.   
20 
 
So it is incumbent upon me Chair not to incriminate 
myself in my responses but to be in a forum where my name 
can be properly cleared so that we then separate [speaking 
vernacular]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You want to interpret it into English 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 36 of 148 
 
...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, I know that because the narrative 
has been created for years.  I cannot control what the media 
says about me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   But all I am saying Chair, I wish I was a 
Madam Venter because by virtue of the colour, I would not 
be presumed guilty in order for me to prove my innocence.  I 
am here as an innocent person.   
 
And Chairperson, thank you for your fairness and thank 
10 
you for standing as an independent person in this process.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Ms Myeni.  It is a – who may 
have matters relating to corruption that you may have 
wished to bring to the Commission but did not bring for 
whatever reason because we certainly since 2018 have 
been 
inviting 
all 
South Africans 
who 
have 
got 
any 
information to bring it.  We are approaching the end of the 
term of the Commission so we might not be able to do 
much about information that we get so late but if you would 
20 
feel 
comfortable 
to 
send 
that 
information 
to 
the 
Commission, I will be very interested in you furnishing the 
Commission with that information so that we can we what 
we can do.   
I mentioned that we are approaching the end of the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 37 of 148 
 
term of the Commission, that places a limit, a limitation on 
how much room we have to investigate further, unlike if we 
had got it about a year ago or six months ago, but 
nevertheless, if you do have, I would like to encourage you 
to make it – to send it to the Commissioner and if you 
decide to do that, send it to the secretary of the 
Commission and you can mention in a covering letter to the 
secretary that you are sending it arising out of the 
proceedings of today and that I encouraged you to send it.  
And then we will look at it and see what can be done with 
10 
it.  You understand? 
MS MYENI:   Thank you, Chairperson, thanks for the 
opportunity, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, I did not anticipate that I would 
need to return to this matter today because I thought that I 
that it had been dealt with yesterday but I am going to ask 
– beg leave to hand in the correspondence with Ms Myeni’s 
attorneys relating to this allegation of collusion between 
the Commission and OUTA.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now, of course, because of Ms Myeni’s 
remote location, what I have asked to have done is that 
contemporaneous with me handing this up and to my 
learned friends and yourself, Chair – I see that they have 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 38 of 148 
 
not been punched, we will do the punching if we can just in 
a moment at the tea break, but I have asked for the 
secretariat to email them to Ms Myeni’s attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So that they can enable her to have a 
copy of it and given that we are close to the tea break I 
suggest that she use the tea break opportunity to read 
them but what I would like you to do is to actually to read 
them into the record because I would like to put an end to 
this suggestion that there was any sense of collusion or 
10 
lack of responsiveness from the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So if we could enter it, Chair, as 
EXHIBIT DD39B.43 because that is the last number we are 
at at the moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which of the two letters? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, yes, we could do them separately, 
could we not? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, do it separately. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So let us do the letter from Lugisani 
20 
Mantsha Attorneys, because that is the first one, as DD39 
…[intervenes] 
MS MYENI:   Sorry, Chair, DD? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, Ms Myeni, the letters that Ms 
Hofmeyr is referring to, you might – they might not have 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 39 of 148 
 
reached you, I am not sure, but she says they have been 
emailed to your attorney.  Maybe you are going to get them 
during the tea break. 
MS MYENI:   Yes, Chair, but she said they are on exhibit? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, they are not on any exhibit as 
yet. 
MS MYENI:   DD? 
CHAIRPERSON:   They are separate, so you do not have 
them at the moment. 
MS MYENI:   Oh, okay.  Okay, Chairperson, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your attorney should be bringing them to 
you maybe, during the tea break. 
MS MYENI:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But she will just read them into the 
record and then later on she can – we can deal with them.  
Yes, that is the letter from Lugisani Mantsha Attorneys 
dated 8 November 2019 addressed to the Acting Secretary 
of the Commission.  That one should be exhibit? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   DD34B.43. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Point 3? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   43, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  The letter from Lugisani 
Mantsha Attorneys dated 8 November 2019 and addressed 
to the Acting Secretary of the Commission will be admitted 
as EXHIBIT DD34B.43. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 40 of 148 
 
LETTER FROM LUGISANI MANTSHA ATTORNEYS DATED 
8 NOVEMBER 2019 HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT DD34B.43 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed and then the second one which is 
the email response from the Commission to that letter 
which is dated 11 November 2019, may I request that we 
enter as EXHIBIT DD34B.44? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that letter will be admitted as 
EXHIBIT DD34B.44.  Okay. 
EMAIL RESPONSE FROM COMMISSION TO LUGISANI 
ATTORNEYS DATED 8 NOVEMBER 2019 HANDED IN AS 
10 
EXHIBIT DD34B.44 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, I propose to read them.  I would 
not ordinarily do so but in fairness to Ms Myeni she does 
not have them in front of her at the moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I think it is appropriate just to read 
them into the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I want to begin with the first piece of 
correspondence which is the letter from Ms Myeni’s 
20 
attorneys at the time and it is dated the 8 November 2019.  
Chair, as you recorded earlier, it is addressed to the 
Acting Secretary of the Commission and it says the 
following: 
1. We are writing this letter to seek clarify and 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 41 of 148 
 
confirmation of the legal status of documents 
published with the emblem of the Commission. 
2. We 
raise 
this 
question 
because 
we 
have 
documents received through discovery that bear 
the emblem of the Commission as a watermark.  
It is the intention of one of the parties to rely on 
the said documents as evidence in the trial. 
3. On the face of it the documents seem to have 
emanated as the evidence of a witness that we 
know to have testified at the Commission. 
10 
4. We thus seek the Commission’s response to the 
following: 
4.1 
We ask that the Commission provide us with 
the specific provisions in the Commission’s 
terms of reference that allow for documents 
with the seal or emblem of the Commission to 
be used as evidence in proceedings outside 
the ambit of the Commission.” 
Over the page: 
4.2 
We ask the Commission provide us with the 
20 
 
specific 
provisions 
in 
the 
Commission’s 
terms of reference that allow for the public 
dissemination 
of 
documents 
submitted 
as 
evidence to the Commission, the public or 
persons not affiliated to the Commission. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 42 of 148 
 
4.3 
We ask the Commission to confirm or deny 
having 
issues 
documents 
submitted 
as 
evidence to the Commission to organisations 
not officially associated to the Commission, 
particularly the organisation called OUTA. 
4.4 
We ask the Commission to confirm the legal 
status of documents so proven to emanate 
from the Commission in legal proceedings 
outside the Commission.  We wait your prompt 
response in this regard.” 
10 
So that is a letter dated the 8 November 2019.  The 
response came from the representative of the secretariat 
and for this purpose we go to EXHIBIT DD34B.44. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just so that it is clear, it appears that 
Lugisani Mantsha Attorneys were representing Ms Myeni at 
the time. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, correct, Chair.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   There has subsequently been a change. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But for some of the interactions with the 
Commission 
Ms 
Myeni 
was 
represented 
by 
Lugisani 
Mantsha Attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then – so they asked for all of those 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 43 of 148 
 
issues to be addressed and they asked for the prompt 
response.  So on the 11 November 2019 – and now we are 
on the email, Chair, that we have entered as EXHIBIT 
DD34B.44, the Secretariat of the Commission responds and 
it says: 
“Dear Sirs, we refer to your correspondence dated 8 
November 2019.  Before we can comprehensively 
respond, we write to you in order to seek clarity.  
Which witnesses are you referring to in paragraph 3 
of this letter and to which documents are you 
10 
referring in paragraph 2 of this letter?  Once we 
have this information we will be able to respond 
about the specific documents referred to.  Kind 
regards.” 
And that is from the representative of the Secretariat.  
There was never any response to that request that would 
have 
enabled 
us 
meaningfully 
to 
engage 
with 
the 
suggestion that witnesses that Ms Myeni’s lawyers knew 
had already testified publicly, their documents bearing the 
watermark of the Commission had found its way into 
20 
discovery processes.  We requested clarity as to which 
specific 
one 
so 
that 
we 
could 
be 
sure 
to 
respond 
appropriately given what had been disclosed and there was 
never a response to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I see we are at quarter past 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 44 of 148 
 
eleven, maybe this would be the convenient time to take 
the tea break. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take the tea break, it is quarter 
past eleven, we will resume at half past eleven.  We 
adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see we do not have Ms Myeni’s picture 
there, there is just her name.  Oh, there she comes up.  
10 
You can hear me, Ms Myeni? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, Chairperson, thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Okay, let us proceed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I made an 
error before the break and my team has alerted me to it.  
There was actually a third letter in the sequence of the 
letters that I handed up before the break because the 
Commission did not want to leave it just on a first request 
for clarification.  So what then happened – I would like to 
just hand up, if we may, because this third letter will 
20 
complete the extent of the interactions between the 
Commission and Ms Myeni’s then lawyers.  This will also – 
have been or is in the process of being sent to Ms Myeni’s 
lawyers so that she can have a copy. 
MS MYENI:   Chair? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 45 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ms Myeni, did you receive during 
the break the two letters?  It is a letter and an email from 
your attorney that was sent to him before the break.  Did 
they reach you? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, the letters have not reached me 
but the documents, they have received them here, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Okay, alright, thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, Chair, just to complete the picture, 
you will recall that – oh, if we could just enter it as 
EXHIBIT DD34B.45 and that the email date 19 November 
10 
2019.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the – is it two emails on this... 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, it is actually a copy of the one we 
were looking at previously because it is a follow-up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So the one right at the bottom is the one 
we have actually entered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But I wanted to show how the two relate 
to one another, so they are both on this page. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Well, the document that 
is date 19 November 2019 addressed by Ms Shannon S van 
Vuuren 
from 
the 
Commission 
to 
Lugisani 
Mantsha 
Attorneys will be marked as EXHIBIT DD34B.45. 
EMAIL FROM MS SHANNON S VAN ZYL TO LUGISANI 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 46 of 148 
 
ATTORNEYS DATED 19 NOVEMBER 2019 HANDED IN AS 
EXHIBIT DD34B.45 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair, we are indebted.  And 
just so that you can follow what happens.  Remember we 
get the letter on the 8 November asking for a prompt 
response and what you see at the bottom of what is now 
EXHIBIT DD34B.45 was the Commission’s first response to 
that, the following Monday, the 11 t h, that is where the 
Commission 
requested 
in 
order 
comprehensively 
to 
respond that we get information about which the witnesses 
10 
were and what the documents were.  There is no response 
to that for more than a week and so on the following 
Tuesday, 
the 
19 
November 
2019, 
the 
secretariat’s 
representative 
again 
sends 
an 
email 
to 
the 
same 
recipients, Ms Myeni’s erstwhile attorneys and says: 
“Dear Sirs, just a reminder regarding the below.” 
And she keeps the email below so that they could have no 
doubt about what was being addressed and since that 
email there has been no response. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, if we can then continue with Ms 
Myeni’s questions. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Buthelezi? 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Yes, Chair, sorry, Chair.  I just want to 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 47 of 148 
 
place on record, Chair, we are not going to pursue this 
issue any further. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   It is not taking our hearing much further, 
you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   We note the response.  At the time the 
horse had bolted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   These things were admitted already in 
10 
court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   We requested clarity, we got counter-
questions and we thought it is not going to take anywhere, 
it is what it is, let us move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Thank you.  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, just for the record, that was not 
the 
position 
that 
was 
presented 
to 
the 
Chairperson 
yesterday by Ms Myeni’s attorneys and representatives.  
What was conveyed to the Commission yesterday was that 
20 
there had been no response from the Commission and that 
is why it was particularly important to put this on record. 
 
Ms Myeni, just before we had quite a bit of evidence 
from you, I was asking about the meeting that the board 
members who had complained about your leadership had 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 48 of 148 
 
called with Minister Gigaba and that they attended but you 
did not attend.  Do you recall that? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question, Chairperson, 
in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, these aspects related to the six 
board members who wrote that letter of complaint to the 
minister have been set out in an affidavit by the former 
board member Mr Bongisizwe Mpondo and that affidavit is 
contained in Ms Myeni’s bundle.  I would like to take us to 
it, if we may, because I am now going to go into not just 
10 
the documents around this issue but actually what Mr 
Mpondo says about events that now unfold. 
 
Chair and Ms Myeni you will find that in the same 
bundle DD34B and it is under tab 13 and it is page 1211. 
MS MYENI:   I have it, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, Chair, this is an affidavit from Mr 
Mpondo.  As with all affidavits received in the Commission 
where somebody does not testify, we request that it be 
provisionally admitted.  To the extent that it might be 
disputed, of course, Chair, you might take a view later that 
20 
somebody should be called to give oral evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But it was placed in Ms Myeni’s bundle 
and for the purposes of today so that she would have an 
opportunity to respond to it.  I am not sure whether she is 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 49 of 148 
 
going to do so but nonetheless it is important for the work 
of the Commission that I take you, Chairperson, through 
what Mr Mpondo says about the events that then unfold.  
Chair, if we could then admit this as DD34B.13 and it is an 
affidavit deposed to on the 28 July 2020. 
CHAIRPERSON:   34B? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Point 13. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One three? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Bongisizwe Mpondo 
10 
starting at page 1211 is at admitted as EXHIBIT DD34B.13. 
AFFIDAVIT OF BONGISIZWE MPONDO STARTING AT 
PAGE 1211 HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT DD34B.13 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you so much, Chair.  So, Ms 
Myeni, if we can just pick up the affidavit some way into it 
at page 1222.  So I would like to – do you have that, Ms 
Myeni? 
MS MYENI:   I do. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  So we can start at 
paragraph 38 at the bottom of page 1222 because that is 
20 
where Mr Mpondo starts to deal with this meeting that I 
was asking whether you recalled and he records there: 
“I remember that there was a meeting that was 
requested by Minister Gigaba before May 2014 
which was called, I believe to discuss the issues 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 50 of 148 
 
raised 
in 
the 
directors’ 
January 
2014 
letter 
addressed to the Chairperson and copied to the 
minister.  The minister, deputy minister and Director 
General attended that meeting along with the board 
members.  The purpose of the meeting from the 
side of the DPE, it appeared, was to mediate and to 
hear both parties in order to come up with a 
solution.  At the time the meeting started the 
Chairperson had not arrived.” 
Ms Myeni, from the context, that is a reference to you.  It 
10 
goes on: 
“The DG advised us that he had made an attempt to 
get hold of the Chairperson who was reported to be 
stuck in a meeting somewhere.  Why there was an 
attempt by the minister to address the issues raised 
regarding the Chairperson, this was not possible as 
the 
Chairperson 
did 
not 
attend 
the 
meeting 
convened for this purpose.” 
Ms Myeni, can you offer any comment on this?  Do you 
dispute what Mr Mpondo says about the efforts to arrange 
20 
a meeting between you, the minister, the deputy minister 
and the Director General? 
MS MYENI:   No comment, Chairperson, may I not respond 
to the question so that I do not incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then at paragraph 39 what – that is 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 51 of 148 
 
over the page at page 1223, what Mr Mpondo there 
accounts is that: 
“There was a meeting that took place at the end of 
June 2014 which was convened by the new minister 
at the time, Ms Lynne Brown.  It was the first time 
we were meeting with this minister.  In the meeting 
the minister afforded us an opportunity to tell her 
what was going on in SAA.  The directors all, to the 
best 
of 
my 
recollection, 
gave 
input. 
 
The 
Chairperson 
arrived 
during 
the 
course 
of 
the 
10 
meeting. 
 
The 
members 
raised 
issues 
around 
leadership which were along the lines of the 
contents of the letter previously communicated and 
the sentiments captured in the minutes and the 
company secretary’s report.  The minister was 
therefore well-aware of the issues the board raised 
around the leadership challenges facing the board 
at the time.” 
Do you recall attending that meeting, Ms Myeni, albeit it 
some way through the meeting with Minister Lynne Brown? 
20 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond, Chairperson, in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   What Mr Mpondo deals with next in the 
affidavit is: 
“A report that was then done by the Department of 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 52 of 148 
 
Public Enterprises for Minister Brown about the 
issues that they were seeking to raise and bring to 
the attention of the Minister.” 
And that is a report that you will find later in the same file, 
DD34B and that you will find commencing – well, might not 
be commencing, I have to check my references.  1393 is 
the page I would like us to go to, if we may. 
MS MYENI:   I have it.  I have it, Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Ms Myeni.  You will see that 
this is a document entitled briefing memo at the top right 
10 
hand corner, it is addressed to the then Minister of Public 
Enterprises, Ms Lynne Brown.  It is from Ms Mkholo, who is 
the Deputy Director General and it is dated the 30 July 
2014.  Just to pause, we are now following the chronology.   
There is the initial letter by the board members in 
early 2014.  There is your response in February 2014, 
there is an effort to meet with Minister Gigaba while he 
was still in that position which the other board members 
and you do not attend. 
 
Then there is the meeting with Minister Brown in 
20 
June where you do attend and at which the board members 
conveyed 
to 
Minister 
Brown 
the 
concerns 
that 
they 
expressed in their earlier letter and now we are at July 
2014 because what the Department of Public Enterprises 
then does is puts together a report on – and let us look at 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 53 of 148 
 
the subject of this document for that: 
“Governance challenges facing the South African 
Airways SAA board of directors.” 
Ms Myeni, do you recall having seen this report before? 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond, Chairperson, in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You will see over the page right at the 
end, if we just go to the end to page 1413.  You will see 
that all the people who compiled this report have signed 
and then you will see towards the bottom on the left hand 
10 
side there is a signature from Ms Lynne Brown dated the 
16 September 2014 and there is a note next to that which 
seems to read, it is in handwriting: 
“I received this memo two months later!  What is the 
speed with which it has to be dealt with?  Shelley 
presented 30/07” 
I think that is 30 July.  I think that is Priscilla or Priscilla 
on 4/08.   
“This is it downhill” 
I do not actually know what that says. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is like it says: 
“This it is downhill” 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  Chair, if I can just pause there.  
Minister 
Brown 
has 
been 
asked 
to 
respond 
to 
the 
Commission about this memo, about what we will now 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 54 of 148 
 
uncover as we take the story forward was done.  She has 
provided an affidavit.  I understand there maybe some 
intention 
for 
her 
to 
give 
oral 
evidence 
before 
the 
Commission.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I am not going to deal with it now, but I 
just wanted to place on record her response to this has 
been sought and provided to the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right.  So, Ms Myeni, I am just going to 
10 
summarise what this report says and if at any point you 
want me to go with specific reference to a paragraph I am 
happy to do so but let me summarise.  What this report 
says to Minister Brown is first that there are factions 
amongst board members within SAA. 
 
Second, the DPE’s assessment is that there is a 
completely dysfunctional board at SAA at that time.  The 
report refers to your decision to suspend all board 
activities until the minister intervenes and the report 
explains that that decision of yours, to suspend all board 
20 
activities, has aggravated matters and it concludes that the 
minister is in a position and has a power to remove some 
or all of the board members.  Ms Myeni, were you aware 
that those views and that assessment had been made by 
the representatives of the Department of Public Enterprises 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 55 of 148 
 
to the minister. 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond, Chairperson, unless I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, Ms Myeni, I put it to you that even 
by September now of 2014 there is really quite a crisis 
within the board.  Six board members have sought to 
engage the ministry about their severe concerns about your 
leadership and what it is doing to the proper functioning of 
the board and then steps were taken, replacements were 
made in October of 2014.  Can you assist us with who was 
10 
retained and who was removed? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to the 
question, I do not want to incriminate myself. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Sorry to interrupt, Chair, but I would like 
to place on record and articulate a point that Ms Myeni 
maybe could not have escalated to a legal point and we 
find the specific example in this very letter, in this very 
letter that is being dealt with now. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder whether your voice is soft. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Sorry, Chair, I want to raise one 
example. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   You see, this letter is a very long letter, 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 56 of 148 
 
Chair, but the perception that develops in the eyes or in 
the mind of Ms Myeni is that this letter is being read 
selectively because I would just like to quote two lines in 
this letter that say one thing.  At page 1395, paragraph 
3.3, it says the following: 
“In spite of this development the board continues to 
operate cohesively for all intents and purposes.” 
You see?  However, the question that is being put is that 
this board is dysfunctional.  Now if I may take you to the 
next page which is page 1401 and it says at the heading: 
10 
“Governance 
challenges 
facing 
South 
African 
Airways board of directors” 
And I take you to paragraph 3.29 at the bottom, second to 
last paragraph, Chair, and if you read this paragraph, it 
says …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, did you say page 1397? 
MR BUTHELEZI:   1401. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1401? 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, one second, let me get there.  
20 
Yes? 
MR BUTHELEZI:   There is a line there, it says: 
“Ms Myeni also calls into question certain practices 
by the company secretary …[intervenes] ” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you at 3.29? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 57 of 148 
 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Yes, Chair, at the bottom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Towards the end. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Fourth line from the bottom, it says: 
“Ms Myeni also calls into question certain practices 
by the company secretary namely deletion of audio 
recordings 
of 
minutes 
of 
meetings 
and 
not 
consulting with the Chairperson regarding board 
meetings and the agenda deeming this to be 
10 
contravention of the board charter.” 
So, Chair, I am not wanting to raise any further debate, I 
am just trying to say, Chair, the way this letter has been 
characterised, there is an omission of certain exculpatory 
points that are now, it seems, being overlooked and I am 
not challenging Ms Hofmeyr, but I am just trying to say that 
with this conduct that she complained of earlier with the 
certain slant on how the evidence is presented to the 
Chair, it can give a person that impression that they are 
being targeted. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, Chair, if I may just respond on two 
aspects.  You see, when my learned friend, Mr Buthelezi, 
draws your attention to page 1395 in paragraph 3.3 and 
emphasises there a sentence that says: 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 58 of 148 
 
“In spite of this development the board continued to 
operate cohesively for all intents and purposes.” 
It is important to read that paragraph in the light of the 
paragraph that precedes it because it is talking about a 
historic position in 2012 where Mr Kona was appointed as 
Chairperson and there was then the issue of – we received 
evidence on this,  him being both CEO and Chairperson 
and then the appointment of Ms Myeni.   
 
So the statement that the board continued to 
operate cohesively for all intents and purposes is talking 
10 
about a historical position on the face of this document 
that occurred in 2012.  What I was putting to Ms Myeni was 
that this report signals a dysfunctional board by September 
of 2014, that is – well, at least July when it was written 
and September of 2014 when it appears the Minister Lynne 
Brown received it.   
 
Also importantly, and I was coming to this, this 
report does record, Ms Myeni, your response to the letter 
at – the January letter of the 6 board members against you 
and recounts, as Mr Buthelezi highlighted from page 1401 
20 
at paragraph 3.29, what your response was to that.   
 
At our previous questioning you were not willing to 
engage with any of those matters.  Does that remain your 
position?  You do not want to engage with any of these 
matters addressed from paragraph 3.29? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 59 of 148 
 
MS MYENI:   Ms Hofmeyr, that is the position, thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, so what happens is the DPE does 
the assessment, its concern that there is by this stage a 
completely dysfunctional board, there is also reference in 
the memo to the fact that legal advice was sought and as I 
say, the conclusion is that the minister is in a position to 
remove some or all of the board members and we were 
coming to the question of well, who was retained and who 
was removed?  I asked you whether you could assist us 
with that.  I think I take your answer to have been you 
10 
decline to do so on the basis that it could expose you to a 
criminal charge, is that right? 
MS MYENI:   Correct, Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Well, what then happened is that board 
members received notice of the convening of a special 
meeting by the minister and we can find that in the same 
bundle, DD34B at page 1415.  Do you have that, Ms 
Myeni? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now this is notice of a special general 
20 
meeting, you will see, and if you go over the page to page 
1416 you will see it is dated the 15 October 2014 and it is 
by order of the member of the company.  Who is the 
member of SAA, Ms Myeni? 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond, Chairperson, I prefer not 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 60 of 148 
 
to incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni can I just clarify?  You are 
refusing to answer a question about who is the member of 
SAA on the basis that that answer could expose you to a 
criminal charge, is that right?  Sorry, Ms Myeni, I think we 
lost connection for a moment, was your answer yes? 
MS MYENI:   I am saying my answer is I am not answering 
the question. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you so much. 
MS MYENI:   And I would not want to incriminate myself, 
10 
that is the answer. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So what this notice does is it says – if 
we are back at page 1415: 
“Notice is hereby given that the special general 
meeting of the member of the company will be held 
on Thursday 23 October 2014 at the Department of 
Public Enterprises.” 
And it goes on to say: 
“Pursuant to Section 62(2)A of the Companies Act 
71 of 2008 as amended, the member of the 
20 
company is requested to waive the right to receive 
at least 15 business days notice of this meeting as 
required 
in 
terms 
of 
Section 
61(1)A 
of 
the 
Companies Act.” 
And then it identifies what this meeting is being convened 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 61 of 148 
 
for and what you will see at paragraph 1 is it says: 
“To consider presentations to be made in person or 
through a representative by the following directors 
as provided for in terms of Section 71(2)B of the 
Companies Act before the resolution in 2 below is 
adopted.” 
And then what follows is a list of the directors who have 
signed that letter of complaint in January of 2014.  So it is 
the six but it also includes Dr Naithani.  So it is the six 
directors who complained and Dr Naithani and what they 
10 
are instructed to do is to make presentations at that 
meeting before the resolution in 2 below is adopted and 
then let us look at what the resolution was that was 
anticipating to be adopted at that meeting: 
“To 
consider 
the 
resolution 
that 
the 
following 
directors be removed as non-executive directors 
from the board of the company with effect from 23 
October 2014.”  
And 
that 
is 
the 
same 
seven 
members 
– 
directors, 
apologies, who had to come present themselves and make 
20 
representations about why they should not be removed.  
Were you aware that that notice had gone out calling for 
those six …[intervenes] 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, I did not hear that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Apologies, let me say that again.  Ms 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 62 of 148 
 
Myeni, were you aware that a special meeting was 
convened 
to 
ask 
the 
six 
board 
members 
who 
had 
complained about the crisis of leadership in SAA and Dr 
Naithani to account for why they should not be removed as 
directors? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to this 
question in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You – your name does not appear among 
the list of those who would need to come and make 
representations about why they should not be removed, is 
10 
it? 
MS MYENI:   Which means, Chairperson, if my name does 
not appear there? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I am just asking for clarification, your 
name is not amongst those. 
MS MYENI:   For clarity, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Your name is not amongst those, is it? 
MS MYENI:   Is there a meaning behind that, Chairperson?  
Well, is there any insinuation? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, Ms …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, she is …[intervenes] 
MS MYENI:   Just for clarity, sorry, Ms Hofmeyr. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, she is only asking you, Ms Myeni, 
to confirm that you were not one of the directors reflected 
in that notice as directors in respect of whom a resolution 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 63 of 148 
 
to remove them was to be passed. 
MS MYENI:   Thank you, Chairperson, may I not respond.  
Thanks for clarify. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, I would like to seek your 
assistance on this.  Does it make sense to you given the 
nature of the dysfunctionality within the board as well as 
the DPE’s understanding that there were factions within 
10 
the board as well as the clear conflict between what the six 
board members were saying in their letter and what you 
were saying in response?  It should not have been the 
case that you, as well as them, should have been asked to 
account for what was going on at SAA. 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, we are before a Commission of 
Inquiry, we are not in court.  I cannot account for things 
that are done at shareholder level. I cannot also account 
for 
reasons 
that 
any 
other 
person 
takes 
decisions 
regarding appointments, regarding decisions that a person 
20 
arrives to, to make.  I would not want to get into that 
space, I think I am elevated too much to understand the 
shareholder matters, therefore I do not want to incriminate 
myself Chairperson, can I not answer this question.   
I think it belongs somewhere else and I do not also 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 64 of 148 
 
think that I would undermine any shareholder for any 
reason that a shareholder decides to do something and 
that then I have views about decisions by the shareholder.  
I can never do that, and therefore Chairperson I prefer not 
to answer the question.  I have made a comment, may I not 
answer the question, I do not want to incriminate myself.  
Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair I would like to place on record, 
and give Ms Myeni an opportunity to respond to this 
because I understand Ms Myeni in her decision not to 
10 
answer the question to be really doing two things.  In one 
respect there is an invocation of the privilege against self-
incrimination but in the same moment there is a refusal to 
answer the question because - and I tried to take down 
verbatim what Ms Myeni said, it’s a question that quote: 
“Belongs somewhere else.”  
And secondly in your answer Ms Myeni you said: 
“That you did not want to traverse shareholder 
matters because it is not for you to comment on 
them in so far as the shareholder might thereby be 
20 
undermined.” 
But moments earlier before the break you communicated to 
the Chairperson of this Commission your grave misgivings 
about the manner in which the shareholder had treated 
previous matters including the conduct of Mr Andrews.  So 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 65 of 148 
 
it is difficult as a consequence of that conflict Ms Myeni to 
understand the true reason behind the reluctance to 
answer the questions.   
I 
would 
like 
you 
for 
the 
purposes 
of 
the 
Commissions 
processes to clarify because on the face of what you have 
said there is a contradiction with what you have said 
earlier and there is an invocation of a basis to refuse 
answering questions which is not a legally valid basis.              
MS MYENI:   Chairperson am I allowed to respond? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS MYENI:   Thank you.  There are no contradictions at all 
I have Chairperson an experience of being not trusted for 
anything I say.  So anything I would say Chairperson no 
matter how loud or how much I jump it will never sit 
because you know that we are born to be criminals number 
1, number 2, I have been categorised as a liar.  These 
matters do not gel at all I can assist in this regard what I 
meant.  My past at SAA was to turn the airline around I 
was not told about certain areas that are preserved that I 
20 
should not touch.  So my field was to touch certain areas 
of the operations not hands on in terms of operations but 
at a distance because I have never been a CEO of SAA 
which is something that some people have continued to 
think that I have been a CEO of SAA.   
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 66 of 148 
 
I have never been involved in operations but I have 
been involved at high level, at strategic level that is one.  
Now these issues when I say a shareholder meeting is a 
shareholder preserved area that has nothing to do with the 
Chairperson.  So Ms Hofmeyr need to understand one thing 
when the shareholder calls a meeting the Chairperson has 
no role but when the Chairperson looks at where the 
organisation or the entity of the government is losing 
money, pockets of corruption, untested contracts that dates 
as way back as 1934 when the airline was established not 
10 
just in the market on certain supplies or keeping them 
confining contracts within a certain grouping.   
That was my cardinal thing Chairperson.  Now I am 
saying I have had an opportunity to work with the great 
leaders that I reported to that I would sit with on one and 
one at their invitation Chairperson because part of the role 
of the Chairperson is a go between the shareholder 
Ministry and the Board.  The Minister can call the whole 
Board, the Minister can call the Board the Chairperson and 
the deputy, the Chairperson can call any member of the 
20 
Board that could be available to understand what is 
happening. So these matter that I am being drawn to 
respond to is a preserve of the shareholder.   
Therefore, it is not about wanting to respond or not  
wanting to respond and it is not about saying I wish the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 67 of 148 
 
Minister would take seriously issues of corruption at SAA 
issues of where the airline was bleeding in terms of its 
financial 
performance, 
profitability, 
onerous 
contracts, 
aircraft leases, missiles that are based in countries in 
foreign countries instead of creating jobs in the country.   
So I am saying these are chalk and cheese it does 
not belong together.  So I repeat and I stick by the 
comment I made earlier to say I wish the same energy that 
would have been given in terms of the challenges facing 
the airline would be the same energy given in terms of the 
10 
Minister giving an ear oversight structures of the airline in 
terms of parliamentary portfolio committees SCOPA would 
give when they raise an issue of where the airline is losing 
money to the extent Chair you have the reports, you have 
some letters that I have written to Ministers not one 
Minister raising issues about current issues in terms of 
orchestrated freefall  of the airline.   
But Chair I am saying my cousin I seen was not to 
be  
told that the airline has to be privatised that is what I am 
20 
saying and that is what I said I was not meaning to say I 
would be involved when the shareholder Minister calls a 
meeting then I must be party to it or I must make decisions 
around that.  I cannot comment on a meeting being called 
by the Minister nor can I make inputs in the meeting that is 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 68 of 148 
 
called shareholder meeting.   
No 
Chairperson 
is 
involved 
in 
a 
shareholder 
meeting except for when the Minister asks you questions 
such as have you sent out the notice because there is a 
timeline in terms of the notice of the shareholder meeting 
or AGM which is 21 days and at the role of the company 
secretary in consultation with the Chairperson but to ask 
for calling her meeting and the decisions that the Minister 
makes around whatever that she wants to say in the 
shareholder meeting, thanks Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   One of the things you have said is that 
you raised certain issues with I think you said SCOPA if I 
am not mistaken.                                           
MS MYENI:   I did so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just want to mention you may or you 
may not be aware that for quite some time I have said that 
the Commission is very interested in seeing what various 
bodies did or did not do or did what they should not have 
done or did not do what they should have done.  That may 
have 
contributed 
to 
some 
of 
the 
issues 
that 
the 
20 
Commission is looking into.  If you talk about corruption at 
SOE’s and you see where a lot of SOE’s are with their 
financial situation is at the moment to the extent that 
corruption may have contributed to that one of the issues 
the Commission once is interested in is.  Where were 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 69 of 148 
 
bodies that were supposed to oversee these SOE’s?  
Where was parliament?  What was parliament doing?  Did 
it do its job?  Did the various committees of parliament do 
its job of oversight over the years over these SOE’s?  Did 
they become aware of certain challenges?  What did they 
do about those challenges?   
So that is one of the issues that I have been saying  
that the Commission is very interested in because one of 
the things that the Commission must do is to say how did 
we come to be where we are in regard to certain matters 
10 
including SOE’s and corruption and so on and who did not 
do their job and what should be done to make sure that the 
situation is remedied.  What should be done to make sure 
that this does not happen again and we cannot do that 
without looking at whether everybody did their job the way 
they were supposed to do.   
So to the extent that you may have raised certain 
issues with certain bodies such as parliament or SCOPA 
which you might feel might not have been given the 
attention that it should have been given you must feel free 
20 
once again to supply that to the Commission because the 
Commission wants to see where things may have gone 
wrong and who might not have done their job the way they 
should have done, okay.                
MS MYENI:   Thank you very much Chairperson.  
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 70 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Ms Hofmeyr.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair it is important at this point given 
what Ms Myeni said just before your response to indicate 
that the privilege against self-incrimination is capable of 
being abused. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.    
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is a privilege that protects persons 
who 
by 
answering 
a 
question 
are 
likely 
to 
expose 
themselves to a criminal charge.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.    
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now in all that Ms Myeni said before 
your response a moment ago there was not an indication 
that being asked why in her view it would be appropriate to 
ask 
only 
the 
complaining 
members 
to 
account 
for 
themselves and not the other members of the Board to 
account for themselves in what was a dysfunctional 
situation.   
At no point in Ms Myeni’s address to you moments 
ago did she say that answering that question is likely to 
expose her to a criminal charge but for previously trotting 
20 
out the words I am inclined not to answer the question or I 
refuse not to answer the question or I request not to 
answer the question because it may incriminate me.  Let 
me just remind all of us what Ms Myeni did say she said 
that she did not want to answer the question because – 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 71 of 148 
 
and again I try to take it down exactly, what Ms Myeni says 
does not sink in.  She declined to answer the question 
because 
she 
expressed 
discomfort 
about 
doing 
so, 
previously today Ms Myeni has indicated that she believes 
that there is a narrative against her and in addition she 
has indicated that she is uncomfortable answering matters 
that are the preserve of the shareholder.   
Chair not one of those reasons is a legally valid 
reason for refusing to answer a question put to her by this 
Commission by its Evidence Leaders and by you Chair and 
10 
so there is a point I submit where if Chair you were to take 
the view that this privilege is being abused you could 
direct Ms Myeni to answer the questions and not one of 
those reasons that I have just highlighted are reasons 
found within the privilege against self-incrimination.   
Remember 
Chair 
yesterday 
with 
respect 
I 
delineated  
the test it cannot be invoked but for there being a real 
possibility, a reasonable ground that the answer may tend 
to expose the person to a criminal charge.  It has got to be 
20 
real, appreciable not imaginary and not unsubstantial and 
Ms Myeni’s latest explanation for why she is not answering 
these questions is I submit nothing short of imaginary and 
unsubstantial because they are not reasons that exists in 
law as a basis for refusing.  
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 72 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Buthelezi do you want to say 
anything or not really?        
ADV BUTHELEZI:   No, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright and the question that you 
had put Ms Hofmeyr was whether she found it sensible that 
those who were sort to be removed by way of that 
resolution where all those who had complained about her, 
her leadership, is that right?          
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, and not her because…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And not her.  
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And the force of the question because 
we here to give Ms Myeni an opportunity to respond to 
what was going on and what has been said about what was 
going on at SAA.  There is fractions in the Board there are 
no doubt complaints on both sides. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   That goes before the Minister but rather 
than asking for all of the Board members to account it is 
the six complaining Board members plus Dr Naithani who 
are asked and not the remaining three and the question I 
20 
would like to seek Ms Myeni’s guidance on is does she 
believe that is an appropriate approach.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Myeni you did give the correct 
reasons when you did not want to answer that question.  
So I am going to ask you to answer it, Ms Hofmeyr is going 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 73 of 148 
 
to repeat it, repeat it Ms Hofmeyr.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair, Ms Myeni at this stage 
by October of 2014 there is in the view of the Department 
of Public Enterprises a dysfunctional Board at SAA and 
there are complaints by the six Board members against you 
and there is your response complaining about them.   
But a special meeting is called asking only the six  
plus, Dr Naithani to present reasons why they should not 
be removed and I asked you as a consequence whether 
you think that that was an appropriate approach to take 
10 
given that – and not to ask you and the remaining other 
two members for your account of why you should not be 
removed.      
MS MYENI:   Chairperson I will never abuse any privilege 
that I am given by this Commission therefore my answer 
remains.  I am not going to answer this question it will 
certainly incriminate me if I respond to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well remember that we – I emphasised 
yesterday why it is important to articulate the basis of what 
you called the preference not to answer and I indicated 
20 
that there may be occasions when I might make a ruling 
that you have to answer a certain question depending on 
each one and I did say that either today or at some stage 
we will look at the questions all the questions you did not 
answer and I will see if there are somewhere I take the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 74 of 148 
 
view that I should require you to answer.  So bearing in 
mind what you said earlier on which Ms Hofmeyr has 
repeated.  I have said that this one I am requiring you to 
answer.         
MS MYENI:   I do not know Chair that is my answer.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright, Ms Hofmeyr.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Ms Myeni what then did 
happen – oh we must just go to what Mr Mpondo’s 
response was to having received that resolution and for 
that purpose we need to just go back into his affidavit.  You 
10 
will find that in the same bundle we have been working in 
DD34B and we need page 1224 at paragraph 45.    
CHAIRPERSON:   1224?  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  
MS MYENI:   I have got it Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Actually I would like to start one 
paragraph higher if we may at paragraph 44 on that page.  
What Mr Mpondo is dealing with here is the notice came to 
him – actually let us pick it up at 43 if we may.  He records 
20 
there: 
“The notice came as a complete surprise to me and 
as I understand it also to the other Board members 
mentioned in the notice.  As the Board was 
proceeding with the business of running SAA with 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 75 of 148 
 
the last meeting being around 19 September 2014 
which was Chaired by Ms Lepule and pursuing the 
issues the Board had with the leadership of the 
Chairperson.  There was nothing that had happened 
at the time which gave me the impression that the 
Minister was not happy with my or the Board’s 
performance.  I was perplexed by the receipt of the 
notice as there had been no warning or indication 
that it was forthcoming.” 
Then he goes on at paragraph 44: 
10 
“Given this notice it seem to me that there was 
already a predetermined outcome of this meeting 
and that there was nothing for me to present 
particularly as there was nothing I had done wrong 
or needed to make representations in respect of.  I 
did not understand what had caused this notice for 
my removal to be sent I therefore after much 
deliberation decided to give the Minister the space 
she clearly needed and resigned from the Board 
through a resignation letter I presented on or about 
20 
the 17 t h of October 2014.” 
At paragraph 45 he says: 
“There was no attempt made by me or to the best of 
my knowledge by other directors who had signed 
the 
letter 
of 
28 
January 
2014 
to 
solicit 
an 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 76 of 148 
 
explanation why the Minister wanted to remove us 
from the Board.  At the time I was not aware of any 
complaints or allegations having being levelled 
against me and none have been made or come to 
light subsequent to my departure.” 
Ms Myeni what I would like to ask you in the light of Mr 
Mpondo’s account there is do you have any insight as to 
whether the outcome of that process was predetermined? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson may I not answer that question I 
do not want to incriminate myself.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did the Minister or anybody in the 
Ministry or the Department of Public Enterprises speak to 
you or write to you about an intention to remove some of 
your colleagues who are on the Board before this notice 
was sent because I would have imagined that you being 
the leader the Chairperson.  
If the Minister said that some of your colleagues 
needed to be removed one would have expected that she 
would have had a discussion with the Leader to hear what 
the leader might have to say about an intention to remove 
20 
some of his or her colleagues and how that would affect 
the functioning of the Board and so on.  Did anybody from 
the Ministry or the department speak to you or write to you 
about that before the notice was sent?         
MS MYENI:   I do not know Chair.  
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 77 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not know, okay alright thank you, 
Ms Hofmeyr.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni I would like to move for a 
moment if we may from SAA matters to another entity of 
which you were Chairperson and that Mhlathuze Water 
Board.  So I would like to go to the evidence that the 
Commission has received in relation to that matter.   
Let me just make it clear I will return to certain SAA 
matters but the evidence at this point has reached the 
stage in SAA where those members have resigned and you 
10 
are retained.  Ms Myeni this is in the October 2014 
appointments.  Can you tell us who you were retained with 
from October 2014 on the Board?  
MS MYENI:   Chair may I not say anything in regard to the 
question that is being posed unless I incriminate myself.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni can I just clarify I have asked 
if you can assist us with telling us who remained on the 
Board with you at SAA in October 2014 and you are 
declining to answer that question because it may expose 
you to a criminal charge.  
20 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson I indicated that I must be 
comfortable answering questions regarding South African 
Airways matters and some questions that I might not also 
become possible to answer and as a result I said I would 
like to take each question as it comes.  
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 78 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Ms Hofmeyr seeks to confirm that 
you would like not to answer the question as to which 
members of the Board remained after the resignation of 
these six or seven members because you fear that 
answering that question may expose you to a criminal 
charge.  She seeks to confirm whether that is the reason 
why you do not want to answer which members of the 
Board remained after these six or seven had resigned.         
MS MYENI:   With respect Chairperson sometime you 
answer one question that leads to the other question.  So it 
10 
is important that I keep answering the way in which makes 
me comfortable.  At the right time Chair maybe in another 
forum I can be able to freely answer that question.  The 
only thing I can talk about Chairperson is as the person 
sitting before you.   
I remained at SAA until 2017 there I can talk about 
myself. Remember Chair the judgement around issues that 
have been alleged by other have been put or levelled 
against me are known as a leader of South African Airways 
of which that judgment has made a recommendation that 
20 
the NPA perhaps configures further investigation on some 
of those matters that they have raised and what they found 
against me in terms of being a director I know for decisions 
that I never took alone.  So it is important Chair that I 
answer as I feel comfortable and I see – as I see fit.  
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 79 of 148 
 
Because I have got to use my judgment.  I am not a legal 
person and I also want to assume Chair that I am not on 
trial.  I am responding to allegations.  I am responding to 
allegations that have another side which need to be tested 
somewhere.  And I do not know whether the ears that are 
listening some investigators that are working with the 
commission including the media is waiting somewhere out 
there to say I have answered this way here.  I have 
incriminated myself here.  I have done this.  I have done 
that.  So it is important Chair to – to invoke my right or 
10 
perhaps the privilege let me not say my right – the privilege 
that the commission has given me and which I appreciate.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – but Ms Myeni really the question that 
is being asked is simply who else apart from you remained 
on the board after the six or seven members had – had 
resigned?  I cannot see anything that can possibly expose 
you to the criminal charge just to say oh after those six or 
seven members had remained the board – in the board it was 
me and so and so and so and so and so and so.  If later on 
20 
there is a question that might be a follow up that might 
expose you to a criminal charge then you can deal with that 
one but I cannot see anything that could really expose you to 
a criminal charge just to say who else remained on the board 
after the six or seven members had left.  You understand? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 80 of 148 
 
MS MYENI:  I do understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if there is a – if there is a follow up 
question later on that might expose you to a criminal charge 
that might be different.  But on this one it just seems 
something very innocuous really. 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I am willing to assist you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  As I said Chair I am here to – to be of 
assistance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS MYENI:  And also to ensure that I do not do a [00:02:55] 
that I am not. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes.  If you look at… 
MS MYENI:  I am not going to assist you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes if you… 
MS MYENI:  So Chairperson I am going to – I am going to 
the minutes of the – please may I be given an opportunity?  I 
am going through the minutes Chairperson of the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got a page I could refer you to.  I 
have got a page that I could refer you to 1227. 
20 
MS MYENI:  The minutes [00:03:24] of 2013 was it February 
or May. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS MYENI:  Where I said you do not have a signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh Ms Hofmeyr are you able to – assist 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 81 of 148 
 
where we would find those minutes?  I think she wants to 
look at the names of the board members. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes certainly.  It is actually just a few 
pages on.  It is page 1247. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1247. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   Have you got it? 
MS MYENI:  Yes I have it thank you very much Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  When – if I see this - the people who were 
present in that meeting then I am going to be able to identify 
the people that were left in the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  So it is myself at the top. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  And then Ms Y Kwinana as number 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  And then Advocate LG Nkosi Thomas and in 
20 
number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 as number 6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  And then in terms of the executive directors it 
would have been the acting Chief Executive Officer as well 
as the CFO. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 82 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay – okay.   
MS MYENI:  That would – out of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Okay 
so 
in 
terms 
of 
non-executive 
directors those who remained were yourself, Ms Kwinana 
and Advocate LG Nkosi Thomas? 
MS MYENI:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Thank you Ms Myeni.  Ms 
Hofmeyr. 
MS MYENI:  The reason why Chair I opening here is because 
– sorry Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  There could have been the – ja I did not want to 
only say any other person in fact I had forgotten about – 
about Nkosi Thomas. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay no that is alright.  Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni as I understand the – the events 
of 2014 Ms Nkosi Thomas had resigned earlier in 2014. She 
was not still around in October of 2014. Do you recall that? 
MS MYENI:  You see Chairperson what I said that I do not 
like to answer a question that is going to lead me to 
20 
something again that will put me in bad light.  Because now 
this is a [00:06:38] question of I was asked.  I am being 
asked a question to remember the occurrences of 2013 and 
deliberately I said may I not answer.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  But… 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 83 of 148 
 
MS MYENI:  And Chair – and Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  The questions I was given for this commission 
are before me.  Now for me to remember some of the 
questions that I am being asked and for me to remember the 
occurrences of 2103 my focus was on the issues that were 
raised in your letter Chair because I thought maybe the letter 
that – that has been sent to me it talks to issues that would 
be addressed at – before this commission.  Now I must 
remember that Nkosi Thomas resigned.  So I have told a lie 
10 
that Nkosi Thomas remained.  So this is why Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MYENI:  I am saying I will never abuse the privilege but 
let me be allowed Chairperson to say may I not answer a 
question because today I am now understanding that I am 
answering everything about SAA but not – I mean if these 
things were on my – I do not see the page – on the letter 
that came from the – from the commission Chairperson those 
are things that are specific that were raised – that were 
specific that I was told I must come prepared or I must 
20 
respond to.  But who gets appointed in the board, who 
resigns in the board, who stays in the board I am being 
honest Chairperson I did not look into that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I – I hear what you say Ms Myeni.  I 
know that sometimes when people appear in court or in a 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 84 of 148 
 
forum like this they are extra cautious about what they say 
because they understand that lawyers will try and hold them 
to whatever they have said and they do not want to say 
something unless they are sure about it.  But for example 
with regard to the resignation – whether Ms – Advocate 
Nkosi Thomas had resigned or not you might not remember.  
If you genuinely do not remember it is an acceptable answer 
that you do not remember whether she had resigned by then 
or not.  Obviously if you do remember that she had resigned 
you can say she – she had resigned or if you think she had 
10 
not resigned you can say so.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair all that is required of witnesses in 
this commission is that they tell the truth.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  That a witness makes a mistake is not a 
lie.  If Ms Myeni cannot remember something it is – she is 
fully within her rights to do so.   Chair what is not a valid 
basis for declining to answer a question is that it will put a 
witness in a bad light. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And what Ms Myeni keeps invoking as a 
ground for not answering question is that they may put her in 
a bad light, that she is not comfortable with them, that there 
is a judgment in other civil proceedings, that the NPA maybe 
investigating matters and that I think she said earlier ears 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 85 of 148 
 
may be listening to what she says.  Chair if Ms Myeni 
continues for those reasons to invoke the privilege then we 
will submit to you in due course that it is being abused.  But 
should we move onto the Mhlatuze matters? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe – maybe Ms Myeni you could 
deal with this because I cannot think of any crime that you 
could be exposing yourself to if you say yes I know Ms 
Thomas had resigned by October 2013/2014 or no I – she 
had not resigned or – or I cannot remember whether she had 
resigned or not.  I cannot see what crime you could be 
10 
exposing yourself to.  Do you want to indicate whether you 
have any recollection as to whether she had resigned or – or 
what the position is? 
MS MYENI:  I do not have any recollection Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. Chair if we still have a bit of 
time I would like to make a bit of headway. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Into the next topic if we may with your 
leave? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is fine. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Ms Myeni are you aware that 
Mr X testified before this commission about receiving money 
from your son’s company Premier Attraction? 
MS MYENI:  Sorry Chairperson who is Mr X? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 86 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  He was a witness who presented evidence 
before the commission and in respect of whose evidence you 
were given a Rule 3.3 Notice. 
MS MYENI:  Well Chairperson he will go as Mr X. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
MS MYENI:  He will go as Mr X Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes I made a ruling that he should be 
referred to as Mr X for reasons that were dealt with at the 
time.  So we will refer to him as Mr X. 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson what is the subject – what is the 
10 
reason if I may ask so that I can comfortably answer? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Evidence was… 
MS MYENI:  Yes I – why is he referred to as Mr X? 
CHAIRPERSON:  An application was made before me for me 
to make a ruling that his identity should not be disclosed if I 
recall correctly.  And – and I therefore – I was satisfied that 
there were proper grounds for invoking those powers and I 
said his identity should not be disclosed.  That is my 
recollection and I said he should be referred to as Mr X.  
There would be – there would be a record of that in the 
20 
record of the proceedings.  There might be a date if you wish 
to see the transcript of what was said at the time of that 
ruling you – that could be made available to you.   
MS MYENI:  Thank you very much Chairperson.  No out of 
the greatest interest Chair I have read there the transcripts. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 87 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  For the first time Chairperson I read Mr X file – 
full file – full document and we are [00:14:27} Chairperson 
has the SIU investigation against Mr X.  But Chairperson I 
am going to ask you as well stoically Chair stoically. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Would you like us to take a lunch 
adjournment and you … 
MS MYENI:  No, no Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.    
MS MYENI:  Please do not.  I am saying stoically Chair this 
10 
is a distraction of a family member.  Mr X is my family.  His 
children are my children.  Mr X is my family Chairperson is 
my brother.  There is no truth in hiding his identity.  Mr X is 
family to me he is my brother. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Ms Myeni.   
MS MYENI:  That is why I am saying Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:  Stoically. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:  I am asking you a question. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni.  If I have made an order. 
MS MYENI:  I am not – I am not breaking Chair or I do not 
want you to break just because I am taking like – 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no 
MS MYENI:  I am slow in talking. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 88 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no. 
MS MYENI:  It is because Chair our system continues to 
deplete the fibre of our society. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but just hang on a … 
MS MYENI:  I am not Chair I am not going to talk to issues 
Chair that pertain to what the so called Mr X said because of 
the fear that has been presented before you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:  This is an honest man. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni. 
10 
MS MYENI:  That I have known for over 25 years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni.  If.. 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson are you talking? 
CHAIRPERSON:  If I have made an order – yes… 
MS MYENI:  I am sorry I beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  Or did you not – did you not hear me? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni I – I am controlling the 
proceedings in the commission.   
MS MYENI:  Yes Chair. 
20 
MS MYENI:  I give you an opportunity to say something and I 
give everybody an opportunity to say something.  At this 
stage I want to say if there is an order that I have made it 
needs to be respected. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chair. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 89 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am going to adjourn now to consider what 
should be done about what you have just done. 
MS MYENI:  Well Chair it was not intended to break any 
orders.  I did not intend to say anything untoward or making 
your order not to be valid or disrespecting you Chairperson.  
My apologies.  But Chair I am saying this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no, no.  We are going to have to 
adjourn for… 
MS MYENI:  Not, not out of disrespect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For... 
10 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  When we come back I will hear what 
you have to say.  I have got to reflect on what you have just 
done.  Let us take the lunch adjournment. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us – we will resume not at two but 
quarter past two.  We adjourn. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES:    
CHAIRPERSON:   During the... just before the lunch break, 
Ms Myeni mentioned somebody’s name that should not have 
been mentioned.  That she not mention it in terms of an 
order that I had made and I have just explained to her that I 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 90 of 148 
 
made an order to object to the identity of the person.   
 
I said that we would adjourn for lunch to reflect on this 
development which is quite serious.  I met with the... with 
Ms Myeni’s legal team and with the evidence leader.  And 
they both have something to say on the way forward.  I am 
going to give them a chance to do so.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR ADDRESSES THE CHAIR:   Thank you, 
Chair.  Chair, Section 5 of the Commissions Act makes it an 
offence for a person who wilfully obstruct the Commission in 
the performance of its functions.   
10 
 
That section is reinforced by similar provisions in 
Regulation 
12 
of 
the 
Regulations 
that 
have 
been 
promulgated in accordance of the establishment of this 
Commission. 
 
Chair, 
the 
Commission’s 
functioning 
depends 
on 
witnesses who have information that is relevant and valuable 
for the Commission it receives.  To be in a position to do so 
even when they fear for their lives and the personal safety of 
their families. 
 
Chair, today Ms Myeni has breached that section of the 
20 
Commissions Act and Regulation 12 and I say that for four 
reasons.  The order that you made Chair concerning the 
identity of Mr X was granted because you were satisfied that 
disclosure of his identity would threaten his and his family’s 
personal safety. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 91 of 148 
 
 
Secondly.  In response to Ms Myeni’s question about 
who Mr X was.  You made it clear to her that you had given a 
ruling, that his identity is not to be revealed because you 
were persuaded that protection of his personal safety was at 
risk. 
 
Ms Myeni then stated that she had read the full 
transcript of Mr X’s evidence and if she did so, she read in 
detail the basis on which the application for his evidence to 
be given in camera and for his identity not to be revealed 
was made. 
10 
 
She would also have seen the basis on which you made 
your decision to grant the application.  And that, fourthly, 
was all preceded the effort of the legal team of the 
Commission to notify Ms Myeni the Sunday before Mr X’s 
evidence was to be given on the Monday. 
 
What was done on that Sunday, was communication was 
sent to Ms Myeni’s then attorneys and further calls were 
made to confirm that that communication had been received.  
If I may just indicate what that communication said.   
 
It advised Ms Myeni that, on the next day, Monday the 
20 
17t h of February, the Commission’s legal team would be 
intending to present the evidence of a witness whose identity 
could not be revealed because of issues of personal safety. 
 
She was told precisely where the hearing would be 
taking place and she was given a copy of the application for 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 92 of 148 
 
the proceedings to take place in camera and for his identity 
not to be revealed. 
 
She was told, in no uncertain terms, that his evidence 
would implicate or may implicate as participation in various 
actions of corruption, fraud and money laundering.  
 
And she was further advised that if she intended to 
oppose the application, she had a right to be present at the 
hearing 
and 
to 
make 
any 
application 
she 
deemed 
appropriate, in the light of what she was informed, would be 
an application for his identity not be revealed. 
10 
 
So against that factual background Chair.  Ms Myeni, 
despite those facts, on four successive occasions revealed 
the identity of Mr X.   
 
Chair, we submit that that conduct is a wilful obstruction 
of the Commission in the performance of its functions.  It 
reveals a disrespect for this Commission and its processes.  
And it will send a chill over these proceedings because it is 
liable to deter future whistle-blow witnesses from coming 
forward. 
 
We submit that this is an extremely serious matter.  And 
20 
we submit that you should direct the Secretary of the 
Commission to lay a charge against Ms Myeni for breaching 
Section 5 of the Commissions Act so that justice can take its 
course.   
 
We further submit that any explanation of Ms Myeni’s 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 93 of 148 
 
conduct that may be proffered by her or any indications that 
may in due course of regret that come from her, are matters 
that are appropriately to be reserved for her criminal trial on 
this charge, should the NPA decide to prosecute. 
 
They are not any offers of explanation.  Or contrition are 
not and could never be grounds for not directing that the 
charge be laid. 
 
Chair, it is our submission that the proper functioning of 
this Commission requires matters to be dealt with resolutely 
and swiftly so that there can be no doubt that people who 
10 
knowingly undermine this Commission will be brought to 
book. 
 
Chair, those are our submissions for the way forward.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Ms Hofmeyr.  Mr Buthelezi, do 
you want to say something? 
ADV BUTHELEZI ADDRESSES THE CHAIR:   Thank you, 
Chair.  As per the discussions we held in chambers Chair.  
We have requested to make a formal submission to you 
Chair.  Ms Hofmeyr has made her submissions.  Our 
submission is not necessarily a submission in response but 
20 
we deem the situation serious and we thought let us come to 
the Chair with a formal submission. 
 
And 
as 
far 
as 
all 
the 
requests 
and 
prayers 
of 
Ms Hofmeyr, we will also deal with those in terms of the 
submission that we make to you Chair. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 94 of 148 
 
 
So I do not want to get into an exchange over for to date 
the merits of what Ms Hofmeyr has stated.  We will give our 
submission and request that the Chair defer his ruling in this 
issue to having received that submission by the end of 
Tuesday next week with regards to how we proceed. 
 
We have also indicated to Chair that we are still...  We 
will proceed and we are still awaiting the Chair’s directions 
in terms of how the proceedings be conducted. 
 
But the indication from Ms Hofmeyr is that they want to 
proceed.  So we will proceed accordingly.  Unfortunately, 
10 
Chair I cannot take the point beyond that.  I do not have 
those instructions right now. 
 
And ours is to say, we will consult after the session and 
try to get proper instruction on how we will deal with this but 
we will be making a formal submission.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I know that we spoke in chambers and I 
mentioned 
the 
date 
of 
Tuesday 
as 
a 
possibility 
for 
submissions.  
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I am just thinking now because 
20 
whatever 
explanation, I think it cannot 
be 
a 
lengthy 
explanation.   
 
I am wondering whether we should not bring the dates 
forward on the basis that after the hearing or this evening, 
there ought to be an opportunity to start working on that. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 95 of 148 
 
 
And if you do not finish, then maybe at some stage 
tomorrow you might be done and say that I should... you 
should finish whatever explanation or submissions you want 
to furnish by Monday morning.  You can use the weekend as 
well. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would that be fine? 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   That is okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am going to say.  I do not know what 
explanation Ms Myeni will be given in due course but not 
knowing what explanation you will give on the face of what 
happened here which we all know.   
 
What you did is really something that, it seems to me 
would discourage other witnesses who want to give evidence 
before the Commission anonymously when they fear for their 
safety or their lives.  Something that is very crucial to the 
work of information.   
 
There are, I believe, many people who would like to 
20 
share information with the Commission and who have been 
wanting to do so over the past two and a half years. 
 
But who are not saying that their lives would be 
threatened or their safety would be threatened but who 
simply feel that they will be victimised in terms of work, in 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 96 of 148 
 
terms of business, in terms of their careers and they are not 
coming forward. 
 
And then there are those who really fear for their safety, 
their lives and their safety of their family members yet who 
have crucial information that is important for the work of the 
Commission. 
 
Now if something like this happens and happens right in 
the Commission, it undermines the work of the Commission 
in a very serious way.   
 
To say the least, I am disappointed in you that you did 
10 
this particularly after I had said that I made an order that is 
against, it should not be revealed.  I did not expect this from 
you.   
 
From yesterday, my impression was that you were 
showing respect to the Commission.  So I did not expect 
this.  Obviously, if somebody disrespects an order that I 
have made, it seems to me that that person disrespects me 
as well. 
 
I am going to wait for the submissions that your legal 
team will bring.  They will bring it – deliver it to the 
20 
Commission by Monday morning.  Mr Buthelezi, ten o’clock? 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   That is okay Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is fine?  Ja.  By Monday ten o’clock and 
I will then have regard to it and then take it from there.  
Alright.  But we are going to proceed.  I think I must just say 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 97 of 148 
 
to the media and other people who may have heard the 
breach of the order that I made.   
 
That 
they 
should 
not 
use 
this 
breach 
to 
justify, 
mentioning the name of Mr X.  They must continue to respect 
the order that was issued as they have done before and not 
mention the name that Ms Myeni mentioned just before we 
adjourned for lunch.  So that order continues to stand.  
Okay.  Let us continue. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Myeni, before the 
lunch adjournment, we had moved to the area concerning the 
10 
time that you were Chairperson of the Mhlathuze’s Water 
Board and I had indicated that Mr X gave evidence about 
having received money from your son’s company, Premier 
Attraction. 
 
There were three deposits of money that he received. 
The first was on the 24t h of October 2015 in the amount of 
one million rand. 
 
The second was on the 11t h of December 2015 in the 
amount 
of 
R 1.15 million 
and 
the 
third 
was 
on 
the 
2n d of February 2016 in the amount of one million rand. 
20 
 
Are you aware of those deposits having been made by 
Mr X into your son’s company, Premier Attraction’s bank 
account? 
MS MYENI:   I have read it about it.  I then am aware of it.  I 
read it yesterday as well. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 98 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Were you aware of it at the time? 
MS MYENI:   My response is, I am aware of what the 
question has been asked regarding the business between 
Mr X and my son. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And in particular, were you aware of those 
payments having been made as I have said it out? 
MS MYENI:   Not particularly but I have been aware that they 
have been doing things together. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, his evidence before this 
Commission is that he had never done any work for Premier 
10 
Attraction, never rendered any services to it and had not 
business relationship at all with Premier Attraction.   
 
I understand your evidence given moments ago is to 
suggest that that is false.  Is that a correct understanding of 
what you said? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, I am aware of the things that they 
have done together but I am – I cannot talk about business 
dealings between two people.  Therefore, I am saying I am 
aware.  I have read the transcript.  I have read mister X’s 
[name not transcribed] submission.  And I have seen bank 
20 
statements.  So I am aware of what happened between them 
but I never get involved in two business entities.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, I would caution you for the 
remainder of today not to refer to this witness as anything 
other than Mr X.  Ms Myeni, Mr X’s evidence before this 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 99 of 148 
 
Commission ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   Sorry, I beg your pardon.  I...  and honestly, I 
am feeling so bad about this whole thing because I do not 
mean to disrespect anyone.  And especially, I do not mean to 
disrespect the Commission or the Chairperson.  I am feeling 
very bad.   
 
But Ms Hofmeyr, if I have mentioned him again, I... it will 
be out...  first out of... I do not know.  I did not hear myself 
whether I said his name or not.   
 
One, it is was disbelief.  Two, it was an emotion that 
10 
came with it.  And feeling betrayed.  I apologise.  But if I 
have said it again, it is really something that I have not... I 
think my mind is not into it.  I apologise.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   I hear you questioning me.  So I am...  So that 
is why I am saying, I do not know whether I have said it 
again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay.  You will refer to him as Mr X.  
You will refer to him as Mr X. 
MS MYENI:   I will refer to Mr X, Chair.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, Mr X did not even know the 
name of the company that it made payments to him, 
according 
to 
his 
evidence 
until 
the 
Commission’s 
investigators told him the name of the company. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 100 of 148 
 
 
Can you give us any insight as to the level of the 
relationship between Mr X and your son and your son’s 
business, Premier Attraction? 
MS MYENI:   Chair, may I not answer that question?  I would 
prefer my son to respond to the question.  I do not want to 
incriminate myself on business activities that I am not 
involved in. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, with respect, I do not 
understand that.  I do not understand how you can 
incriminate yourself in respect of something you are not 
10 
involved in.   
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to the question 
that is being asked because I do not want to incriminate 
myself? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, what Mr X testified was that he 
did not know Premier Attraction at all.  He had no business 
relationship with Premier Attraction.  What would happen 
before he received these payments is, that you would 
contact him and you would alert him to the fact that money 
20 
was coming into his account.  Do you confirm that that is 
what you did? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to this 
question?  I do not want to incriminate myself ...[indistinct] 
[distortion present – speaker not clear] 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 101 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   He said that it is one of the funds that he 
was instructed to deliver in cash to you and so he made a 
number of withdrawals between the 27t h of October 2015 and 
later November 2015.  Did you instruct Mr X to withdraw 
cash 
from 
the 
amount 
that 
he 
had 
received 
on 
the 
24t h of October and provided to you? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to the question 
in case I incriminate myself?   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr X testified about the fact that he 
considers you a very good family friend and that he had on 
10 
many occasions visited you.  And as a consequence of that, 
the people at your home where – that work for you, would 
have no difficulty with him coming to the property when you 
were not there.   
 
Can you confirm that that was the nature of the 
relationship and that he did have access to your property on 
occasion when you were not there? 
MS MYENI:   No person has access to my property without 
my permission. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
20 
MS MYENI:   [Indistinct] [distortion present – speaker not 
clear] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, it is a different question.  My question 
was, did he on occasion come to your property when you 
were not there? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 102 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let me ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   [distortion present] ...[indistinct] not aware of 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   I am not aware.  Sorry, Chair.  I spoke on top of 
your voice.  Sorry, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MYENI:   On top of you responding.  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you have answered.  I think what 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MS MYENI:   Did you ask me, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think what Ms Hofmeyr had in mind is – 
or understands that Mr X testified that the nature of the 
relationship between himself and yourself or your family was 
such, that even when you were at home, he could come to 
your home if there were other people and there would no 
problem.  That is what ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   That is not true Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not true? 
MS MYENI:   That is not true. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS MYENI:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   He said when he would make these visits 
to your home, if you were there, he would hand over the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 103 of 148 
 
cash that you requested from him to you directly but when 
you were not there, he would leave the cash somewhere in 
your office and be somewhat careful to conceal it.  Are you 
aware of that is what took place? 
MS MYENI:   I am not aware. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So he did not ever give you cash to you 
directly? 
MS MYENI:   I am not aware Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I was just seeking clarity.  I realise that 
my framing of the question as crisp as I would have liked it 
10 
to be.  I was asking whether he ever gave you cash 
personally in your hand? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, the question is to open-ended.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS MYENI:   I must be told ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   ...what cash ...[indistinct] before.  If I give you 
cash and if he gives me cash what it is for.  So the question 
too broad and open-ended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ja, in fairness Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   ...I accept that.  I have been focussing in 
on 
a 
period 
between 
the 
27t h 
of 
October 
and 
late 
November 2015 when, according to Mr X ...[intervenes]  
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 104 of 148 
 
MS MYENI:   I have lost you there. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry. 
MS MYENI:   I have lost you.  Sorry. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I want to give you a greater clarity as to 
my question.  I was focussing on the period between 
27 October 2015 and late November 2015.   
 
And it was during that period that Mr X said he would 
come to your home to give your cash and that was cash that 
he withdrew from his bank account after your son’s company, 
Premier Attraction paid him a million rand.   
10 
 
And I would like to know from you whether you confirm 
that that did take place? 
MS MYENI:   I am not aware of that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And during that same period, can you 
confirm whether he left cash, which on his version he 
withdraw on your instruction from that original million rand 
and left it in your office for you? 
MS MYENI:   That he will then? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   In your office, in your home. 
MS MYENI:   A million rand in my office? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, let me be clear.  His evidence was.  
He got the initial payment of a million rand on the 
24t h of October 2015 and then he would make successive 
withdrawals 
of 
cash 
over 
the 
period 
between 
the 
27 t h of October 2015 and late November 2015.  And on 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 105 of 148 
 
occasion he would leave that cash in the office at your 
home.  Did that happen? 
MS MYENI:   Not that I remember Chairperson.  I do not 
remember that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But could it have happened? 
MS MYENI:   Sorry? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Could it have happened? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is there a possibility may have happened 
...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   [Indistinct]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is there a possibility ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   [Indistinct] and answer.   [distortion present – 
speaker unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   I have given an answer Chairperson.  I am not 
aware of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So if he ever left any cash, you 
never received cash that you had told had been left by him in 
your office or in your study at home? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, I do not have a place where a 
20 
person can walk in and give cash like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   That is accessible in my absence.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   If I am not at home, my home is not as easily 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 106 of 148 
 
accessible as I read what was being said by Mr X.  So I am 
not too sure about ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You would deny that such a thing 
...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   It is really difficult for me Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MYENI:   Sorry.  Sorry, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I am saying ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   My apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am saying you would deny that 
10 
something like that every happened? 
MS MYENI:   I am saying Chairperson, it is difficult for me to 
ever put before Mr X to say he is lying.  It is difficult. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   I mean, this is a person that I respect.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MYENI:   So it is not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not true? 
MS MYENI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   There has been evidence before this 
Commission that you have... there were... is a witness who 
has given evidence before this Commission previously, 
Mr Le Roux.  Are you aware of his evidence? 
MS MYENI:   I have not seen his... what is it?  His affidavit 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 107 of 148 
 
or his submission.  Or maybe I have seen it ...[indistinct]  
There are too many.  [distortion present – speaker unclear] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed.  Do you have a safe? 
MS MYENI:   Or is that witness...  Sorry.  Is it this one? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, no, no.  This was previously 
...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   It is on the ...[indistinct] [distortion present]  
Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry, Ms Myeni.  It was previous 
evidence given before the Commission by Mr Le Roux in 
10 
respect of which you received a Rule 3(3) notice.  Does that 
assist you? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that BOSASA? 
MS MYENI:   I received too many Rule 3(3) notices.  Maybe 
if you can just give me a more or elaborate...  Oh, sorry 
Chairperson.  You know I hardly hear when you start 
speaking ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is that so?  Okay, I wonder whether 
there is some technical problem but I wanted to say I think 
Mr le Roux that Ms Hofmeyr is speaking about is a witness 
20 
who testified about BOSASA matters.  I think Richard le 
Roux? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Richard le Roux who used to work for 
BOSASA so he would have given evidence about you 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 108 of 148 
 
relating to BOSASA.  Do you have any recollection of 
receiving his affidavit or 3.3 notice relating to BOSASA? 
MS MYENI:   I was not following, Chairperson, I would not 
have known or maybe I can remember if I see his 
submission but I am open to listening to who Mr le Roux is 
and what he is submission was about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you have a safe inside your office at 
home? 
MS MYENI:   It is not true, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, I am asking a question, do you have 
a safe inside your office at home? 
MS MYENI:   Oh sorry, I though he said, Mr le Roux said 
there is a safe inside my office.  I do not have a safe in my 
office, Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you have a safe in your garage? 
MS MYENI:   I do not have a safe in my garage. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, in relation to the second two 
payments.  Remember I indicated earlier there was a 
payment in October and then there was a payment in 
20 
December 2015 and then there was a final payment in 
February 2016.  Mr X said in relation to those second two 
payments, the one in December 2015 and the one in 
February 2016 that you instructed him to payment amounts 
into a bank account the number of which you provided to 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 109 of 148 
 
him.  Did you do so? 
MS MYENI:   I am not aware of that, Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, I just want to be clear 
because when you say you are not aware of it, I want to be 
certain as to what precisely you are denying in relation to 
Mr X’s evidence.  So that is why I am just seeking clarity.  
So did you instruct Mr X to pay money into your account – 
well, into an account you gave him in December of 2015 
and February of 2016? 
MS MYENI:   Because of the timeframes or the timelines 
10 
that you are referring to, I will not be able to recall.  
Remember, Chairperson, with respect, I have worked with 
the incumbent, just in case I make a mistake, Mr X. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr X. 
MS MYENI:   I have worked with the person, I have known 
the family from as way back as 1997.  So that is why if 
then 
there 
is 
a 
particular 
period 
referred 
to, 
the 
relationship between me and my brother broke down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr X.  You mean Mr X or …[intervenes] 
MS MYENI:   So …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you say my brother, are you 
referring to Mr X or are you referring to …[intervenes] 
MS MYENI:   I am sorry, Chair.  Sorry, Chair, for record 
purposes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you referring to somebody else or 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 110 of 148 
 
are you referring to X? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, Mr X. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright. 
MS MYENI:   We – because, Chairperson – okay, there was 
an assumption from Mr X that wherever I worked and 
whatever I would do, he knew – like, for instance, he is 
into construction.  When I was into construction I would 
call him sometimes and ask him to please assist me, I will 
be building a house for somebody, I think it was in 2001, I 
am donating a house to this family and then he would come 
10 
and build.   
I would buy material and he would do whatever that 
I asked him.  Now for me to be able to say during this 
particular period and that particular period there was 
money that was given by Mr X or I gave him money, that is 
why it is a bit difficult. 
 
In 2013 he was leading some family affairs that had 
occurred at home and at that particular time, after that – 
no, in fact at that particular time, the relationship was a bit 
strained.  We had a death in the family.  Even at that time 
20 
the relationship was a bit strained.   
We had a wedding for my half brother who worked 
for him for years.  He was sort of ducking and diving.  He 
would not look me in the eye.  At that time I did not know 
what was going on but I would even go and talk to his wife 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 111 of 148 
 
rather or talk to the daughter to say look, there is no way 
your father may not speak at my brother ’s wedding.  That 
is the kind of a relationship that we had.   
 
Now I am saying if then the period referred to is 
2015 and ’16, there was an investigation taking place at 
Umhlatuzi at that particular time and at that time every 
time I am being asked to come and sit and listen and also 
answer questions to those that were investigating, his 
name was popping up all the time and I would make sure 
that I ask him, to say would it be possible that you might 
10 
have done something like this?   
Then he would assure me that there is nothing but 
he would not pick up calls and he would not be the person 
I know, the friend I know, the family friend I know and what 
stood out at that particular time was – although I do not 
remember quite precisely the year, one of his houses got 
burnt within the premises.  He has a house for the girls, 
another back room – but big back rooms, not small 
[indistinct] 07.07 things.  So one burnt to ashes.  Now I am 
hearing this from the family members, not from him.  Then I 
20 
phoned him in a sort of reprimanding him to say how can 
you not tell me such a big thing? 
 
The other thing then, Chairperson, that I can 
mention, hoping I do not incriminate myself, was that when 
he took the second wife, the relationship was – I have 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 112 of 148 
 
always been very close to his wife, to the first wife and his 
first wife would tell me certain things to say this is what is 
happening, this is what has happened and then I am seen 
a big sister to say how.   
We did not know that this was going to happen or 
you are doing this but that thing has not changed and, 
knowing him, Chairperson, he is a very sensitive person.  
He would be emotional about issues that I would raise 
pertaining to things that I feel are not right.   
 
So I would talk to him in 2015 and ’16 about what 
10 
was doing on and also saying you cannot do these things 
that are going to compromise you and also compromise me 
because I will have to say the truth the way I know how. 
 
If, 
for 
instance, 
excuse 
me, 
you 
have 
done 
something wrong in a state entity which I preside over.  So 
that is the long and short of what I can explain regarding 
2015 and 2016 relationship.  I know I have not touched on 
Le Roux because I have not heard the question from Le 
Roux. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so I think there was the question of 
20 
whether you did or may have given him a certain account 
number in which you asked him to deposit certain monies 
during that period.  What was your answer to that? 
MS MYENI:   Chair, like I say, I am saying I will not – oh, 
ja, now I remember, sorry, Chair, thanks for assisting for 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 113 of 148 
 
me.  No, I will not remember that particular period, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, it is a very specific question.  
Is your answer that you do not remember anything about 
your dealings between Mr X and yourself in the 2015/2016 
period? 
MS MYENI:   I do not remember, Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And at that time you would be 
Chairperson of the Jacob Zuma Foundation, is that right? 
10 
MS MYENI:   Sorry, Chairperson?  I did not get the answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The question from Ms Hofmeyr is 
whether 
at 
that 
time, 
namely 
2015/2016, 
you 
were 
Chairperson of the Jacob Zuma Foundation?  That was the 
question. 
MS MYENI:   Yes, Chairperson.  Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni you have previously deposed 
to an affidavit before this Commission in response to the 
evidence of Mr Agrizzi in which you stated that all funds 
20 
received by the Jacob Zuma Foundation is done by 
electronic transfer and not cash.  Do you remember giving 
that version on affidavit? 
MS MYENI:   Which specific reference to what Agrizzi 
alleged? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 114 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, no, I am just asking if you recall 
the 
allegation. 
 
So 
is 
it 
your 
evidence 
before 
the 
Commission today that the way in which …[intervenes] 
MS MYENI:   Sorry, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, sorry, Ms Hofmeyr, I think Ms 
Myeni just wants to complete her [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
MS MYENI:   Which specific reference, Chairperson, to 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Agrizzi’s evidence. 
10 
MS MYENI:   Agrizzi. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes but the challenge I have with that 
answer, Ms Myeni, is I am interested in the facts and the 
facts do not change whether you are responding to Mr 
Agrizzi’s evidence or Mr X’s evidence, do they? 
MS 
MYENI: 
 
 
In 
order 
not 
to 
incriminate 
myself, 
Chairperson, I have written an affidavit about BOSASA and 
the statement that was issued by Agrizzi and I have been 
very specific and direct to the matter that was before the 
Commission, Chairperson, regarding BOSASA and Agrizzi. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, what was my question? 
MS MYENI:   You question is that the amounts deposited to 
the foundation are done electronically and that is how the 
donations go but I am saying it was specific, Chairperson, 
to the person that is referred to. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 115 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, that was not my question.  My 
question – that was an earlier question.  My question to 
which you gave the immediate answer was do the facts 
change depending on whether you are responding to Mr 
Agrizzi or Mr X? 
MS MYENI:   I am going to be confused here, Chairperson.  
I was still following because I thought we were talking 
about Mr X, now we are with Mr le Roux.  We are now with 
Mr Agrizzi.  So I want – I do not know, I think I am going to 
be confused. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me ask this question.  In your 
affidavit in response to Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit or evidence 
did you say that donations to the Jacob Zuma Foundation 
are made electronically? 
MS MYENI:   Well, Chairperson, I am going to, with your 
permission, can I address you a bit, Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   If the Commission would like for me to 
present on issues of the Jacob G Zuma Foundation as the 
person that has led the Foundation in terms of being its 
20 
Chairperson, may I address you this way, Chairperson?  
Number one, there were people, Chair, that were 
investigated relating Jacob G Zuma Foundation and their 
businesses were closed by association to the Jacob G 
Zuma Foundation or the association to Jacob Zuma as the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 116 of 148 
 
person that is sort of perhaps alleged to be a corrupt 
person.  That is one. 
 
Two, Chairperson, throughout my tenure as the 
Chairperson of the Jacob G Zuma Foundation, the Jacob G 
Zuma 
Foundation 
has 
been 
investigated 
since 
its 
establishment.  The Jacob G Zuma Foundation, the account 
was closed by ABSA, I think it was about 2016 or so.   
Now, Chairperson, the reason why I am addressing 
you when I said I am guilty of anything that I have done by 
association, even the people that were assisting the 
10 
Foundation were also victimised, their businesses were 
closed and we would receive correspondence from people 
who are saying we cannot assist because there is this 
challenge. 
Now my question, Chair, is that a foundation as a 
body, as an entity, a foundation is not Dudu.  A foundation 
is not my business.  Here I am answering about the 
donations that are done to the Foundation, Chairperson.  
Here I am, Chairperson, having to answer because I 
presided over the Jacob G Zuma Foundation whose money 
20 
has benefited the poor and the downtrodden. 
My question, Chair, would I be sitting here having to 
answer the same question if I was running Mr de Klerk’s 
Foundation, 
Mr 
Mbeki’s 
Foundation, 
Mr 
Mandela’s 
Foundation, Mr Motlanthe’s Foundation, Mr Ramaphosa’s 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 117 of 148 
 
Foundation?   
Would I be questioned about how the donations go 
into their Foundations?  Many enquiries from the likes of 
Piet Louis Myburgh asking me who are the donors of the 
foundation?  I would tell me staff or the administrator and 
bookkeeper and for your information, Chairperson, I had to 
convince President Zuma to say our bookkeeper must be a 
person of a certain colour, our administrator must be a 
person of certain colour because personally, I cannot be 
trusted be of the colour of my skin. 
10 
Then I said they must be the ones, Chair, who 
receives, who deposit, who release payments, those people 
of colour.  Now I said to them with the media enquiries, all 
now in the media enquiry, it is a crime to donate to the 
Jacob Zuma Foundation, it is a crime to run the Jacob 
Zuma Foundation, it is a crime to ask any private company 
or any business person for donations into the Foundation 
of President Zuma.   
Then I said to Piet Louis Myburgh, if you are doing 
an enquiry on this entity because you are not investigating 
20 
Dudu. 
 
If 
you 
are 
doing 
an 
investigation 
into 
the 
Foundations, send me questions that have been sent to De 
Klerk’s Foundation, questions that have been sent to 
Thabo Mbeki’s Foundation, his [indistinct] 19.08, send me 
questions that have been sent to Cyril Ramaphosa, the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 118 of 148 
 
President’s Foundation, Nelson Mandela’s Foundation, I 
will, through my office and the administrator, being a while 
woman and our bookkeeper, being a white woman, they will 
provide with every information you need. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay …[intervenes] 
MS 
MYENI: 
 
 
Then, 
Chairperson, 
I 
have 
gone 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us …[intervenes] 
MS MYENI:   …out of town to try and address on this 
matter.  Today I am to answer to the nation how the 
10 
donations would happen, how the – therefore, Chair, with 
your permission, I am not going to answer to Jacob G 
Zuma Foundation donations.  They must – can perhaps 
assist me by bringing everyone from the Foundation to 
answer to the issues of the Foundation so that it is not 
Dudu who answers these things that are being asked about 
the – one single Foundation in South Africa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, we have a situation where 
certain witnesses have given certain evidence with regard 
to money that they say was given to the Jacob Zuma 
20 
Foundation or was given to you, they have said whatever 
evidence and their affidavits would have been sent to the – 
to you or to the Foundation at different times.   
Now you, having been or still being Chairperson of 
the Foundation, you are the leader of the Foundation, one 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 119 of 148 
 
would expect that the leader at least would know what is 
happening in the organisation that he or she leads.  
Obviously 
it 
does 
happen 
that 
one 
does 
not 
know 
everything, depending on the size of the organisation, so 
Ms Hofmeyr is asking you questions because certain 
witnesses have given evidence that is to the effect that 
certain payments were made to the Jacob Zuma Foundation 
or were made to you in circumstances which require further 
investigation or which require the Commission to hear from 
somebody from the Foundation, say do they know about 
10 
such payments, is this the way that donations were made, 
for example, because I think Mr Agrizzi was saying that it 
was cash.   
So when I asked you the question an and I am 
going to back to the question and it is really about what 
you already have said in your affidavit that Ms Hofmeyr 
spoke about, whether you did say in your affidavit in 
response 
to 
Mr 
Agrizzi’s 
evidence 
or 
affidavit 
that 
donations to the Jacob Zuma Foundation are made by way 
of electronic transfers, so that was my question. 
20 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, I stand by what I am saying.  
That affidavit I wrote is very specific to the individual.  We 
would get deposit slips sent to us, Chairperson, or dropped 
to a certain office in Jo’burg or an office in Durban of the 
Foundation that so and so was in a fundraising event in 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 120 of 148 
 
such and such a place, he made a pledge to donate to the 
Foundation and this is a slip that he decided to go and 
deposit the money and here is a proof that he has 
honoured the pledge.   
In respect of BOSASA and Agrizzi, I addressed that 
specific matter in that regard, Chairperson.  There was a 
reason I said that, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MYENI:   Agrizzi worked for a company called BOSASA 
which I understood to be a private company, that is why I 
10 
was specific because, Chairperson, with regard to that 
particular company, when they made donations to the 
Foundation’s event of the birthday of President Zuma, we 
had asked them – we gave them a few things that this is – 
this is a plan, this is what we hope will be done and this is 
what we want to achieve, is this what we want to see for 
the day.  And that is what they did.   
They 
deposited 
the 
money 
themselves 
electronically, Chairperson, not to us, to service providers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MS MYENI:   But service providers would tell us – we 
would write thank you letters and I have indicated that, I 
referred you to that, would write thank you letters to any 
donor and sometimes the donor would say do not give us 
thank you letter.   
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 121 of 148 
 
But, Chairperson, with respect, I do not want to give 
any account about the Jacob G Zuma Foundation unless 
six 
Chairpersons 
or 
eight 
Chairpersons 
of 
various 
foundations would sit in this Commission and account 
about foundations of Presidents, current President, former 
Presidents and De Klerk Foundation, the late Tata Nelson 
Mandela Foundation, then I will be comfortable, Chair, to 
talk about the foundation of President Jacob Zuma, what it 
did, how it fundraised, the internal policies that existed in 
the Foundation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Ms Myeni, that will not be a valid 
ground for you to refuse to answer questions relating to 
the Jacob Zuma Foundation namely that there are other 
foundations which are not before the Commission.   
The position that we have is that certain witnesses 
came, made affidavits and gave evidence some of which 
may implicate or may seem to implicate the Jacob Zuma 
Foundation or you, but I am not aware of any witness who 
has given the Commission any affidavits of statements 
relating to any other foundation.  But, of course, every 
20 
affidavit 
or 
information 
that 
gets 
brought 
to 
the 
Commission is looked into and investigated on its own 
merits. 
 
One of the things that I have said is that sometimes 
one hears complaints along the lines that the investigators 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 122 of 148 
 
of the Commission or the Commission is targeting certain 
people and not others and I say, well, I just wish that those 
who make that complaint, if they know any information 
relating to corruption or state capture on the part of those 
people that they would bring it forward because the 
Commission in over the past two and a half years was 
ready to investigate whoever.   
But sometimes other people will give information 
about certain people and if those people do not give 
information about them then the Commission does not have 
10 
anything, so – but I just want to say it will not be a valid 
ground to refuse to answer questions relating to the Jacob 
Zuma Foundation to say there are other foundations which 
are not before the Commission which are not being asked 
questions because you are being asked questions based 
on evidence and affidavits that have been furnished to the 
Commission by certain witnesses.   
I certainly am not aware of any evidence or 
affidavits that has been brought by anybody in regard to 
the other foundations that you are talking about.  You 
20 
understand?  Yes, okay, alright.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, as we have done with previous 
witnesses, it is often useful and efficient in the process of 
the Commission’s hearings if a witness can be directed to 
answer 
the 
question 
crisply 
and 
then 
provide 
an 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 123 of 148 
 
explanation thereafter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I think this afternoon’s proceedings 
would march along that much more efficiently if she was to 
be directed to do the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ms Myeni try and just answer 
questions crisply, even if you have got some explanation to 
give but let us hear the first answer like when I said did 
you say in your affidavit in response to Mr Agrizzi’s 
evidence that donations to the Jacob Zuma Foundation are 
10 
made by way of electronic transfer, a crisp way of 
responding is yes that is what I said in that affidavit, my 
affidavit, or no that is not what I said and here is what I 
said.  So let us try and be crisp like that.  
 
Okay, alright. 
MS MYENI:   Ja sure, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair because I don’t actually 
yet have an answer to my question, so is it the case that 
the only way that the foundation receives donations is by 
20 
EFT or other formal types of transfers? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson I may have said that in respect 
to the donation that was claimed to have been delivered in 
cash by Agrizzi. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And did you receive donations by other 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 124 of 148 
 
means from other entities?  
MS MYENI:   In kind yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And I think you referred earlier to 
sometimes just having deposit slips dropped off, so would 
those be occasions when cash had been deposited in the 
account and then you were just given a deposit slip as 
proof that the cash had been delivered? 
MS MYENI:   Cash has been delivered?   No I am not sure 
about that ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry, apologies, deposited. 
10 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson maybe that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Deposited, not delivered. 
MS MYENI:  Let me explain this Chairperson, there are 
fundraising mechanisms that are different, there is no one 
straight forward way to raise funds.  One that I can just 
cite a classical example about is when the people are 
being called to as fundraising event or dinner and people 
then pledge to assist or pledge to donate.    
 
I remember a certain company in the electronics or 
in the IT space they have – they were assisting us with 
20 
laptops for the students.  There will be people who will say 
I will pay R500 000 towards the foundation but I will pay 
R100 000 as and when I get the money and then when the 
attacks were vicious in the name Zuma and we all know 
that what has been happening in the country then the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 125 of 148 
 
person would say as much as we have CSI or Corporate 
Social Investment that we would use to donate, but I can 
no longer do that, therefore I will personally find a way of 
raising or donating into the foundation but I will then send 
you the deposit slip, that says we have honoured our 
pledge. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And those would be deposit slips 
because cash had been deposited in the account of the 
Jacob Zuma Foundation, correct? 
MS MYENI:   It would be, it would be. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So entities other than ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   ...[Indistinct – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes Hofmeyr, Ms Myeni.  Ms Myeni you 
want to say something? 
MS MYENI:   No Chairperson I was saying it would depend 
there was no blanket way of fundraising. Another entity 
would be open to say we will deposit, once we have 
deposit we would like the letter so that we claim or we 
submit it to SARS for tax deductible benefits or something 
like that so it would depend on the entity that we are 
20 
dealing with. 
 
And then Chairperson it was not – it would not be 
proper for a company like – that’s why I need an affidavit, 
like BOSASA to donate to the foundation via cash when ... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Looks like we have lost you Ms Myeni, ja 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 126 of 148 
 
I think we have lost her.  We will see whether the 
technicians can ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair we will take steps to – I think they 
are trying to reconnect at this point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
MS MYENI:   I am back Chairperson, my apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes we lost you for some time. 
MS MYENI:   I am back Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I think you were saying that 
donations could be made in different ways and you were 
10 
saying that – you were saying with regard to BOSASA they 
did not make donations by delivering cash, is that correct? 
MS MYENI:   That is my understanding Chair in my 
dealings with the late Mr Watson.  I have never dealt with 
Agrizzi Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But how would you know if they had 
deposited cash because deposit slips don’t identify the 
party who is making the deposit do they? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson we had a bookkeeper so I was 
20 
not intimately involved in that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No but you have just given evidence that 
as I understood it tended to suggest that you could 
determine whether BOSASA was depositing cash or not and 
I am putting to you well you wouldn’t know because 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 127 of 148 
 
deposits slips don’t reveal who the depositor is do they? 
MS MYENI:   No, no, no Chairperson I did not know that 
you 
are 
referring 
specifically 
to 
BOSASA. 
 
I 
made 
reference Chairperson to the deposits that BOSASA made 
specifically towards the event which was taking place, 
which was the birthday celebrations of President Zuma, so 
I am not suggesting that there was any cash deposited or 
whether it was electronic transfer but we were told by the 
Service Providers that were assisting us to say the venue 
has been booked, X amount has been paid, that is what I 
10 
knew and that is what I was told.   
 
You know Chairperson some of these things that I 
am being asked today are too operational, so for me to 
understand because somebody was reconciling things, that 
for instance we would have a list of people who will have, 
not my list but if we are in a fundraising dinner somebody 
stands 
up 
and 
pledges, 
we 
write, 
somebody 
in 
the 
foundation would write a name of the person or go to the 
person can I have our business card, to write at the back 
of the business card this person has pledged to donate 
20 
R250 000 or a million Rand for follow up and then they 
would put that into a grid. 
 
Now I cannot say that I would know that it was 
Viljoen that put cash or it was a Xolani that put cash 
somewhere, I won’t know that, but there would be a 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 128 of 148 
 
reconciliation when we call or when the administrator 
phones from that grid to say on this day there was an 
event, we are calling to find out to make a follow up if 
payments have been made, that is how things were done.  
And then Chairperson I am not suggesting that other 
people [distortion] do it in any different way, because I am 
not a fundraiser and I am not a – yes I am not a fundraiser 
nor am I a bookkeeper so I won’t be able to say 
specifically that BOSASA would donate in cash or BOSASA 
won’t donate in cash, that is why I was specific when I 
10 
made 
reference 
to 
BOSASA 
giving 
me 
300 000 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni I am asking you about 
operational matters as you describe them because your 
own affidavit before this Commission says, and I quote, 
and I am happy to take you there in a moment, I deny that 
– I deny any of that, you are referring to the 300 000 that 
was alleged to have been committed by Mr Watson to be 
paid to you.  You say therefore I deny any of that as 
20 
anyone donating to the foundation would use EFT or any 
other formal transfers.  So it is your own version that 
anyone donating to the foundation would use EFT or 
another formal transfer. 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson I deny that Agrizzi gave 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 129 of 148 
 
R300 000. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And I am not focusing on that Ms Myeni.  
MS MYENI:   I am focusing on that Chair because it 
appeared that Agrizzi was right and the sensualisation of 
the media was such that I got a bribe from BOSASA, it was 
a very big story Chair, I am specific, I don’t want us to 
generalise on that particular matter if you may Ms Hofmeyr 
and 
with 
respect 
to 
you 
Chairperson, 
we 
must 
not 
generalise 
I 
want 
it 
to 
be 
specific. 
 
If 
a 
person 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The evidence leader is not asking about 
the R300 000, she is just asking about what appears to be 
the way in which you said in the affidavit donations would 
be made to the foundation.  So she is looking at the 
manner in which she understands your affidavit, you said 
donations would be made to the Jacob Zuma Foundation.  
So Ms Hofmeyr do you want to ...[intervenes]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair.  You see Ms Myeni it is 
20 
not the question that is generalising, it is your statement 
before this Commission.  You say anyone donating to the 
foundation would make use of EFT or any other form of 
transfer. That conveys to the reader that you have 
knowledge of these matters because if you did not have 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 130 of 148 
 
knowledge you couldn’t with conviction under oath say 
anyone donating to the foundation would make use of EFT 
or any other form of transfers, so I put it to you that you 
had to have operational knowledge in order to make that 
statement, is that correct? 
MS MYENI:   No Chairperson I am going to respond to 
Hofmeyr this way, in a similar way as I wrote here.  
[speaking in vernacular] somebody must maybe must assist 
me and I am sure my legal people are there.  [speaking in 
vernacular] ...under oath with reference to the media spats 
10 
that was taking place in the country after Agrizzi mentioned 
my name.  [speaking in vernacular].  So I am [speaking in 
vernacular]. This is where then [speaking in vernacular] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughing] 
MS MYENI:  I wrote this affidavit Chairperson knowing I am 
dealing with one person, I am not dealing with the other 
people, I am dealing with this particular person because 
there is nothing blanket about it.  [Speaking in vernacular]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright, ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:  [speaking in vernacular] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Myeni has resorted to expressing 
herself in IsiZulu on most of that answer, now we didn’t 
have an interpreter ready to interpret what she has said, 
ready,  obviously I do understand what she is saying.  Ms 
Hofmeyr what do you think we should do? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 131 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I suggest that we adjourn so that we can 
obtain a translator. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m, are you able to put it in 
English Ms Myeni, the part that you put in isiZulu? 
MS MYENI:   Thank you Chairperson I thought the 
Advocate would translate because he is also Zulu speaking 
Chairperson because now it looks like ...[indistinct – 
speaking simultaneously] very specific is because I have 
never dealt with Agrizzi so a person of Agrizzi let me put it 
that way would make a – because I don’t know him, how 
10 
can Agrizzi trust me with R300 000 for the foundation 
alone, any person who would want to make a pledge or to 
bring a cheque Chair would put a cheque in an envelope 
but he would make an appointment if he wants to give it 
straight to the owner of the foundation so a person that I 
don’t know of Agrizzi descent would not entrust me with 
such a big responsibility alone Chair, that is what I am 
trying to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr I asked her if she could put 
in English what she had put in isiZulu, that is what she has 
20 
said. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may proceed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Unfortunately it still does not answer the 
question, you see the question was based on Ms Myeni 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 132 of 148 
 
your affidavit before the Commission which clear said 
anyone depositing with the Foundation does so in one of 
two ways.  I put to you that indicates you have knowledge 
of operational matters, do you not have knowledge of 
operational matters?   
MS MYENI:   Chairperson may I not answer that question 
then of knowledge of operational matters, in case I 
incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We were previously endeavouring to 
10 
explore cash deposits because as I read your affidavit you 
rule out the possibility that BOSASA was giving cash to the 
Foundation 
because 
you 
said 
that 
the 
means 
with 
electronic transfers and other formal transfers, but in your 
evidence earlier you said there are also cash deposits 
made, do you recall giving that evidence? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson if I am to address Ms Hofmeyr I 
don’t know the cash that would have come, it is possible, I 
don’t know the cash that would have come from Agrizzi to 
the Jacob Zuma Foundation or to Dudu. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed so you can’t rule out the 
possibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She is still completing her answer. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Myeni are you done with your 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 133 of 148 
 
answer? 
MS MYENI:   Now Chairperson I am specific, I have dealt 
with Mr Watson, we never dealt with Agrizzi Chair, I was 
very clear and direct that I have never received in person 
as Dudu I have never received any money from Agrizzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS MYENI:  I have never received any gift or anything 
from, BOSASA has assisted the Foundation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So because you don’t know who is 
10 
depositing cash you cannot rule out that BOSASO did so, 
can you? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question Chairperson 
in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni you gave evidence earlier that 
there was an investigation under way, Mhlathuze in 2015 
and 2016 that implicated Mr X’s company, is that correct? 
MS MYENI:   Yes indeed I am the one who made 
submissions into this commission regarding the question 
that was being asked. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes are those the annexures to our 
affidavit where you showed us the investigations that have 
been launched? 
MS MYENI:   This is a matter that I would prefer not to 
answer. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 134 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is just a point of clarity because you 
have 
just 
said 
that 
you 
made 
submissions 
to 
the 
Commission about these investigations that you were 
testifying about, and I am just clarifying whether the 
investigations you are talking about are the ones that you 
attached to our affidavit to the Commission. 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson I am such a lay person I do not 
know much about legal issues.  This I believe that this 
investigation that is taking place at Mhlathuze is a current 
matter that is taking place, on the current case that is 
10 
taking place and I was still a chairperson at that particular 
time therefore Chairperson, I apologise Ms Hofmeyr I 
understood that you said I must first answer and then 
quality if I want to qualify.  May I then not answer that 
question in case I incriminate myself because I am still 
going to be before the I think the people that are 
investigating Chairperson, I think it is the SIU if I may be – 
if I recall, if I recall Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see Ms Myeni the challenge that 
presents itself based on what you have testified to is that 
20 
you explain a breakdown in our relationship with Mr X 
around 2015 and 2016, on the basis of investigations that 
were being conducted at the time at Mhlathuze, which 
involved his company, but the annexures to your affidavit 
about 
investigations 
taking 
place 
at 
Mhlathuze 
are 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 135 of 148 
 
commencing 2019, so how can it be that investigations in 
2019 are what created a breakdown in your relationship 
with Mr X in 2015 and 2016? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson I am clear about that, there was 
internal investigation that took place at Mhlathuze first 
there was no SIU and then there were external people that 
were brought in to continue with the investigation that had 
taken place inside the organisation. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes but did they involve ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   One such company ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes complete your answer Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:   I am going to bring back my thought 
processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MS MYENI:  I am being asked like I am lying to say there 
was a breakdown in relationship between me and the family 
in 2015 and 2016, breakdown Chair because if you are 
family you talk almost every day with the person, or you 
talk every second day or something like that.  Now there 
20 
was investigation which I kept raising issues about to the – 
to Mr X, therefore I am saying then and now it is different 
investigations that have been taking place.  I have 
sensitised by the CEO that there is an SIU investigation 
taking place.  I was sensitised then that there was the 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 136 of 148 
 
second investigation that was taking place being done by 
an external company that wanted to sit with me one on 
one.   
 
Now in all these investigations certain names are 
being used, in all these investigations, therefore only now 
as I am speaking that because there is ISU, this is an 
Organ of State Chairperson, it is not a private investigation 
done while I was part of Mhlathuze, when I was Chair at 
the time and after I had left Mhlathuze there was also 
another investigation which was amplifying the findings 
10 
that had been found on the first investigation which was an 
internal investigation and then after that I think the 
company that was contracted to do the investigation, after 
that I think there was then there is a new Board, there is a 
new CEO, and therefore there was – there is now 
involvement of the SIU, hence I am saying then now Chair I 
cannot talk to matters that I are still with the SIU and I 
might also be subject of the same investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   For the record Chair I would like to 
20 
record that there  has still not been an answer to my 
question, but I am going to move on.  I understand after a 
long answer Ms Myeni has invoked the privilege against 
self incrimination, so if we can then go back to the deposit 
that Mr X indicated to you Ms Myeni, or indicated that you 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 137 of 148 
 
Ms Myeni had provided him with the bank account into 
which to make those deposits.  Deposits are things that 
you can check on a bank if they are done by EFT aren’t 
they? 
MS MYENI:   ...again, sorry your question is?  
ADV HOFMEYR:   If a deposit is made by electronic funds 
transfer then you can identify who makes the deposit on a 
bank statement, can’t you? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson may I not answer that question, 
in case I incriminate myself. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see Mr X’s evidence was that he 
didn’t even know that he was depositing into the bank 
account of the Jacob Zuma Foundation, these very large 
amounts that on his version you instructed him to deposit 
and he said that he would never have made a donation 
because in order himself, in order to make a donation you 
have to know to whom you are donating.  Were you aware 
that he deposited R1million to the Jacob Zuma Foundation 
on the 11 t h of December 2015? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson may I not answer this question in 
20 
case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then he made another deposit on 
the 2 n d of February 2016 in the amount of R800 000 to the 
Jacob Zuma Foundation, were you aware of that deposit? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson may I not answer this question in 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 138 of 148 
 
case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni the other piece of evidence 
that Mr X gave to the Commission was that on the very 
same day that the Commission had contacted your son 
about his involvement in paying Mr X’s company and then 
Mr X paying money into the Jacob Zuma Foundation his 
daughter received a call from you in which you asked her 
why Mr X was selling us out, can you confirm whether you 
made that call? 
MS MYENI:   I lost your Ms Hofmeyr. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I will try again Ms Myeni can you hear 
me now? 
MS MYENI:   I lost you – sorry I lost you I didn’t get that.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   That is fine it seems the connection is 
not stable, is that better? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, it is perfect, I can hear you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So Mr X testified before the Commission 
that on the same day that the Commission first contacted 
your son about Premier Attractions dealings with Mr X your 
– or his daughter received a call from you in which you 
20 
asked her why Mr X was selling us out.  Can you confirm 
making that call? 
MS MYENI:   I don’t recall any call like that Chairperson, 
that is whu - okay I do not recall – I do not recall that 
Chairperson. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 139 of 148 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And your son testified also before this 
commission and he did confirm that he phoned you on that 
day and alerted you to the fact that the commission had 
made contact him about Premier Attractions dealings.  Do 
you remember receiving that call from your son? 
MS MYENI:  He might have to remind me Chairperson.  I talk 
to him almost every day so he must tell me which day he 
called and which particular aspect – we discuss a number of 
things.  So I will not remember that.  And this particular day 
he called for this.  But I am saying I read his transcript. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You said that you do not remember making 
the call to Mr X’s daughter.  Can I just probe that a bit 
further?  Is it possible that you could have made a call in 
which you asked her why her father was selling you out? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson these children are my children that 
is – I can – that is the only thing I can say.  But other than 
that Chairperson may I please Ms Hendricks – sorry Ms 
Hofmeyr not answer that question in case I incriminate 
myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Now I think it is important to just be clear 
20 
Ms Myeni why this money from Premier Attraction to Mr X’s 
company to the Jacob Zuma Foundation is relevant at all to 
the work of the commission.  Are you aware of why the 
commission 
was 
interested 
in 
these 
aspects 
as 
we 
questioned your son and Mr X? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 140 of 148 
 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You see the reason why I am quest – 
raising these questions with you Ms Myeni is because 
Premier Attraction received at a point in time R2 million from 
an entity called V&A Consulting, do you know that entity? 
MS MYENI:  I would not – I would not know the business 
dealings between my son and whatever that he does with 
whoever.  So I would not know. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You do not know that entity? 
10 
MS MYENI:  Perhaps if – if – no I am saying I would not 
know the dealings between my son and whatever that he 
does.  But Chair with your permission if you said – if you 
gave me the name of the business like V&A but then you say 
the owner billed Ms Zondo it is different. We interact and we 
deal with so many people I would not know that there is this 
particular business that my son does business with.  And this 
particular business that my son does business with.  I would 
not know those details Chairperson.  So I – I would like – as 
a – I am sorry Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – yes I seem to get the impression that 
what you are saying is you do not think you know the name 
V&A but if you are told the owner of that company it may be 
that you know the owner but when you are just told the name 
of the entity that might not ring a bell to you.  Is that what 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 141 of 148 
 
you are saying?  Did you hear me? 
MS MYENI:  I am saying Chairperson I would not know the 
business people that my son does business with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MYENI:  Assuming that he does business with private 
companies.  I would not know them Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Do you know Mr Vikash Narsai? 
MS MYENI:  Can I Chairperson as well because we are still 
continue with Mhlatuze.  Can I then say may I not answer? I 
10 
cannot say any of the questions pertaining to Mhlatuze.  May 
I not answer so that I do not incriminate myself?  Let me just 
put it that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay this particular question that is the 
one you were talking about at a stage. 
MS MYENI:  This particular question Chair that is being 
spoken about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MYENI:  And the Premier Attractions dealings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I just would like to get clarity here Ms 
Myeni because I asked a question about whether you know 
V&A Consulting and I understood your answer to that to be 
you – you may not know the entity but if you knew the name 
of the person involved in the entity then you may be able to 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 142 of 148 
 
identify them.  In response to that I gave you the name of 
the person involved in V&A Consulting and asked whether 
you knew him and in response to that question you have 
invoked the privilege against self-incrimination, is that right? 
MS MYENI:  No.  I invoked this privilege from the moment 
you asked me the questions about Premier Attraction 
dealings. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  That may be… 
MS MYENI:  I invoked the same – the same privilege 
Chairperson with respect on matters pertaining to Premier 
10 
Attraction, Mr X and private dealings of Premier Attraction 
with his – the partners or with the associations – oh sorry 
associates with whoever that they do business with.  That is 
why I am saying – because each question Chair is leading to 
another.  Do you know Premier Attraction?  Do you know 
V&A?  Do you know – I – I – may I please with respect Chair 
not answer those question because it looks like I will 
incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do recall that we – we said each 
question has got to be dealt with on its merits.  If you invoke 
20 
… 
MS MYENI:  Indeed Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At a certain stage you have to invoke it in 
regard to each question.  From what you have – from what 
has been 
happening 
my impression is that 
on 
some 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 143 of 148 
 
questions you are able to answer.  You feel comfortable to 
answer.  On others you wish to invoke the privilege.  I do not 
know whether – oh we lost your picture.  Were you hearing 
me when we lost your picture? 
MS MYENI:  I hear you very well Chair I do not know how I 
lost – you lost my picture but I can hear you very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay so let us continue.  You – you – 
I was saying that my impression is that in regard to some 
questions you feel comfortable to answer and you do answer.  
In regard to others you feel uncomfortable and you invoke 
10 
your privilege.  So let us continue. 
MS MYENI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you do your best to assist where you 
can assist.  And if you invoke your privilege you do so 
question by question as you have been doing. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You see V&A Consulting was contracted by 
the Free State government to do an RDP housing project in 
the Free State, were you aware of that in 2015? 
20 
MS MYENI:  I invoke my privilege Chairperson.  May I not 
answer to that question? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then what happened is that V&A 
Consulting paid R2 million to your son’s entity Premier 
Attraction.  Were you aware of that payment? 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 144 of 148 
 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I am distant to all these things that 
I am being asked.  I am very distant to them.  May I please 
with your permission invoke the privilege Chairperson?  I do 
not know these questions.  I do not have answers to these 
questions. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni if you are distant from matters 
and you do not have answers to them that is not a basis to 
invoke the privilege against self-incrimination.  Do you – are 
you – do you understand that that is a different matter? 
MS MYENI:  In this particular regard - Chairperson in this 
10 
particular regard I – may I invoke the privilege Chairperson 
not to incriminate myself? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then after Premier Attraction received 
the R2 million it then paid these amounts to Mr X’s company 
and 
Mr 
X’s 
company 
paid 
them 
to 
the 
Jacob 
Zuma 
Foundation.  Did you have knowledge of that routing of the 
money? 
MS MYENI:  May I invoke my privilege Chairperson?  May I 
not answer the question so that I do not incriminate myself? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni I would like to look at the Jacob 
Zuma Foundation in a bit more detail because I have been 
focussing on the interactions between Mr X and those 
deposits into the foundation.  But now I would like to look at 
some other deposits to the Jacob Zuma Foundation that have 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 145 of 148 
 
been dealt with in the evidence before the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I am sorry.  I am sorry Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Can you just help me.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are at four minutes to four. 
1. Let us talk about the way forward. 
2. If we are proceeding we might need to take a short 
break and then resume. 
What is your suggestion about the – whether to – you would 
ask that we proceed – I am available to proceed? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair I think it would be useful to make a 
10 
bit more headway.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So I would suggest that we do proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You are – what you envisage in terms 
of how far we should go? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well there is still quite a way to go so I 
would suggest possibly until 5.30 or thereabouts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay that would be fine with me.  Mr 
Buthelezi how is your situation? 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  If I could just get five minutes Chair I just 
20 
need to run a few things past Mr Mabuza because we still 
have other business that we wanted to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes, yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  With regards to today and post. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 146 of 148 
 
ADV BUTHELEZI:    So our arrangements have been that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:    We would adjourn at the normal time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes then you would attend to the business. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   And then we can do the homework that 
the Chair has given us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   So we have got that situation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV BUTHELEZI:    So I still need to go back and start that 
10 
process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay maybe – maybe subject – maybe we 
should take a short break so you can make that call but 
maybe if – maybe we could go up to five to accommodate 
whatever but it might depend on your situation failing which 
we will – we might look whether tomorrow we would not start 
earlier than normal to to – to make up for the time. But let 
me check with Ms Myeni as well.  Ms Myeni are you available 
for us to continue beyond four or five / half past five if 
everybody is available? 
20 
MS MYENI:  I am – I am able to proceed Chairperson I am 
here before you – I am here in Gauteng for this particular 
process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Okay alright. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chair. 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 147 of 148 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  I suggest Ms Hofmeyr we take a 
break maybe for ten minutes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then when we come back we will hear 
what Mr Buthelezi says because the other homework that 
they have got to do is also important and urgent. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us see what we can do.  Okay we 
will adjourn for ten minutes.  We will resume at ten past four.  
We adjourn. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Buthelezi have you got some report 
back? 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  We have had a discussion with Ms 
Hofmeyr to say we would ask the Chair if you could adjourn 
for the day and start early tomorrow which we were thinking 
20 
around nine o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  We did indeed have that 
discussion.  My learned friends were very accommodating 
suggesting maybe half an hour to day and a 9.30 start 
05 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 299 
 
Page 148 of 148 
 
tomorrow but I said on balance there is some urgency in 
them preparing the submissions that they wanted to.  So I 
think we landed on the notion that adjourning now would be 
helpful to them and then starting at nine o’clock tomorrow so 
we do not lose any of the time we might have made up this 
afternoon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine.  We can start at 
nine tomorrow.  Okay so we will then adjourn now.  Ms Myeni 
we are going to adjourn now. 
MS MYENI:  Yes Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are going to adjourn now. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja to enable your legal team to attend to 
the matter that was discussed earlier. But tomorrow we will 
start at nine o’clock.  Okay.  Alright. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will then adjourn for the day.  We 
adjourn. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 6 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
