 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 310 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 72 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 3 of 72 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 23 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have an announcement to make in 
connection with the events of last Thursday, the 19 t h of 
November, 2020 in this Commission, before we start. 
 
Last week was set aside for Mr Jacob Zuma to take 
the 
witness 
stand 
and 
face 
questions 
from 
the 
Commission’s Legal Team on various mattes that are being 
investigated by the Commission on which he has been 
implicated by a number of witnesses.   
 
On or about the 22 n d of October 2020 a summons 
10 
that had been issued and signed by the Secretary of the 
Commission, as required by the Commissions Act of 1947 
was served at Mr Zuma’s residence at Nkandla compelling 
him to appear before the Commission on 15 to 20 
November 2020, both dates inclusive, in order to give 
evidence and be questioned.  The summons made it clear 
that the purpose of summoning Mr Zuma was for him to 
give evidence on various matters being investigated by the 
Commission and that he be questioned on those matters. 
 
Mr Zuma appeared before the Commission on 
20 
Monday 16 November 2020, when I heard argument on his 
application for my recusal.  On Tuesday Mr Zuma, through 
his Counsel, requested me to grant him permission not to 
be at the Commission on Wednesday the 18 t h November 
2020 as he wished to attend a family funeral.  I granted 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 4 of 72 
 
permission but required that he should be back at the 
hearing on Thursday the 19 t h of November 2020. 
 
On Thursday morning Mr Zuma appeared before the 
Commission.  I delivered my ruling on his application for 
my recusal and dismissed his application after concluding 
that it had no merit whatsoever.  Counsel for Mr Zuma 
informed the Commission that they would be challenging 
the ruling on review and that a complaint would be lodged 
against me with the Judicial Service Commission.    
 
At that stage Mr Zuma’s counsel also informed the 
10 
Commission that they, including Mr Zuma, were going to 
excuse themselves from the Commission.   Mr Pretorius, 
the Head of the Commission’s Legal Team, indicated that 
Mr Zuma was not entitled to excuse himself unilaterally, as 
the summons that had been issued and served on him was 
still valid and binding, and that he required my permission 
to leave. 
 
I adjourned the proceedings for the tea break.  
During the adjournment Mr Zuma left the Commission and 
did not return after the adjournment.   He did so without my 
20 
permission. 
 
The summons directing Mr Zuma to attend and 
remain in attendance was at the time of his departure from 
the Commission still valid and binding and had not been 
set aside.   
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 5 of 72 
 
 
Section 6[1] of the Commissions Act Number 8 of 
1947, which deals with attendance of a witness who has 
been summoned is clear, it reads: 
“Any person summoned to attend and give evidence 
before a Commission who without sufficient cause 
fails to attend at the time and place specified in the 
summons, or to remain in attendance until he is 
excused by the Chairman of the Commission from 
further attendance shall be guilty of an offence.” 
I read this section again: 
10 
“Any person summoned to attend and give evidence 
before a Commission who without sufficient cause 
fails to attend at the time and place specified in the 
summons, or to remain in attendance until he is 
excused by the Chairman of the Commission from 
further attendance shall be guilty of an offence.” 
The decision by Mr Zuma to leave the Commission without 
obtaining permission and in the face of a valid and binding 
summons is a serious matter.  It impacts on the integrity of 
the Commission, the Rule of Law and public accountability, 
20 
and in this regard it is important that we all remember that 
the matters which this Commission is investigating and on 
which it seeks to question Mr Zuma are matters that 
happened largely when Mr Zuma was President of the 
Republic and had an obligation to account for what was 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 6 of 72 
 
happening during his presidency as the President of the 
Republic.    
 
The Rule of Law and public accountability are 
values that are fundamental to our Constitutional Order, 
also our Constitution promises all of us that we are all 
equal before the law.   This is a principle of our 
Constitution that is fundamental to a society that is built 
upon the Rule of Law and it is one that goes to the 
foundations of our Constitutional Order.    
 
Mr Zuma could not, it would seem, have been under 
10 
any confusion about the need to request my permission on 
Tuesday because on Tuesday through his Counsel he did 
request my permission in order not to be in attendance on 
Wednesday.  On Thursday before he left the Head of the 
Commission’s Legal Team had made it clear that as long as 
the summons stood it was binding and it was not up to him 
to excuse himself.  Nevertheless Mr Zuma did excuse 
himself. 
 
His conduct may send a message to all other 
witnesses, who might not be comfortable to come and 
20 
answer questions in this Commission that it is the right 
thing to do for a witness who has been summoned to 
decide to excuse himself and that witnesses who have 
been summoned can come and go as they please before 
the Commission.  If that were to happen this Commission 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 7 of 72 
 
would not be able to operate.  It is therefore quite 
important for the proper functioning of this Commission 
that Mr Zuma’s conduct be dealt with in a manner in which 
our law provides it should be dealt with. 
 
This Commission is very clear about what should 
happen arising out of the events of Thursday and it 
remains determined to carry out its functions in accordance 
with the law and the Constitution.  Given the seriousness 
of Mr Zuma’s conduct and the impact that his conduct may 
have on the work of the Commission and the need to 
10 
ensure that we give effect to the Constitutional provisions 
that everyone is equal before the law I have decided to 
request the Secretary of the Commission to lay a criminal 
complaint with the South African Police against Mr Zuma, 
so that the police can investigate his conduct and in this 
regard the Secretary would make available to the Police all 
information relevant as well as make information available 
to the National Prosecuting Authority.  Most of the 
evidence is available because the proceedings of this 
Commission were live on television and exactly what 
20 
happened from the time I began to deliver my ruling up to 
the time I adjourned the proceedings would be available. 
 
Apart from that the Commission is going to take 
certain steps: 
1. I am going to determine other dates when Mr Zuma 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 8 of 72 
 
must appear before this Commission. 
2. The Secretary will issue a summons to be served on 
Mr Zuma to appear before this Commission during 
those dates. 
3. That summons will be served on Mr Zuma. 
4. The Secretary of the Commission will make an 
application to the Constitutional Court on an urgent 
basis for the Constitutional Court to issue an order 
that will compel Mr Zuma to appear before the 
Commission in accordance with the summons that will 
10 
be issued, in other words to comply with the summons 
and 
when 
he 
attends 
the 
proceedings 
of 
the 
Commission in compliance with the summons not to 
leave the proceedings without my permission.” 
The order that will also be sought will include an order 
compelling Mr Zuma to comply with directives that are 
issued in terms of Regulation 10[6] of the Regulations of 
this Commission, which were promulgated by Mr Zuma 
when he was still President, which require him to furnish 
certain affidavits to the Commission.   
20 
 
That is what is going to be done.  This Commission 
is quite clear about the steps that will be taken and those 
steps will be taken as a matter of urgency. 
 
That is the end of the announcement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Noted, thank you Chair. 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 9 of 72 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  May I be excused Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you; you are excused.  Good 
morning Mr Chaskalson, good morning everybody again. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Chairperson the evidence this 
week is evidence that the flow of funds stream of the 
commission has gathered and it is evidence that does not 
neatly fit into any of the other streams of the commission 
10 
that tend to focus on a single organ of state or in the case 
of the BOSASA stream a single enterprise.   
 
 
The flow of funds stream has been supporting the 
other streams in relation to money flow issues arising out 
of their investigations.  It has also been focussing on 
broader investigations relating to money flows that appear 
to be linked to the proceeds of crime arising out of corrupt 
procurement processes. 
 
Much of its work has already feature in evidence led 
by other streams in particular where witnesses have been 
20 
questioned around prima facie corrupt money flows relating 
to procurements in most cases it is the flow of funds 
investigators who have done the digging that supports that 
questioning. 
 
But the flow 
of funds 
stream has also 
been 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 10 of 72 
 
conducting its own broader investigation that cuts across 
the investigations of other streams and that does not fit 
neatly into the discreet topics. 
 
At a later stage the flow of funds stream will be 
presenting 
extensive 
evidence 
of 
domestic 
and 
international 
money 
laundering 
linked 
to 
the 
Gupta 
enterprise. 
 
However 
this 
week’s 
evidence 
will 
start 
with 
testimony that is wholly unrelated to the Gupta family.  Our 
first witness will be Mr Stephen van Coller the CEO or EOH 
10 
Holdings. 
 
His statement appears at Volume 1 of the Flow of 
Funds Bundle and it is Annexure VV1 which runs with 
annexures from pages 3 to 68 of that volume. 
 
I will give an outline of Mr van Coller ’s evidence 
and then also a road map of where we are going with the 
rest of week Chairperson and then come back to lead the 
evidence of Mr van Coller. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  We have chosen to begin with the 
20 
evidence of Mr van Coller because we wanted to make the 
point 
that 
corruption 
relating 
to 
state 
procurement 
processes requires two principle parties. 
 
On the one hand there are the corrupt officers of an 
organ of state but on the other hand there are also corrupt 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 11 of 72 
 
bidders or corrupt contractors who distort the procurement 
processes by paying bribes or kickbacks to the corrupt 
officers of the organs of state. 
 
So if we are going to sort out the problem of 
corruption in South Africa we need to address the problem 
from two different perspectives.   
 
Obviously there is a need for mechanisms and 
processes that will make it more difficult for corrupt state 
employees and officials to interfere with procurement 
processes.  
10 
 
But there is also a need for mechanisms and 
processes that will ensure that the private sector does not 
engage in corrupt practices that interfere with procurement 
from outside the state. 
 
There tends to be a disproportionate focus on the 
first perspective and not enough of a focus on the second 
perspective.  But the second perspective is very, very 
important but to state the obvious if no-one in the private 
sector was willing to pay bribes in respect of public 
procurement processes there would be no problem of 
20 
corruption in respect of state contracts. 
 
And if the private sector had more reflective 
mechanisms in place to prevent corruption in respect of 
their dealings on state contracts there would be much less 
scope for corruption to take place in respect of state 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 12 of 72 
 
contracts. 
 
And that is why we regarded the evidence of Mr van 
Coller as so important.  As we will hear when he testified 
Mr van Coller is an executive who was brought in as CEO 
from – of EOH from outside the company in September 
2018. 
 
Soon after he joined EOH he became aware of the 
fact that the company for which he was now responsible 
had been engaging in questionable practices in the past.  
So he did what far too few South African CEO’s have done.  
10 
He proactively investigated what his company had been 
doing and when he found prima facie evidence of corrupt 
practices he not only took steps to remove the responsible 
individuals from EOH but he also took steps to correct the 
harm that they may have caused. 
 
So 
he 
proactively 
engaged 
the 
SAPS; 
the 
Directorate of Priority Crime Investigations and the Special 
Investigation Unit to report what his investigations had 
identified about his own company. 
 
And 
where 
these 
investigations 
showed 
that 
20 
improper conduct within EOH had caused organs of state to 
pay EOH amounts to which it was not entitled through the 
SIU he initiated processes to identify the amounts that 
EOH should repay the state.   
 
And he also put in place a series of mechanisms in 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 13 of 72 
 
an attempt to prevent in the future the problems of the past 
taking place again. 
 
Mr van Coller ’s evidence today will provide an 
overview of what he found at EOH and what he has done to 
put that right.  It provides a useful starting point for a 
discussion that we hope to take further in the commission 
relating to the responsibilities of the private sector in 
South Africa in remedying our corrupt past and in trying to 
prevent a corrupt future. 
 
I want to emphasise Chairperson that Mr van Coller 
10 
will not discuss the details of individual cases of tenders 
involving improper conduct within EOH.  Those details will 
be addressed in the evidence of Mr Stephen Powell at 
least some of those details will be addressed in the 
evidence of Mr Stephen Powell who will be testifying on 
Wednesday. 
 
Mr Powell is the head of ENS Forensics and ENS 
Forensics were engaged by Mr van Coller to conduct EOH’s 
investigation into its own past. 
 
Mr Powell’s statement is Annexure VV2 together 
20 
with the reports and annexures that it refers to his 
statement runs from Volume 1 page 70 to Volume 2 page 
387.   
 
Mr Powell will be testifying on four EOH contracts 
with organs of state and presenting the findings of his 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 14 of 72 
 
investigations thus far into those contracts.  Two of the 
contracts involve the City of Johannesburg; one involves 
the NPA and one involves the South African Police Service. 
 
Before we got to Mr Powell on Wednesday we were 
due to hear the evidence of the Executive Mayor of 
Johannesburg Mr Geoff Makhubo.  But in view of the fact 
that Mr Makhubo’s evidence will respond to Mr Powell’s 
evidence with your consent we have agreed with Mr 
Makhubo’s legal representatives that he will now be 
testifying on Friday after Mr Powell’s evidence. 
10 
 
To give you a guide to where Mr Makhubo’s 
evidence is to be found his witness statements and the 
documents to which he will be referred in evidence are 
Annexure VV3.  They commence at FOF Volume 2 page 
389 and they run to the end of Volume 3. 
 
Mr 
Makhubo’s 
legal 
representatives 
are 
endeavouring 
to 
submit 
a 
– 
or 
to 
put 
together 
a 
supplementary affidavit for him before Friday and if that 
comes it will be added to the bundle. 
 
Mr Makhubo was the Treasurer General of the ANC 
20 
greater Johannesburg region from 2008 to 2018.  He is 
going to be testifying about donations to the ANC made by 
EOH and by other companies including Regiments Capital. 
 
He was also MMC for Finance when the City of 
Johannesburg concluded two IT contracts with EOH that Mr 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 15 of 72 
 
Powell addresses and he will be testifying about his role in 
relation to those contracts. 
 
The last topic that will be traversed in the evidence 
of Mr Makhubo is his relationship with Regiments Capital 
which is the 100% owner of Regiment Fund Managers a 
company which one contracts managed the sinking fund of 
City of Johannesburg. 
 
On Thursday we will be hearing the evidence Mr 
Phetolo 
Ramosebudi. 
 
His 
witness 
statement 
and 
documents to which he will be referred in evidence are 
10 
Annexure VV4 and they comprise the whole of Volume 4. 
 
Mr Ramosebudi has been the Treasurer to ACSA, 
SAA and Transnet and he will be testifying about his 
relationship 
with 
Regiments 
Capital 
and 
various 
transactions concluded by Regiments Capital on behalf of 
ACSA, SAA and Transnet while he was Treasurer of those 
organs of state. 
 
Now with that outline of where we are going to go 
this week I would like to call Mr van Coller to testify as our 
first witness this week? 
20 
MR VAN COLLER:  Thank you Mr Chaskalson.  Please 
administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR VAN COLLER:  My name is Stephen John van Coller. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have objections to taking the 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 16 of 72 
 
prescribed oath? 
MR VAN COLLER:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR VAN COLLER:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help 
me God. 
MR VAN COLLER:  So help me God. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you; you may be seated Mr van 
Coller.  Mr Chaskalson you confirm that the bundle that we 
will be using for the duration of Mr van Coller ’s evidence 
will be Flow of Funds Bundle 1? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And where I have referred to 
volumes in that opening address it is bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Yes.  Ja okay. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Mr van Coller I will need to ask 
you to confirm the correctness of the contents of your 
statement in Bundle 1 but before I do so can I take you to 
one correction which needs to be made at paragraph 43.7 
on page 10? 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 17 of 72 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And just to confirm the page numbers 
that we will be using are the black numbers on the left 
hand corner of each page. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So at – at page 10 if I have the 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The black 10 Mr… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Black 10 that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You confirm the black 10? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Black 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ja. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So at the – at the – towards the 
end of the page paragraph 43.7 there is a paragraph at the 
end of which is the link address to a mobile whistle blowing 
application that EOH has developed.  I understand that 
since you furnished your statement the relevant web 
address 
has 
changed 
and 
is 
now 
to 
be 
found 
at 
https://www.eoh.co.za/exposeit/. 
MR VAN COLLER:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Subject to that change can I ask 
you confirm the contents – that the contents of your 
20 
statement are correct? 
MR VAN COLLER:  Confirmed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And of course the signature at the bottom 
of page 12 is your signature; is that right? 
MR VAN COLLER:  That is correct. 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 18 of 72 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And your affidavit – your statement is 
actually an affidavit you took it before a Commissioner of 
Oaths? 
MR VAN COLLER:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Mr van Coller at the start of your 
affidavit you identify yourself.  Can I ask you just briefly to 
take us through paragraphs 1 to 4 where you describe who 
you are? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before we do that Mr Chaskalson would 
you like me to admit his affidavit as an exhibit or not yet? 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I would – sorry Chair yes.  Can 
we make it Exhibit VV1? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Stephen van Coller ’s affidavit starting 
at page 3 is admitted as Exhibit BB1. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Chair I have just been informed 
that it needs to be VV1.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  It will be admitted as Exhibit 
BB1.1.  Okay thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Mr van Coller.  Could 
you then tell the commission who you are and how you 
20 
came to be who you are? 
MR VAN COLLER:  So – thank you.  Currently I am the 
Group CEO at EOH.  Prior to that I was on the Group 
Executive at MTN for two years as the Digital and Data and 
Corporate Development Officer.  Prior to that I spent ten 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 19 of 72 
 
years at Barclays Africa or now ABSA Africa.  For the last 
seven of that I was the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Corporate Investment Bank.   
We had businesses across obviously South Africa 
but – twelve African countries.  Prior to that I spent ten 
years at Deutsche Bank in South Africa.  At the end of it 
being a Managing Director and on the Executive Committee 
and prior to that I did my articles – my accounting articles 
at Ernst and Young.   
Show my age I started with Arthur Young and they 
10 
joined with Ernst when they need to become Ernst and 
Young.  At the time I had a B.Com Honours from 
Stellenbosch.  I have a higher diploma in Accounting from 
the University of Natal.  A registered Chartered Accountant 
in South Africa. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Mr van Coller.  I am 
going to come back to your banking experience at the end 
of your evidence because I am going to ask you to 
comment on lessons that you may have learnt from your 
experience at EOH which may have implications for the 
20 
banking sector.  But for now I want to take you to 
paragraph 8 of your statement where you explain the 
context in which EOH has been engaging with the Zondo 
Commission.  Would you tell the Chairperson about that 
context? 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 20 of 72 
 
MR VAN COLLER:  Yes when this happened in February we 
obviously it was huge for the company not so much in 
monetary directly because the markers of contracts that we 
will talk about were not big in our lives but obviously 
having your partnership withdrawn for no reason or for 
convenience was a big black cross across our name.   
So the board got together and we decided that the 
best course of action if we were not going to blacklist was 
to get an independent firm with credibility to run the 
process.  It would allow me and the management to build 
10 
the 
company 
and 
it 
would 
keep 
the 
investigation 
independent.   
Clearly I was part of the sub-committee that regular 
feedback but we basically gave ENS the forensic team 
under Advocate Powell unfettered access to our books and 
records and they then conducted their investigation.  And 
the idea was that we could cooperate freely with any 
regulatory bodies that were doing investigations; wanted to 
investigate and we could also make sure that we met our 
legal and regulatory obligations and with the segregation 
20 
of duties it would be clearly factual and no emotion 
attached to it and this is why once again we thought it 
would be a good idea to split the evidence here so that 
Stephen Powell – Advocate Stephen Powell who does not 
work for EOH’s gotten – he can be purely factual. 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 21 of 72 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Mr van Coller you – maybe you 
have gone ahead of where I was intending to take you 
because I am not sure the Chairperson is aware of 
Microsoft and that background.  Maybe if I can ask you to 
explain to the Chairperson when you joined EOH and how 
first and then we will… 
MR VAN COLLER:  Sure.  So I was approached by the 
founder who was the CEO at the time in early 2017.  He 
was – they were busy concluding quite a huge loan from 
the South African banking sector – about R3.2 billion and it 
10 
was what we call a leverage loan in that it was quite a lot 
for such a company and he had realised that he needed 
some professional management; someone with banking 
experience to come and reorganise the company into 
something that would be able to repay this loan.   
He was also worried that he had accumulated a 
whole lot of businesses 272 in total and they never really 
been consolidated into a single business.  So there was 
lots of issues.  It was very complex and looking back I can 
see that they were struggling to manage the complexity of 
20 
it.   
At that time he wanted me to become – to come and 
be the Chief Operating Officer.  Some advice I had been 
given that if you are going to go and change a company 
someone has built up the best thing is that they do not 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 22 of 72 
 
hang around otherwise they obviously do not want you to 
change what they have built.  We could not agree terms at 
that time and so our – I went onto – you know back to 
MTN.  He then appointed Zunaid Mayet who had been there 
for I think over ten years and had come from Siemens but 
he was running one of the divisions and he made him the 
Group Chief Executive Officer.   
In around June of 2018 the founder Mr Asher 
Bohbot came back as the Chairman and then approached 
me again and said that they had not quite got it right after 
10 
the year – over the year and they wanting me to come back 
but this time he wanted me to come back as the Group 
Chief Executive Officer and that he would resign at the end 
of that financial year after I got there which would have 
been the 31 July 2019 to ensure a smooth transition.   
And on that basis I agreed to come because then I 
would have the ability to make sure I could put in place 
what I needed to put in place.  And that was how I came to 
here – it is just to give some background.  I was very 
excited about EOH for a few reasons.   
20 
One was that when I spoke to all my customers 
having come out of the corporate investment bank and 
have served a lot of them for the ten years I was at 
Barclays Africa; ABSA and the ten years I was at Deutsche 
Bank when I spoke to them about EOH they told me about 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 23 of 72 
 
the wonderful products and services they got from the 
company and they used them a lot and I found that they 
were in many, many of my customers.   
In fact when you have a look at it now we have got 
over 5000 customers.  So very systemic to South Africa 
and the heart of the SASSA’s; COJ; the big banks, those 
are the – the first thing and so I thought that given that 
they have got great product and great people to turn it into 
a profitable business I should be able to do that.   
The second thing was that that they had a great 
10 
youth development program that had been very successful 
in taking youngsters out of school; out of university and 
training them in relevant ICT programming and products 
and actually employing them.   
In fact I think they have done over 10 000 over their 
lifetime and they had nearly an 8f3% success rate of 
getting people jobs and I have always been passionate 
about social inclusion and social equality.   
It was one of the reasons why I moved to MTN 
because there they had a big mobile money operation and 
20 
obviously that goes under the banks’ radar and would have 
been great.  So I thought this would be a great opportunity 
for me and that was why I actually left and joined. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So you joined in September 
2018? 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 24 of 72 
 
MR VAN COLLER:   That is correct 03 September. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And you went in with great 
optimism and excitement that quite soon you discovered 
things that were not so good.  Can you – can you explain 
to the Chairperson? 
MR VAN COLLER:  Yes the first thing it was quite evident 
to me that when I actually got access to more detailed 
numbers was that the company was in trouble.  And when I 
looked back it looks almost like that R3.2 billion loan that 
was made was almost a rescue package and like we have 
10 
seen they were then using that money to actually repay the 
interest and the debt so they were not generating cash.  It 
is almost like using one credit card to pay the other credit 
card.   
And when I got there they had just concluded or 
were 
in 
the 
final 
throws 
of 
concluding 
a 
Black 
Empowerment deal that someone would inject R700 and – 
or actually up to R1 billion but the first tranche was R500 
million and short after – shortly after they put in 750.  So 
having a look at that I thought well there should be enough 
20 
cash to sort this out.   
The problem was – is when I had a look under the 
books and records there was a few problems, big problems.  
One was the fact that they did not account by legal entity – 
they accounted by business unit.   
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 25 of 72 
 
So when they came to do their final accounts it was 
very difficult to actually get the legal entities to stack up.  
They did the consolidation of 272 legal entities on an Excel 
spread sheet which clearly was sub-optimal.   
There were not any proper controls that I have – 
would have expected in a listed entity.  In fact the FD a Mr 
John King had extraordinary authority across all the 
entities.   
There was not a clear what we call Delegation of 
Authority from the board down into what was really the 
10 
operating company, EOH Mthombo so they basically ran on 
their own.  When I asked for the submissions and minutes 
from the last six months Executive committees to look at 
and go through and catch up I was told that they did not 
exist and they did not have an Executive committee.  It all 
got funnelled through the founder and the then CEO and 
when I was there the Chairman Asher Bohbot.   
And so the first thing I had to do was get approval 
from the board to change the CFO.  So within the first two 
months of me being there we asked the FD who had been 
20 
the FD for sixteen years – Financial Director to resign 
which he did.   
I then appointed a treasurer because once again we 
had over 232 bank accounts.  We had 3.2 billion of debt – 
actually more it you add on the amounts owed from the 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 26 of 72 
 
acquisitions closer to 4.1 billion of debt.  And – but we had 
because of the 750 million that had been subscribed for we 
had around R1 billion in the bank accounts and this was 
clearly very inefficient because you have got this negative 
carry of your bank – your money in the bank account earns 
a lot less than you pay on your loans.   
So we employed a treasurer.  She came in – in 
December or actually the end of November 2018 and 
started trying to manage the cash flows because clearly 
this was going to be very important and if you do not have 
10 
confidence in the actual accounting system the only way 
you can manage your finances is through a bank account 
because that is real.  That is how much money have got 
every day. 
 
The new FD started in mid-January and we then – 
and then on top of that I had asked for a few things.   
 
One was I asked ENS at the time to please have a 
look at specific contract which was with the Department of 
Water Affairs.  The reason I did that is there was – there 
was a media report around it and I wanted to make sure 
20 
that we knew everything about what we had got involved in 
and so they started on that. 
 
I then did a road trip to all our staff – talking with 
ENS and we did a presentation around anti-bribery and 
corruption – the zero tolerance on corruption – that we 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 27 of 72 
 
were going to take going forward.  And I then – because we 
had only one compliance person for 10 000 employees and 
272 legal entities I needed to started a program to put in 
the proper rules.  We did not have a risk officer or a risk 
team.  We did not have a compliance team.  We did not 
have internal audit.  These were things that I just expected 
in a listed entity and purely I surely from my past life I had 
seen all of those.   
 
So we got ENS.  We also got PriceWaterHouse 
Coopers and I got the University of Stellenbosch Centre for 
10 
Corporate Governance and Africa to come and have a look 
at what we had.  Do some training first of all but start 
creating a new framework and I am sure we will go through 
everything we did.   
And then I started the search to get a head – a 
Chief Risk Officer that would be an Executive Director.  I 
found one probably in around March – she served out her 
three months’ notice and I think she started around June 
2019.  And I am sure we will get back to some of that later.   
MR VAN COLLER:  Can I – can I take you now back to 
20 
Microsoft which you deal with at paragraph 23 of your – of 
your statement.  It is at page – black page 5 of Volume 1?  
Can you tell the Chair what happened in February 2019 in 
relation to the Microsoft agreements with EOH? 
MR VAN COLLER:  Yes on the 8 February which was a 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 28 of 72 
 
Friday I got a phone call probably about four o’clock in the 
afternoon from one of our coverage officers who said they 
have received a letter from Microsoft to say that they were 
giving us thirty days and they were going to terminate our 
– their partnership with us for convenience. 
 
The first thing I do is, I ask for the letter.  The letter 
came.  I had a look at the letter.  It was signed by a person.  
When I looked at the person’s name and went on LinkedIn, 
they 
did 
work 
for 
Microsoft 
and 
they 
were... 
there 
designation was Trainee Legal Assistant. So I thought this 
10 
was strange.   
 
I tried to contact, at that point, the current CEO of – the 
then CEO of Microsoft.  I had done some work with him.  His 
name is Zoaib(?) Hoosen(?).  Previously, when I was at 
Barclays Africa and I tried to find out what was going on.   
 
Basically, he had said to me that he had been told by his 
legal team in Dublin that they have to exit.  He had been 
given the details and he could not help me.   
 
Clearly what I did is, I then reported it then to the board 
and to some of the executive committees to try and find out 
20 
what the story was.  We had a few meetings over the 
weekend.   
 
Clearly, we were going to need to deal with the investors 
and the media because we were JSE listed and we started 
preparing 
a 
statement 
but 
we 
needed 
to 
get 
more 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 29 of 72 
 
information.   
 
And then on - I think it was the Monday morning, I got a 
call from a reporter called Duncan McLeod from TechCentral.  
He said to me that he had been contacted by a whistle-
blower.   
 
He had been given access to some documents and 
basically that EOH had over charged the Department of 
Defence when they procured licenses from EOH, that EOH 
had circumvented SITA and that EOH had invoiced for more 
licenses than have actually been delivered.   
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry.  Mr Van Coller, can you 
explain to the Chairperson what SITA is. 
MR VAN COLLER:   SITA is the state agency that all the 
procurement happens at. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is procurement in the IT 
Sector? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Correct, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I take you back to your 
statement at paragraph 30 where you talk about the steps 
that you took in response to discovery or the breaking of the 
20 
Microsoft news? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes, I...  This is where it gets a little bit 
more complicated for a number of reasons.  The first thing 
was, I then went and put out a notice to the senior 
employees.  I need to know what is going on.   
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 30 of 72 
 
 
I need people with information to come forward.  And 
one – if you understand the constructive EOH at that time, 
as you got this head office but you got 272 operating entities 
underneath it, all doing different things for, what I call a 
checkerboard, in an ICT company.   
 
Any corporate needs to buy a computer, needs to put 
software on it, needs to maybe store data.  These were all 
run by different parts of EOH.   
 
And so often, when a tender came, they would need to 
be consolidated together.  But I went directly to the head of 
10 
the – our Microsoft business at the time.  It was a man called 
George Grants.   
 
And I said to him, you know, does he know anything 
about this.  Can they please give me the documents and the 
invoices.  As it turned out, the investigating on this had 
actually started in December of 2017.   
 
My understanding – I do not have all the detail but it 
actually came out of the Auditor General – there was a query 
because of the bypassing of SITA.   
 
Microsoft had got involved through their lawyers and 
20 
there was a number of emails backwards and forwards 
between the Microsoft lawyers and EOH.   
 
The trial, eventually, went dead in about July or August 
of 2018, just before I joined and nothing had happened.  But 
there was a lot of documentation and it was clear, very 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 31 of 72 
 
quickly, that there was a problem.   
 
George Grants had actually raised to his senior manager 
or the CEO of his division at that time, that there was a 
problem.  That was a Rob Godlonton and he had then raised 
it to Zune(?) Mayete(?), who was the Group CEO and he had 
raised it with the Founder and then Chairman, Ashe Abbott, 
to say there is a problem.   
 
The invoices do not match to the licenses actually 
delivered.  There are some differences in pricing and there a 
number of sub-contractors in this account that were not part 
10 
of the tender.   
 
Clearly, then I had evidence.  I called in ENS Forensics, 
led by Advocate Stephen Powell and I said to them:  Well, 
here is the information.   
 
We 
need 
to 
do 
a 
proper 
investigation 
on 
large 
government contract for the last five years.  So he went back 
to 2014.  But I said:  Please, focus on this one first because 
clearly we are going to have to deal with it quickly because 
the last thing we wanted to do was get blacklisted.  And I 
can take you through some of the things we did, should it be 
20 
required but...   
 
So we got the new Finance Director to get all the 
information, the accounting information of the invoices and 
the flow of money and we gave ENS access to our whole 
email server that is set on Mimecast and we gave the access 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 32 of 72 
 
to our Accounting Books of Record and that allowed ENS 
then to go and do key-word searches and starting to actually 
look at the whole contract. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If I can take you page 10 of the 
bundle, paragraph 44 where you briefly described the 
conclusions that were reached in relation to the Microsoft 
contract after ENS had its investigation.  Can you explain 
those to the Chairperson? 
MR VAN COLLER:   So the findings – and I can go through 
the detail.  There is also some interest in the approach that 
10 
– I can also give just to give an understanding or the 
thoroughness of this because ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I would like to take you back 
...[intervenes]  
MR VAN COLLER:  Okay.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...to the approach because the 
approach is much broader than Microsoft but while we are on 
Microsoft, if you can just tie it up. 
MR VAN COLLER:   There were basically six findings.  One 
was serious governance and control failures.  Two was 
20 
collusion with original equipment manufacturers or the 
software owners.  There were tender irregularities and I can 
take you through you all the detail underneath that.   
 
There 
was 
inappropriate 
gifting, 
sponsorships, 
donations, bad timing and then there was suspect payments.  
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 33 of 72 
 
We found payments where it would have been right at the 
beginning of a contract.   
 
We have not even signed or have not got first payment.  
It will be round numbers.  They were not be repetitive.  
Normally with a, you know, a sub-contractor, it is time and 
material.   
 
It is not a round number like a million rand or two million 
rand or – it will have rands and cents attached to it.  Would 
you like to me go through these? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  Maybe – I mean, you...  
10 
Well, let us first identify the findings that you reported at 
your annual results presentation in July 2019.  You talked 
about those at page 7, paragraph 36.   
 
And 
the 
presentation, 
the 
relevant 
part 
of 
the 
presentation is at pages 39 and 40.  So maybe if you can 
take the Chair through?   
 
First identify the document at pages 39 and 40 as that 
annual results presentation and then take the Chair through 
those findings that you describe there. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Okay so, the first thing I talked about 
20 
earlier was the Delegation of Authority and given that there 
was no spread of this Delegation of Authority.  It is 
significant responsibilities to a very few executives and that 
is normally a red flag.  We had an artificially inflated 
software. 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 34 of 72 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Mr Van Coller.  Can you 
maybe explain to the Chair why this Delegation of Authority 
is a problem inside the company? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Normally, and what we have got now, is 
you will have a split of authority because what you do not 
want, as we say, we do not want people to be poacher and 
game keeper.   
 
For example, right now is the CEO of EOH.  I cannot 
sign a check.  I cannot make a payment that is specifically 
for the Chief Finance Director or the Chief Financial Officer.  
10 
The Chief Financial Officer, also, cannot onboard a supplier.   
 
So, unless that has gone through the Chief Risk Officer, 
she is going to want to pay.  So in that way, you make sure 
there is always a segregation of duty and it needs to go 
through a number of hoops. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can I...  And the logic of that 
would be, if it is a corrupt process going on, you have 
various different people who ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN COLLER:   Correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...who have to be onboard. 
20 
MR VAN COLLER:   It makes it very difficult for people to 
collude because you have to go through a number of 
different gates and then different departments.   
 
What happened in our situation.  Because there were not 
controls, proper controls in place, the same people who on 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 35 of 72 
 
boarded a sub-contractor could sign an invoice, could pay it, 
get it paid, could get it allocated into the accounting system.   
 
So just one person could basically do all of that on their 
own.  It was very similar when you have a look at the 
acquisition strategy.   
 
It was basically done by one or two people and it 
happened.  So there was not a process to ensure that it was 
above board.  So just allow people to then subvert the 
system or steal money because there is no control or little 
control.   
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The next point you identified, 38.2 
is Artificial or Inflated Software Licence Sales.  Can you 
explain to the Chair what that refers to? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes.  Actually, 38.2 and 38.3 are the nub 
of what happened.  38.2 was where people in EOH colluded 
both with the purchasing – a client, as well as the software 
or original equipment manufacture or OEM as we call them, 
to bypass SITA to then inflate prices and to get those 
invoices paid.  We have three of those, which I am sure we 
will talk about the detail but there were two ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, maybe we can talk.  You 
deal with those three at...  Sorry, I lost my note.  You deal 
with those three at page 11, paragraph 44.1.1.  Maybe if you 
can quickly take the Chair there and explain them? 
MR VAN COLLER:   I can.  So basically, what happened 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 36 of 72 
 
there.  There were two Microsoft licensing deals with the 
Department of Defence and there was one SAP licensing 
deal with the Department of Water Affairs.  In both cases, 
there was over-invoicing and under delivering of licenses.   
 
So in one of them, for example, we charged for 20 000 
licenses.  We only delivered 15 000, and plus we charged 
that above the normal rates, that if the Department of 
Defence had gone directly via SITA to Microsoft where they 
have a master’s Services Agreement, they would have got a 
much better rate.  So those were those three contracts.   
10 
 
Those have been – are, you know, busy with the SIU at 
the moment, the Special Investigation Unit.   
 
In fact, on the two Microsoft license deals, we have 
actually come to a settlement agreement or an agreement of 
debt and that was for this over-licensing portion and we are 
busy repaying that and we are working with the SIU on the 
Department of Water Affairs, and hopefully, we will sign a 
similar one.   
 
The second about this potential tender irregularities are 
really where, in my view, people were stealing money from 
20 
EOH to ...[indistinct], a political donations which I will get to 
on 38.6, or just stealing money for themselves.  Because in 
most of the cases, they were in the accounts sub-contractors 
for a contract.   
 
The excuse being that we needed 30% enterprise 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 37 of 72 
 
development for a government contract but in nearly all of 
our tenders, these companies never featured actually in the 
tender but it was hidden in the accounts that way.   
 
And there are some instances where we can see that 
there is discussions between parties about confidential 
information, the tenders.  In some cases, EOH employers are 
actually writing the content of the tender and some case, 
obviously, to exclude other bidders but in some cases, to 
make us more likely to win the tender.  There is swopping of 
information.   
10 
 
Interestingly, in some cases we – or in most cases, from 
what I can see, we would win the tender almost at any cost.  
So our costings and what we put in the tender documents did 
not really make a difference and we can see that in our 
accounts.   
 
We have written off on these problematic contracts, as I 
call them, the written off of nearly R 900 million of work 
because we under-tendered and we could not deliver.   
 
And what we were expecting to do and we saw some of 
it, is to change orders later and inflate the contract.  I think 
20 
maybe it was because there were some political changes in 
some of the net-close(?) at the time, it were different people 
and then that we got caught on the bad side of a wrong 
contract.  There was...   
 
Also, we used – there was misuse of a single source 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 38 of 72 
 
procurement 
exception 
and 
Regulation 
32. 
 
We 
saw 
instances of that.   
 
I 
have 
talked 
about 
this, 
the 
regular 
sharing 
of 
confidential information from within, inside the organisation 
who was doing the tender.  We have got emails to show that.   
 
Then if you go on to 9.4.  We used Middleman.  This was 
exactly the problem that the banks or the banking sector 
faced in 2009, using what they call introducers and then not 
knowing what the introducers do.   
 
So then paying a fee for them to help you get new 
10 
things, win contracts, et cetera, being politically influential.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry.  At that point Mr Van Coller.  
Can I take you back to your statement at paragraph 7 and...  
I am so sorry.  Page 7, paragraph 38.5, where you talk about 
payments made to sub-contractors in circumstances where 
there is no evidence that work was done by them.  Can you 
elaborate on that? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes.  So, to my earlier point and number 
of these so-called sub-contractors.  As I have said, nearly all 
of them that we paid, and we can go through the numbers in 
20 
a minute, were for no work done or dubious work done.   
 
And some of them are obvious because when you go and 
speak to the project manager who was on the contract, they 
have no recollection of that sub-contractor being on the 
project.   
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 39 of 72 
 
 
Two is, we have got no evidence of time-sheets.  Three 
is, they were not part of the original bid.  And four is, we are 
paying the round numbers.   
 
In some cases where it is dubious work done, you will 
have descriptions like, consulting services.  The other thing 
that also raised alarm bells.  These specific contractors, 
sub-contractors, we did teaming agreements with that were 
no specific contract.   
 
They were just a general – here is a teaming agreement 
and we will use you as and when.  And that also, obviously, 
10 
raised alarm bells.  So when we did our original review, we 
came up with just shy of R 1,2 billion worth of suspects 
suspicious payments.   
 
We, subsequently, worked through those and we ended 
up worth about R 865 million to date as at the end of the 
submission.  ENS tell me R 700 million is for no work done 
and most of that is, is not – most of the payments are not 
related to any contracts.  They just find themselves into the 
contract accounting.  So in a way hidden.   
 
There is about R 160 million for dubious work done, 
20 
consulting services or that, with no specific things.  And the 
reason why we started with the R 1.2 billion was – I suppose 
it was a bit like, if you know you have got skin cancer, you 
do not go and cut neatly around the edge.  You have to take 
a bigger piece out to make sure that you do not miss 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 40 of 72 
 
anything.   
 
And that goes back to the in-depth and the conscious 
decision that EOH made to do, to be very conscientious 
around doing their investigation. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   At your statement at paragraph 
41, you talk about the limitation at EOH spaces because it 
does not have any cohesive information gathering counts.  It 
can just look at what is inside its own books.   
 
How do you engage with the estate agencies in relation 
to all of these potentially corrupt contracts that you have 
10 
discovered? 
MR VAN COLLER:   So there was a lot we did and ENS 
have, you know, helped us a lot with that.  We used actually 
– we have our own internal forensic department called 
Extend.  They actually made the rand.  They exposed that for 
us.   
 
But basically, we put all the information together and we 
have – because we were unable to follow the money, I can 
only see where it got paid to.  I cannot see what happened 
afterwards.   
20 
 
We do have one or two cases where we see one of our 
employers then invoiced the sub-contractor that we had paid 
and they had signed off, and clearly, it was, you know, 
possible they have made a – made payments out of their own 
pockets and were trying to get the money back or they were 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 41 of 72 
 
just blatantly stealing.   
 
But we have engaged with SAPS.  We engaged with the 
Director 
of 
Priority 
Crimes 
Investigations, 
the 
Special 
Investigating Unit.  We have spoken to SITA.  We have 
spoken to the National Treasury.  We have spoken to the 
South African Revenue Services.   
 
And we have also made – we have actually done 
affidavits for criminal prosecution.  And we have completed 
about ten reports, Section 34 reports in terms of the 
Prevention 
and 
Combating 
of 
Corruption 
and 
Corrupt 
10 
Activities Act.  That is that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But...  Yes ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN COLLER:   If you wanted, of course ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That answers my question.  You 
speak about the ENS. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Advocate Chaskalson.  We are at quarter 
past eleven. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We could take the tea-break now or 
depending on how long we will be, we might take it later.  
20 
What do you think? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   DCJ, my answer is, if we look at 
the time, it is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  We will take the tea-
adjournment and resume at half-past eleven.  We adjourn. 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 42 of 72 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Before we 
wrap up on the core findings of the ENS investigation 
might I – Mr van Coller, can I take you back to the slides 
that are on page 39 and 40 of the bundle.  Those, if I 
understand and I would ask you to confirm, are an extract 
from the 2019 annual results presentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the page, Mr Chaskalson? 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   39. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
MR VAN COLLER:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you and can you explain 
to the Chairperson starting on page 39 what that slide 
describes? 
MR VAN COLLER:   So this describes - just going back to 
the original 1.2 billion, one of my colleagues actually broke 
it down, we found 350 in our valid work and then the 935 
then gets split into at 1 – loans written off, I will come back 
20 
to that, what we call ghost contracts, these invoices for no 
work done and then 180 was various places where we had 
overbilled various customers.   
The loans, it seems to me, towards the end, they 
were getting this small group of rogue employees in the 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 43 of 72 
 
public sector vertical were getting pushback from the 
project managers or the business unit owners for these 
invoices that kept getting slipped into their management 
accounts and you can see this pushback on email, where 
does this invoice come from, we never contracted these 
people and then that invoice then gets allocated to another 
project to try and, you know, obviously wash it through the 
accounts and then all of a sudden they came up with the 
idea of giving subcontractors loans and then just writing 
the loans off at a later stage because then that did not 
10 
have to go into a contract account.  It would circumvent 
that, so we wrote off around R90 million worth of these 
fictitious loans that they had given the people money, in 
some cases signed a loan agreement but when we went to 
recover the money there was absolutely no intent to repay 
it.  In fact we got some fairly aggressive legal letters back 
on the fact. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And at the bottom of that slide 
you, under 935, which is the 935 million of suspect 
payments you have identified 50 ED partners that had now 
20 
been blacklisted. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Ja, we eventually – I mean, this was in 
September 
or 
October 
of 
2019. 
 To 
date 
we 
have 
blacklisted about 85.  And I think that is dealt with a little 
bit over the page on page 40 where we talk about the 16 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 44 of 72 
 
EOH employees, 50 is now 85 and then you have got the 
12 government employees and that Section 39 reports are 
now at 10. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Section 74? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Seven Section 34, yes, they are now 
ten. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is now ten, yes. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And that Section 34, the 
Prevention and Combating of Corruption Act. 
10 
MR VAN COLLER:   Correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  If I can then ask you 
to go to page 8 where you talk about some of the remedial 
measures that you have taken in paragraph 43.  Can you 
take 
the 
Chair 
through 
paragraph 
43 
starting 
with 
paragraph 43.1 and just explain the significance of each 
one of these measures? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Obviously what is – this is a shortlist 
of a much longer list but – and I can go through it, but the 
real issue here is that – what we talked about earlier, is 
20 
when you do not have the basic policies in place, 
employees can either use that to their advantage or in fact 
they then have no cover because if they are asked by a 
supplier or a client to do something, they do not know what 
are the boundaries that the organisation had set.   
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 45 of 72 
 
So a lot of what I put here, in my personal view, is 
very basic – almost, as I say, 101 for any listed company 
and none of this was actually in place.   
I also believe strongly it comes from the top as they 
said the fish rots from the head first and this is very much 
the case in an organisation.  If the board and the executive 
committee are not walking the walk, people will follow them 
and they will do whatever they are doing and so it is a very 
important thing and we started with that coming from the 
top which was the leadership commitment, anti-bribery and 
10 
corruption.   
We did a lot of face-to-face training, dedicated anti-
bribery and corruption training for employees.  We have 
actually 
now 
set 
up 
a 
digitally-based 
training 
which 
interestingly we can now offer to our customers but as of 
the end of this month we would have been over 95% 
completion rate.  We had good attendance.   
It just shows you that the core of a staff generally 
are wanting to do the right thing and wanting to get 
guidance and if I can just go back to page – because I 
20 
think it is an interesting slide and it just puts things in 
context which we want 38, I think it was, I think it is 37, if I 
remember correctly.  It is 35, if you just go to page 35 and 
this is what we call a risk control framework and largely 
deals with the seven pillars of governance.  If you have a 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 46 of 72 
 
look in May it was largely red and yellow, so nonexistent 
and this – if …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Mr van Coller, I think you 
are using red page 35, so it is black 37. 
MR VAN COLLER:   I was right on 37.  On 37, you can see 
this is just the seven pillars of governance and this what 
we call the checkerboard and if it is red, it means it is 
nonexistent, if it is yellow there is something, there is work 
to do and the idea is that you have programmes in place to 
get it in green.  You will see we will publish an updated 
10 
one in our yearend accounts this year and a couple of days 
and you will see that has largely gone to green but you can 
see how very quickly, because the stuff in not complex, 
how we went from May to September, a lot of the red has 
gone and we continued to do it but these are basic things 
for a listed company and I think they are really important 
so just to go through a shortened list but the anti-bribery 
and corruption policy, especially Sections on introducers or 
middlemen, strategic transaction risk.   
So when you are putting together a bid and you need 
20 
subcontractors, how do you make sure as the main 
contractor you are managing that risk.  The fraud risk 
policy, what to look for, what you can and cannot do.  This 
gifts and entertainment policy is really important.  This the 
banks did as well in 2008 because there are a number of 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 47 of 72 
 
instances where a people were spending lots and lots of 
money on entertaining clients with very expensive things 
and this was obviously pushing the line but we have it in 
our industry as well and I have actually done some work 
with the World Economic Forum specifically on this and we 
put in something that now if the gifts is more than a R1 000 
you have to go through a whole process and we have been 
careful 
on 
not 
going 
to 
what 
they 
call 
educational 
something where they fly you to somewhere nice in the 
world, they do an hour or half a day on education and then 
10 
there is, you know, lots of entertainment around it, we just 
have – we have put in something that is more financial 
services [indistinct – dropping voice] 
Whistle 
blowing 
policy, 
I 
think 
this 
is 
where 
…[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I just take you back to gifts 
and entertainment policy because it is an issue that we will 
canvass in more detail when Mr Powell comes to testify but 
you have now a section in your gifts and entertainment 
policy that extends to donations, to political parties.  Can 
20 
you speak to that? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes, that is a good point.  I mean, one 
of the things we found, we found both undisguised 
donations and disguised donations.  The undisguised 
donations, the issue is the size and the fact that it is to a 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 48 of 72 
 
single political party, ANC, it is normally in a listed 
company you will give balanced donations but – and then 
two – and I can go through some of that detail and then 
two, it will come out.  We have got disguised donations 
where we get asked to make a donation officially and then 
a donation actually gets challenged through one of the 
subcontractors or these entities that we have got a teaming 
agreement with where they just give us an invoice that 
dubious and in fact I think Adv Powell will give you some 
evidence around that it actually runs as a tab, the money 
10 
goes in and then invoices go against it and eventually we 
are nearly finished this money, we may need more and so 
you will see some of that later.  I can get into that detail if 
you would like. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, I will be taking Stephan 
Powell through - to that detail. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  You were talking about the 
whistle blowing policy?  
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes, the whistle blowing policy I think 
20 
is 
critical. 
 
My 
experience 
is 
that 
most 
people 
in 
businesses are actually wanting to do the right thing and 
they are actually your best policemen, in a way.  If you 
give them the capability to be your policemen and so the 
few things are one, make it easy, we did it on an app, in 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 49 of 72 
 
fact our app can be – this Expose It app can be 
downloaded by anyone, it is free of charge on Google Play 
and on the app or App Store on iTunes and you can then – 
it works almost like an anonymous Whatsapp.  You can 
send videos, you can send documents, you can send 
whatever 
you 
want 
to, 
there 
can 
be 
two 
way 
communication.  It is only if you choose to do an affidavit 
or make your name public, you can. 
 
The second thing is – so it needs to be anonymous, 
they need to be comfortable it is anonymous.   The second 
10 
thing that is very important is you need to give feedback.  
So if people have come forward and told you stuff, once 
you have done your investigation, give them feedback.  In 
some instances it is just wrong perception, lack of 
information, in other cases they just want to know that they 
have actually helped and, you know, the third thing is you 
actually – you fundamentally have to protect them to make 
sure that there is no comeback because often there is lots 
of pressure and we should actually be elevating them 
because they are actually the bravest of everyone. 
20 
 
We 
then 
did 
anti-money 
laundering, 
terrorist 
financing and sanctions policies.  These are all sort of 
standard.  We have a share dealing policy that we put in 
place.  This was not in place and actually some of the 
issues with the share price falling was directors selling 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 50 of 72 
 
their shares and not getting proper approvals.  We had 
regulatory change in relations policy, procurement policy 
obviously key given we are doing lots procurement, there 
needs to be a process to make sure it is independent and, 
you know, how people need to act within that and then a 
competition compliance policy.  There were clearly other 
things – would you like me to go through 43.4?  That 
obviously carries for… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, I am interested in – can you 
identity to the Chair where these were appointments.  You 
10 
list, for instance, all the way up to 43.4.9 appointments 
that were made.  Can you identify where it was actually 
positions, new positions that you were creating as opposed 
to simply appointing new individuals. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Sure. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And where you created new 
positions what the importance of the position is. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Sure.  So this was obviously as a 
result of the work at ENS, PwC and the University of 
Stellenbosch, Centre of Corporate Governance in Africa did 
20 
for us.  Clearly the existing position of the new CEO, we 
got a new financial director that was an existing position 
but someone had been in that job for 16 years, so getting a 
new brush was absolutely important.   
We did not have a Chief Risk Officer who was an 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 51 of 72 
 
executive director before this, is new, and underneath that 
position 
is 
risk 
compliance, 
regulatory, 
government 
oversight - and that is really important.  Underneath that 
position there is also the internal audit and the legal 
department.  So a very important position. 
 
We had – we did not have a head of risk so that 
was clearly a new position, clearly important, given where 
we ended up.  We had a head of compliance but it was a 
single person.  We now have a compliance department 
and you can see we got someone out of the financial 
10 
services world because obviously there are a lot of 
lessons to be learnt for the rest of corporate South Africa.   
Out of the financial services we appointed head of 
legal, we had one but they were largely doing contracting.  
This is much broader than that, that does even our own 
legal cases.  We did not have any internal audit and so we 
appointed a head of internal audit and this position is 
critical because it is what the external auditors need to 
rely on in terms of the work they do. 
In normal listed companies, where you have what we 
20 
call three lines of defence, you train the frontline, the 
people that are out there in the business and so that they 
know what the boundaries are, what the policies are.   
You then have this, you know, second line which is 
compliance and internal audit and then your third line of 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 52 of 72 
 
defence is the external auditors who then do, you know, 
checking of the checking, if I can put it that way, and that is 
very normal for a listed company.  That is not abnormal, 
some people feel that that is a lot. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You speak in 43.4.8 of the new 
independent board aligned with King IV principles.  Can 
you explain which principles you needed to – or which 
principles had not been complied with? 
MR 
VAN 
COLLER: 
 
 
The 
main 
one 
was 
just 
the 
independence of the board.  The King IV says you need to 
10 
have more independent directors, non-executive directors, 
than non-independent and an non-independent would be 
someone with a large shareholding, someone who has been 
an executive for a period of time and has not gone through 
a three year cooling period or someone who has been on 
the board for more than 10 years and in our case the Chair 
was the founder, so he had been there for 20 years.  He 
had been the CEO a year previously and had not gone 
through the full three year cooling off period.   
 
There was a head of HR who had resigned as an 
20 
executive two years before, had not gone through the three 
years cooling period.  There was also an original founder, 
Rob Sporen, who had been on there for 20 years and then 
there was the head of the IT committee who had just gone 
through his ten year stint and was still on the board.  So 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 53 of 72 
 
there were at least four board members that were non-
independent. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you have any views on 
remuneration of board member and independents. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Sorry, say that again? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Remuneration of board members 
and independents. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Ja, there is – interesting is that you 
need to split out your remuneration committee from the 
Chairman, you need to split out your Chair of your audit 
10 
committee from you Chairman just like you need to have 
the head of – or the Chief Risk Officer reporting directly to 
the Chair of the risk and the board not just to me because 
obviously as the CEO because that does not create 
independence.  Ditto for the finance director to the audit 
com Chair and then obviously Remcom needs to be 
separate so that you can appoint independent board 
members away from the Chairman.  These are just basic 
controls. 
 
The issue, I suppose, in all of these boards is 
20 
something that I think may need to be looked at.  I think is 
what you are asking me, is sometimes board members are 
being paid quite a large sum of money to be a board 
member and this is why you need to have this limitation on 
their time so that it does not become a job, actually they 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 54 of 72 
 
are there for the good of the shareholders, not because 
they need a job and this is why it was so important to make 
sure that you get this rotation right and you do not let 
board members stay there for long periods of time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You have touched on 43.4.10 
which is your new risk governance framework.  Is there 
anything that you want to amply there?   
MR VAN COLLER:   Not really, I mean, I think we have 
been through it, there is a lot of detail of everything we did 
but it was very important that we actually got that up and 
10 
running, got proper information, we are managing the 
various 
risks, 
we 
are 
having 
this 
– 
a 
discussion 
independently with the board and getting the board to 
understand what risks sat within the business and what 
policies and procedures we had to actually manage them 
and I think that is just such an important of a board and if 
you have a look at that slide 37 that I had showed earlier, 
there was basically very little in play at all which I think for 
a listed company is bad. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Unless there is anything you 
20 
want to add to over the page on page 10 to 43.4.12 
through to 43.4.14, I want you to elaborate on the details 
of the bid review but is there anything that you would want 
to add in respect of 43.4.12 to 43.4.14? 
MR VAN COLLER:   I think two things was really this real 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 55 of 72 
 
zero tolerance against bribery and corruption.  You need to 
reiterate it and you have got to walk the talk and you have 
got to have your backing of your board on it, which we did, 
you have got to make those policies open and you need to 
in some cases actually put those into your contracting.  So 
if you are contracting with people, they need to adhere to 
your policies because you are the main contractor. 
 
What was interesting is we did not really have a 
conflicts management control room and this is to do with 
not only employees who are within the business and have 
10 
maybe got other businesses or their partners have got 
other businesses, we need to manage that conflict so that 
when you go through procurement those conflicts are 
properly highlighted but also, having a look for politically 
exposed people or influential persons especially when you 
are dealing with a third party.  We had none of that.  It 
seemed to be, you know, not worried about it at all. 
 
And then the last bit, the 14 bit, was just making it 
easy for people to adhere to these things, the anti-bribery 
and corruption attestations they have to do every year, the 
20 
conflicts of interests and the gift and entertainment 
registrations to get it signed off, so we have actually got a 
view on it so that we can match up to make sure that none 
of these gifts and entertainment are happening at bad 
times around, you know, bids and things like that.  And 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 56 of 72 
 
actually, if you - today if you have not done your anti-
bribery and corruption attestations, you have not done your 
compliance training and/or you have not done your conflict 
of interest disclosure, you are gonged out for any bonus 
for that year, it does not matter how well you performed 
and that has been a very good date for us. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then if you can describe the bid 
review, just to give the Chairperson a sense of the scale of 
the internal investigation that has taken place at your 
instance. 
10 
MR VAN COLLER:   So the bid reviews, obviously we are 
getting a lot of bids, 272 entities, lots of them doing good 
work, good honest work with – and together with the public 
sector but often these big bids come in over R10 million 
and this is where things can go wrong if you get the wrong 
partners involved and so ENS originally conducted, as you 
say, 559 bid reviews, they were very important and we 
have now, with the help of ENS, trained our own people 
and got a capacity and we have combined all our bids into 
a single bid review place, so it all has to come through a 
20 
single gate and has a single standard vetting process and 
these are now obviously interrogated by specialists in the 
various disciplines, compliance, legal, finance, risk.   
And it is not only for the bribery and corruption 
thing, it is also around what guarantees are you signing, 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 57 of 72 
 
are they sensible, what are the terms of the contract, are 
people paying you on time or are you just being their bank 
account because they are going to pay you, you know, 120 
days or something like – so it is the whole importance of 
the bid because one the things that gets hidden off a 
balance sheet is when you sign guarantees for work to be 
performed, you do not actually see those as a liability on 
the balance sheet and certainly we had quite a few of 
those to sort out. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You speak of your anti-bribery 
10 
management system assessment at 43.6.  Can you explain 
that to the Chairperson? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes, there is actually a very 
interesting – in the UK there is the ISO 37001 and it gives 
six principles and it is actually an international standard.  
We decided that – and it is actually higher than the South 
African standard, interestingly, and we decided with ENS 
this is a good framework for us to go through and so we 
have been assessed on that.   
We continually assess ourselves and this is what 
20 
the continual improvement progress in EOH is driven by 
and I would encourage anyone in corporate South Africa to 
have a look at it because it is a great framework, it is an 
easy framework and it is an international best practice 
framework. 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 58 of 72 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You have already touched on the 
whistle blowing mechanism and spoken about the app.  Is 
there anything else you want to say in that regard? 
MR VAN COLLER:   No, that is – I think we have covered 
that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then we have already dealt with 
the 
initial 
over-invoicing 
issue 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
Department of Defence and the Department of Water 
Services.  The ENS investigation that you instituted back in 
2019, is that still ongoing, the broader investigation? 
10 
MR VAN COLLER:   The broader investigation has 
concluded.  However, as we get queries from various 
regulatory bodies and agencies, in some cases we can do 
the – or ENS does the keyword searches and bring 
documents out.  It also helps us because you can then 
package them into themes and streams and so ENS remain 
available as they were for this Commission to fill specific 
information out for specific transactions.  Clearly all that 
information has been given to the SIU, has been given to 
the Financial Intelligence Centre, has been given in to 
20 
SAPS or in to the DPCI and they remain available to assist 
wherever required. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then in paragraph 45 you 
speak 
of 
other 
changes 
in 
respect 
of 
enhanced 
governance.  Can you take the Chair through these and 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 59 of 72 
 
elaborate where you see fit? 
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes, some of these are business-
related but I think they are important.  What had happened 
is although we had 272 entities, they were allowed to do 
public sector work on their own and so what happened is 
this small group of rogue former employees created their 
own little vertical, as they call it, they then found tenders 
that they felt they could influence and they would then go 
and tender, win the work but then subcontract internally 
into EOH so that those subcontractors within EOH did not 
10 
know what was happening on the other side. 
 
The second thing, though, that happened was that 
because they were not going through the actual company 
where the product excellence sat, they would import in 
some cases.   
And one crazy example that is just extreme, to just 
belabour the point, is we had a contract with over a 
hundred people on it, only three of them were EOH 
employees, the rest were largely contractors, a big chunk 
of them coming from India because they were obviously 
20 
wanting to keep that contract separate.   
And so what we have done now is we have taken all 
our work, it does not matter whether it is private or public 
sector, they sit in what we call these centres of excellence, 
where the product excellences, so whether you are a public 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 60 of 72 
 
sector client or a private sector client you get the same 
level of service. 
The second thing is we have separate bid offices, 
this is how they also were able to circumvent, they had 
their own bid office, pretended to do all the checks but did 
not.  We have now got one and that one was just part of 
the segregation of duties so that everyone has to go 
through the same gate and the same standard.   
We have also got – I put together a new public 
sector business risk framework and this is largely to make 
10 
sure that we are dealing with the politically exposed 
person 
issues 
properly, 
we 
are 
dealing 
with 
the 
subcontractors because you are required, because the 
enterprise development requirement of 30% that you have 
done those checks, that you have gone through and 
checked the validity at CIPC in terms of the company, that 
there is real people there doing real work, that they have a 
track record, etcetera, rather than some of these empty 
entities that we found that Advocate Stephan Powell will 
talk a little bit more about it yesterday (sic).   
20 
In the finance department, which we did not have 
these enhanced controls was one, the delegation of 
authority that is actually taking some of the power away 
from the FD so they cannot be a gamekeeper, cannot 
onboard or approve a supplier and pay it, needs to be done 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 61 of 72 
 
separately, enhance internal controls just around the 
financial statement closed process, now actually managing 
legal entities, giving them balance sheets and making sure 
that we check that people do not hide invoices on the 
balance sheet, that people actually report when they have 
signed a contract so we can record it.  These are 
important.   
There is a monthly results to Exco and the board 
and that comes in a standard format, that includes balance 
sheet, includes income statement, includes risk, includes 
10 
legal, includes internal audit. 
We have got an investment committee now for 
mergers and acquisitions and disposals so that it is done 
properly and above a certain level it has to go to the board 
or above a certain level it comes to Exco and above that it 
goes to the board. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I just stop you there?  In 
relation to acquisitions, what was the problem in the past 
in relation to acquisitions and in particular the experience 
of corrupt procurement? 
20 
MR VAN COLLER:   Ja, so if we go to – and it is page – 
no, not that one – beginning of this document because I 
think it is – it just shows what can happen.  It is page 25 of 
the pack and you can see here – actually the underlying 
businesses at EOH are actually very good because if you 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 62 of 72 
 
just take these five issues that happened – and this was 
due to lack of governance because this should have gone 
through a board approval process but they invested R900 
million into Zimbabwe.  In some cases they were actually 
paying for OEM licences in South Africa but delivering 
them to clients in Zimbabwe, collecting cash in Zimbabwe 
but obviously the cash would not come to South Africa, it 
stayed in Zimbabwe.   
So once you put 900 million in you have got to find 
900 million from somewhere else.  Even if it is a great 
10 
business in Zimbabwe, you do not get 900 million out in 
the time you need to pay your debt and I will correlate that 
back in a minute. 
We bought – we spent R750 million largely on 
international acquisitions for assets.  We used debt to buy 
acquisitions that were not generating cash so we needed to 
find other businesses to generate cash to repay the debt. 
We had this inefficient contracting, as I call it, this 
was where they wanted to just get these contracts in so 
that they could put invoices again and steal money and 
20 
here, at the time of this, this was October 2019, we had 
written off about 750 million of cost overruns, that is close, 
that is just shy of a billion at the moment. 
We invested R400 million in a business with a 
single customer.  So they only had one contract and yet we 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 63 of 72 
 
were able to pay R400 million for it.  Clearly when the 
contract came to an end and the customer went away, we 
had paid 400 million and the business we had was worth 
zero.   
And then obviously this lack of governance and 
controls allowed around 930 million to be extracted or 
stolen from EOH.  That money has gone.  And what is 
interesting, if I have a look at the numbers, if I just add 
down and that is that left hand column, just those five 
issues cost the company about R3.7 billion in costs and we 
10 
had raised in 2017 3.4 billion as they used that money to, 
you know, plug these big mistakes that they made and this 
is really what made the company so difficult.  So I think 
that is just an important point. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I know that Stephan Powell will 
deal with this in more detail but one of the issues that he 
will address is that how certain of the companies that EOH 
had acquired seemed to have a business model that 
involved corrupt procurement.  Can you speak to that at 
all? 
20 
MR VAN COLLER:   Yes, I mean – and I am sort of – this is 
just my summary.  When I have a look at everything 
Stephan and them presented to me, they obviously – or to 
the board subcommittee, it is quite interesting that very 
quickly in their investigation they found this small group of 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 64 of 72 
 
people and the more they broadened it, it was the same.  It 
was almost like someone had taken a big pantechnicon and 
driven it through a big sugar cane field, it was very easy to 
follow.  It was, you know – and it was the same thing going 
over and over again and my sense is there were two 
businesses that were bought.   
One of them I think Stephan is giving evidence on.  
Advocate Powell is giving evidence on, on Wednesday, and 
that was a company called TSS and it looks like those 
practices 
were 
imported 
because 
the 
owner 
of 
that 
10 
business, a person called Jehan MacKay, is one of the two 
architects.  If you have a look, him and a person called 
Ebrahim Laher who bought the SAP business into – not the 
SAP, SAP licensing business into the business, those is 
where nearly 96% of all the issues come from and the two 
of them and some of their direct reports were the people 
that signed on nearly all of these invoices that had no work 
done around the teaming agreement.   
So it looks like as those businesses came in it then 
got – that is, if I had to guess what would happened.  I do 
20 
not – as we cannot follow the money and follow everything, 
I just have to – that is my summation of it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Have you – in relation to your 
investment – I mean, the mandate of your investment 
committee that now operates, are there any mechanisms in 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 65 of 72 
 
place in relation to vetting potential acquisitions in that 
context? 
MR VAN COLLER:   There is – that is a - phew, that is a 
much bigger – a discussion.  I think some of these things 
around due diligence and, you know, being an ex-banker I 
was just saying to some of my colleagues there is some 
basic due diligence that I think needs to be done in an 
acquisition, when you are lending money, when you are 
subscribing for shares and it goes around to just some of 
the basic controls that I have spoken about, you know, if 
10 
you had just gone and had a look, does this company have 
board meetings, can I see the minutes, can I see the board 
packs, are they quality?   
Then you go down to the executive committee, do 
they have meetings, you know, do they have packs, do 
they have minutes, what is the quality of those and then 
move into the things like the risk committee and internal 
audit and you can very quickly see what is the culture of a 
company and are they prepared to do these things 
especially if they are large companies.  
20 
A small company can often, because it is so small 
you can manage it easily because it is all within your 
sight, but when you have got 272 legal entities, it is 
incredibly difficult and unless there is proper process 
there is always going to be a high probability of some kind 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 66 of 72 
 
of failure.  So I do think that there are some basics that I 
would hope that investors, who are investing pensioners’ 
money, 
banks 
who 
effectively 
are 
licensed 
by 
the 
government to be able to provide loans and savings and 
using depositors’ money to give loans to corporates, they 
actually run through just a few of these, you know, basic 
controls.   
It is quite interesting now given some of the issues 
with the auditors, we have just been through a process 
with PwC as new auditors and it is very encouraging to 
10 
see the new processes that they put in place just to make 
sure that these pillars are in place, segregation of duties, 
controls are actually there because then, if things happen, 
they are normally contained but they normally get caught 
by the systems so they do not get to fester for long 
periods of time.   
If you have a look at our investigation, we started 
in 2014, there was some of it going on but not a lot, ’15, 
’16 and ’17 was probably over 80, 85% of what – when it 
just got out of control.  If there had just been some 
20 
process and policies in place you would have controlled it 
and it would have been able to be in a manner – and in 
hindsight now, you know, this group of rogue former 
individuals and the directors at the time nearly destroyed 
10 000 
people’s 
jobs 
and, 
you 
know, 
that 
I 
think 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 67 of 72 
 
personally is unforgiveable. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr van Coller, I do not have any 
further questions for you unless there is anything in 
particular that you would want to emphasise beyond what 
you have already said, those are really my questions for 
you. 
MR VAN COLLER:   No, I think my - my last bit, I have 
done quite a lot on LinkedIn and in the newspaper just 
around lessons learnt.  Just going to the previous 
question, I am not going to go through the detail, but I will 
10 
just run quickly through the sort of five or six things, I 
think it is important because some of these need to almost 
form part maybe of a King V code or a best practice code, 
I do not know, for JSE but I always say businesses are not 
corrupt, people are and if you allow a few people to do 
something they will and it is really about culture.   
The culture in an organisation is critical and I think 
when you are lending money, investing money, have a 
look at the culture, have a look at who is running the 
company and do you think that this is a culture you like 
20 
because culture beats strategy every single day.  You can 
drive a strategy but if it is not - the culture at the top is 
not one of zero tolerance, there is a problem. 
Complex 
corporate 
structures, 
if 
you 
cannot 
understand a company, there is a reason why you cannot 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 68 of 72 
 
understand it, it is as simple as that.  I would not invest 
there, you know, personally.  There is limited governance 
and compliance, very earlier indicators I have talked 
enough about that but it is very easy to go and have a 
look at it.   
I think broad independence is absolute critical, 
especially in a listed company or one that you are doing a 
lot of work with because if they are not independent, the 
meetings are not happening properly, you are not getting 
the checks and balances. 
10 
I 
have 
talked 
about 
making 
it 
easy 
for 
whistleblowers.  Most people are honest and they are your 
policemen, make it easy for them and it is a very 
courageous thing to do and if they do not feel support and 
valued they will not use it. 
I would not use a middleman.  The financial sector 
had this problem, they had to root it out.  I see it, you 
know, quite widely in the services sector.  There is a 
problem, they are using your brand, you do not control 
them. 
20 
And I suppose, lastly, just to shout out to the whole 
of corporate South Africa who both, you know, private and 
public sector.  And I want to say they have been brilliant 
in this process because they could have quite easily just 
closed our doors and walked on but they have been very 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 69 of 72 
 
supportive, as long as we did the right thing.  Right, it is, 
you know, if you stand for something you stand for nothing 
and I think, you know, once you are compromised, if you 
make one – one little bit of compromise you are eternally 
compromised and that makes it very difficult and your 
staff will see when you do that and I think you really need 
to make sure, as South Africa, that we are accountable for 
what we are doing because it is in the interests of the 
country. 
My point, I suppose the last thing is, I have been 
10 
quite vocal, it is quite interesting that a few rogue 
employees can make such a big difference to 10 000 
people’s lives.  The problem is, is that they take the 
money and they run off and maybe this is a problem with 
capitalism or the way corporate structure works is the 
legal entity remains with all the problems even though the 
money is gone and so the people working in that entity 
now have to repay all the money that the others stole.   
So it is – it almost does not feel fair that the new 
EOH is paying for the past even though it is a different 
20 
company and, you know, somehow we have to get that 
right.   
But the fact that EOH has, you know, come through 
this difficult period so successfully, personally, it has just 
been the hard work and determination by so many people, 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 70 of 72 
 
not just the employees but a lot of the new board 
members who, when I reached out to them, were prepared 
to put their shoulder to the wheel even though, you know, 
there was an issue and a smell there or a noise there, 
some of my executive committee members who were also 
were not part of, you know, previous management agreed 
to come even though their knowing it was going to be late 
nights, weekends and people, you know, trying to be 
difficult and it is just amazing and it shows you if you just 
do the basics right you can actually turn an amazing 
10 
business around and now that we are well clear of those 
few dishonest, greedy individuals, I like to call them, we 
are really looking to move forward. 
We have learnt a lot, I mean, I have learnt a lot, 
even though coming out of 20 years of banking, but just, I 
suppose, my last bit to, you know, corporate South Africa, 
it does two to corrupt and as the advocate said in the 
beginning, you cannot steal from yourself there is always, 
you know, someone bribing and someone paying the bribe 
and it is so easy to blame the government, you know, 
20 
blame the private sector but in many cases it is the public 
sector actually making the payments and in some cases, 
that I found quite disappointing, you know, people say 
well, we have to do it, it is the way you do business 
otherwise you do not get it.  I think that is nonsense and I 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 71 of 72 
 
really want to get South African corporate to make this as,  
you know, a big priority because otherwise we are going 
to lose the essence of everything we have done.   
You know, we need to have zero tolerance.  We 
have seen the effect of the corruption, we have seen in 
this country over the past decade and it really has an 
effect on the masses.  It steals the very essence of what a 
lot of people in this country fought for for so long, they 
fought for equality and, you know, corruption steals this 
equality from their fingertips. 
10 
We obviously at EOH, at the new EOH now done 
the best we can, our circumstances, we have promised to 
continue to focus now solving for our clients, we will 
continue to assist the authorities through ENS so that they 
can follow the proper, you know, paper trail and do the 
rest and, if I may, just a last one indulgence, just a quote 
from Nelson Mandela who really, to me, gave all South 
Africans hope for our children and he said: 
“For to be free is not merely to cast off one’s 
chains but to live in a way that respects and 
20 
enhances the freedom of others.” 
And I think that is all our duty as South Africans at the 
moment.  Thank you very much. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Mr van Coller. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Mr van Coller, for 
23 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 310 
 
Page 72 of 72 
 
making yourself available to give evidence before the 
Commission, we appreciate very much.  If a need arises 
we will ask you to come back but thank you very much and 
you are now excused. 
MR VAN COLLER:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, we are in the unfortunate 
position now because of scheduling difficulties and the 
rearrangement of Mr Makhubo’s evidence that the next 
evidence will be on Wednesday which will be Mr Powell’s 
10 
evidence.  I apologise for the lost time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine.  We will adjourn 
then for the day and tomorrow there will be no sitting and 
then we will resume on Wednesday.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 25 NOVEMBER 2020 
