 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
28 AUGUST 2020 
 
 
DAY 257 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 212 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
28 AUGUST 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 3 of 212 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 28 AUGUST 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are we ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes there are two matters Chair on 
the role today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    The first is an appearance on 
behalf 
of 
Nedbank 
Mr 
McCarthy 
and 
the 
Transnet 
10 
Mohamadi matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then the second is the 
evidence of Mr Mokhesi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In the Free State matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.   
ADV GOODMAN: Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Somebody should sanitise before you … 
ADV GOODMAN:  Oh I am sorry Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think they did not pay attention. 
ADV GOODMAN:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV GOODMAN:  Chair my name is Isabel Goodman I am 
here on behalf of Nedbank.  I am instructed by Allan Overy 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 4 of 212 
 
and my attorney Ms Khan is in the audience. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV GOODMAN:  Chair Nedbank had applied – had 
brought an application on the 10 May to adduce evidence 
and to be permitted to cross-examine Mr Mohamadi in 
relation to the Transnet interest spots.  It submitted an 
affidavit on the 14 June and in January of this year that 
application was granted and it was grant leave to adduce 
evidence and to cross-examine.  Nedbank however no 
longer seeks leave to cross-examine and it seeks leave to 
10 
have its affidavit stand as evidence before the commission 
without the need to lead oral evidence.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am quite happy to grant Nedbank 
leave.  It must be leave not to proceed with cross-
examination or to give oral evidence but subject to one 
qualification that the commission retains the right at any 
time to call upon somebody at Nedbank to appear and avail 
themselves for questioning with regard to any aspects.  So 
on that understanding I am quite happy to grant that leave. 
ADV GOODMAN:  Indeed Chair thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV GOODMAN:  The – Nedbank has tendered both oral 
submissions 
and 
written 
submissions 
should 
the 
commission require it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 5 of 212 
 
ADV GOODMAN:  But it is a power of course you have 
anyway. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV GOODMAN:  Thank you Chair.  May we then be 
excused? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are excused ja. 
ADV GOODMAN:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair may Mr Mpofu address 
you? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Mpofu. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Thank you.  Chair I am here to address 
an application I believe the Chair has had sight of a copy 
of our application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have had a chance to read the 
application. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Ja.  We did – we also prepared some 
heads but it is a – I am told they were not properly 
20 
transmitted but we will rely on the application papers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  It is quite a simple application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair if I may just 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 6 of 212 
 
clarify very quickly well firstly, I am – my name is Mpofu I 
appear with my juniors Ms Pillay and Mr Sibotho [?] for Mr 
Mokhesi.  Now the real reason we are here Chair is – is at 
a 
simplistic 
level 
it 
is 
really 
just 
a 
postponement 
application.  And in fact, it is – as I will explain now it is 
two postponement applications as it were rolled into one.  
Because as the Chair will have seen in the Notice of 
Application, we have two prayers in the alternative. 
 
The one… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know if I saw the notice. 
10 
ADV MPOFU SC:  The notice oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I saw the affidavit. I do not know if I 
saw the... 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Notice okay. I will just – I will read it out 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  It – we are for two prayers. 
1. That the application – applicant’s obligation to testify 
at the commission he and is hereby suspended until 
the finalisation of any criminal charges against the 
20 
applicant pertaining to the asbestos audit conducted 
in the Free State. 
So that is the main prayer so to speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Then we say alternatively and that is 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 7 of 212 
 
why I will explain that now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Alternatively, that applicant’s obligation 
to testify before the commission is hereby staid pending 
the finalisation of a court application for review declaratory 
and other appropriate just and equitable relief. 
 
In other words Chair the – the second prayer only 
arises if the first prayer is not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Aphased? 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  And – so in theory we could have done 
the first application and then with the ruling. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Then we come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  But for – to save time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  We do both of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Back to back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  In anticipation.  Now – so the – that is 
really what we want to clarify upfront. All these other 
interesting issues about Section 35 and what have you are 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 8 of 212 
 
not directly before you so to speak.  We only raise them in 
order to justify the application for a postponement. 
 
So what is really before the Chair is whether we 
have – we have sufficient ground for – to ask for a 
postponement. 
 
Now Chair the – in our heads we had outlined the 
principles but though they are trite the – about you know 
there must be good cause, it must be a bona fide 
application and so on asking for a postponement. 
 
And we are in a way fortified by the fact that the 
10 
Chair has already granted a postponement in this matter 
before 
which 
we 
are 
very 
grateful 
about 
and 
that 
postponement was particularly because by the time Mr 
Mokhesi had come here at that stage he had just consulted 
with his lawyers and he had not really had a proper 
consultation. So he wanted an opportunity which the Chair 
kindly granted him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was there not also an issue about his 
senior counsel not being well? 
ADV MPOFU SC:  That was correct yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes. So – 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the one I remember quite well. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the grounds.. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 9 of 212 
 
ADV MPOFU SC:  So roughly Chair the point I am really 
going towards is that that postponement was relative to 
affording a chance to get proper representation which is 
related as the Chair knows in – these are all routed – I 
mean Section 35 issues.  The legal representation, the 
right to remain silent, the right not to incriminate yourself 
they are all – they belong to the same family of rights so to 
speak. 
 
Now the – so what has actually happened therefore 
is that he – he now has obtained such legal advice which is 
10 
why we are here.  And Chair in a nutshell we assert the 
right to – you know the rights that I spoke about 
particularly the right to remain silent and the right to not to 
incriminate yourself in the following manner specifically. 
 
Put it this way the – our quarrel is not with the 
commission because the commission does not appoint 
itself and it does not draw its own Terms of Reference so 
to speak.  But unfortunately, the road to the other quarrel 
has to go past here so to speak. 
 
So – the – in a nutshell Chair and I am not going to 
20 
go into the legal cases and so on.  In a nutshell what we 
are saying is that in – in asserting his right to remain silent 
and his right not to incriminate himself in these particular 
circumstances we concede upfront that those rights if you 
read the constitution literally they are accorded to what is 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 10 of 212 
 
called an arrested person or an accused person and we 
concede that there is some greyness about that.  Because 
all the – we cannot take it further – higher than saying that 
he has been told that the – an arrest is imminent so to 
speak but in reality he is not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It has not happened. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes it has not happened that we 
concede.  But I suppose we counter that concession very 
quickly by as the Chair knows very well that we – the – in 
terms of Section 38 of the constitution you may assert your 
10 
rights even if they are merely threatened.  In other words 
even if the violation has not actually – actually occurred. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Secondly the right to – the right against 
self-incrimination also extends to the risk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  The risk of our prosecution.  So the – 
one does not really have to be literally in shackles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  To assert those rights. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  The American case of [00:10:49] that 
says something where there – the emphasis on the risk of 
a prosecution is – is asserted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 11 of 212 
 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Now if that – if you put then that to bed 
what we then have is a situation where somebody is saying 
to the Chair bona fide I am – if I want to put it crudely – I 
am refusing to answer your questions but I am not refusing 
because I want to refuse I am refusing simply because I 
want  
a. To understand what is happening with this criminal 
charges or 
b. At worst to go to court to assert my right not to 
answer those questions.  In other words to assert 
10 
whether I do have a right to refuse or not. 
Yes we humbly then ask the Chair to – to look at it 
with those eyes that it really – it is a Section 34 type of 
enquiry because the Chair does not have to believe that if 
you go to court for example we will succeed.  Whether we 
succeed or not is another question.  We are simply 
asserting the right to go to court and clarify if we are 
compelled or not compelled. 
 
And then of course just out of common sense Chair 
it would be futile to say oh well okay you can go to court 
20 
Mr Mpofu with your client but in the meantime I want to 
hear him on this and this and that because then it will 
defeat the very purpose of going – of asserting those rights 
and thereby denying of Section 34 rights so to speak. 
 
Now the – the only point I really want to make Chair 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 12 of 212 
 
is the following.  The ambiguity arises from the – the 
recent amendment to the terms.  The – I am prepared to 
say that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the regulations? 
ADV MPOFU SC:  To the regulations rather. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Regulation 11 in particular yes.  The – 
the – I am prepared to say without committing myself that 
before that amendment this situation would not have 
arisen.  Because at that stage it was very clear that 
10 
answers 
that 
you 
give 
here 
are 
– 
were 
completely 
protected.   
 
Now we know in reality I am sure the police watch 
the commission precedence as well but let us put that 
aside.  So in theory your answers were protected. 
 
What has since happened and for other good policy 
reasons is that Regulation 11 was introduced so that the 
commission may assist other law enforcement agencies 
and that it is in that context that the risk that we perceive 
arises.  
20 
 
And it might be that we perceive a risk that is not 
existent or not whatever but that will be determined by – by 
a court of law in due course.  But at the very least the 
Chair just has to be convinced that we in good faith we 
perceive that risk and due to the perception of that risk we 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 13 of 212 
 
therefore humbly request that the – the compulsion to 
testify be suspended or staid until such that such time that 
we – we are able to – to allay the risk. 
 
So that is in a nutshell the situation Chair.  If the 
Chair has any questions that is the anchor of the 
application as I said of the two applications. 
 
The first one being that we suspend until the 
criminal charges are finalised but – or the Chair could say 
no and only suspend it until you clarify your rights and we 
have said in the heads which is not in the application we 
10 
also said that obviously the Chair would have a discretion 
on saying for example you must assert your rights within – 
we cannot wait for ten years for you to assert your rights it 
must be done reasonably within a reasonable time or report 
back to the commission as to progress. 
 
Or even – well I suppose the commission would still 
be cited anyway in the – in those proceedings as an 
interested party.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the – the one issue is of course that 
Mr Mokhesi has if I recall correctly has submitted his 
20 
version … 
ADV MPOFU SC:  To two affidavits. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Two affidavits. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Ja. 
 
Already 
to 
the 
commission.  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 14 of 212 
 
Assuming that in doing so he has fully disclosed to the 
commission all that he knows that is relevant.  That means 
that his version is already before the commission.  Now 
that being the case it does not seem to me that he ought to 
be concerned that he might incriminate himself in any way.  
He has already disclosed his version so even assuming 
that those Section 35 rights were applicable in his situation 
there would be – it seems to me they would be that 
difficulty.  The only thing that as I see it he might be 
saying is well when I am in – on the witness stand I could 
10 
be – I am going to be asked questions. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where I might have to elaborate and so 
on and so on.  But I am not sure – I am not sure how 
weighty that would be particularly before you know what 
the questions are. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know.  It may be that it is a situation 
where when you have taken the stand – witness stand you 
are asked questions – there will be questions that you feel 
20 
you can answer there is no problem. Then there may be 
questions where you feel that you are not comfortable 
answering.  That may be the situation.  It might not be a 
situation where you refuse to take the witness stand. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Correct. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 15 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see.  Because there – it is important 
to draw the distinction. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Refusing to take the witness stand and 
taking the witness stand but refusing to answer certain 
questions. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Certain questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because of certain reasons and being 
able – being willing to answer other questions you know.  
So – so there is that.  I know that I may be mistaken but I 
10 
think there is a witness who came who had a concern like 
that then said okay we will see as we go but felt quite free 
to answer.  I think there was no problem. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so there is that.  And then of course 
as you know there is the problem that the lifespan of the 
commission is limited and we are really trying to – to 
finish.  Of course the – if anybody goes to court that gets 
out of our control.  We have no control as to how long that 
takes.  We can make submissions and the court would 
20 
decide but it could be that we end up not having the 
benefit of his evidence in circumstances where one would 
really have preferred to have the benefit of his evidence 
because of the important position in government he 
occupied as the Accounting Officer.  So – so  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 16 of 212 
 
1. There is the problem about the lifespan. 
2. There is – of the commission.  I mean we – we are 
trying to finish the hearing of oral evidence by end of 
this year. So that the three months of our lifespan 
next year January to March is used for the writing of 
the report. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  The report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have a lot of witnesses who must still 
come.  So there is that problem.  We have already lost one 
day with regard to him and now if we postpone the hearing 
10 
of his evidence, we lose another day.  That is two days we 
have lost relating to him alone.  So there are those 
concerns. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Okay yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And of course once one accepts that the 
Section 35 rights do not apply then it seems that the only 
basis and you must tell me if I misunderstood your 
submissions.  The only basis on which the postponement 
application is made is really that he was to clarify in the 
court what the position is in the light of the amendments to 
20 
the regulations.  Is my understanding correct? 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Chair let us put it this way.  His position 
is that he should not be compelled. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes 
ADV MPOFU SC:  But obviously that is his position. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 17 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  yes, yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Someone else might have a different 
position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  And therefore that – that dispute… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what is the ground for that position? 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The legal ground for it? 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes thank you Chair.  Yes.  Well the 
legal ground and that – that is – I wanted to respond to 
10 
that first.  We do not accept Chair that the Section 35. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Rights do not apply. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Rights do not apply yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  And that is for the following reason.  
Firstly, as we said on the basis of the arrest on an arrest 
he is in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  So to speak but on the basis that the 
Chair raises which is quite an important consideration 
20 
namely that what has he got to lose because he has 
already made two statements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  We – with respect do not – our 
submission is that that is not something would exclude 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 18 of 212 
 
Section 35. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  For the following reason Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  The – in fact the Chair has given half of 
the answer I was going to give namely that the risk – 
remember we are dealing with a risk here?  The risk of 
self-incrimination still exists because obviously the – the 
obligation to give evidence goes hand in hand with the duty 
to answer questions or to be cross-examined for that 
10 
matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes and then you are in a different zone 
altogether as we know to a statement that you made than 
when you are confronted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  With this, that and the other. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Because that is exactly where the 
incrimination actually comes.  Not so much in what you say 
20 
than what may be extracted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Which goes again I am agreeing with the 
Chair particularly on the second issue which is that the – 
this is not – we are not asserting a right not to testify. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 19 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  As such and the Chair will know that 
there is a long line of cases about exactly what the Chair 
was saying that that for example the way it is put in the 
cases is that it does not prevent you from taking the oath 
for argument sake ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  So you cannot say no I am not taking the 
oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV 
MPOFU 
SC: 
 
Because 
of 
the 
right 
to 
self-
incrimination.  So literally speaking that right is asserted 
question by question by question by question but we all 
know that – you may just then not – just stand there and 
take the oath and say nothing to which is the same thing 
as not testifying as it were. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  So I am with the Chair there but where 
we part ways with respect Chair is the fact that the – the 
fact 
that 
he 
has 
made 
statements 
in 
my 
respectful 
20 
submission does not nullify the entire right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Or it is not so much – it is not like a 
waiver of the right because he might have waived part of it 
by giving the affidavit but there is still the residual right of 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 20 of 212 
 
– against cross-examination so to speak.  That is the first 
thing. 
 
The second thing Chair is that actually that – even 
the fact that he has given evidence is actually a point in 
our favour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Because  
a. It shows that he is – this is not someone who is trying 
to be difficult.   
Where he had a duty to cooperate he did.  But where he 
10 
has now obtained legal advice which by the way the Chair 
gave him a postponement so that he can get the legal 
advice.  So the Chair cannot now say well the legal advice 
you got I do not like it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not… 
ADV MPOFU SC:  And I do not think – I am not saying the 
Chair is saying that.  I am just saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I say nothing about legal advises. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Yes.  But I am simply saying the legal 
advice is what it is.  He genuinely has received legal 
20 
advice that says this is a grey area it might need to be 
clarified.  So this is not somebody who is you know trying 
to dodge the commission.  He was here every time even 
now when the dates were changed he made amendments to 
his schedule to be here.  So that is the first issue. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 21 of 212 
 
 
The second issue which is probably more important 
Chair is that the – the – and this is about prejudice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  The commission is not really prejudiced 
in the sense that it is left with nothing.  The commission 
has got his two statements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  And therefore, it would mitigate at best 
the – any prejudice that the commission would suffer 
because they already have his version.  What the – the 
10 
only thing the commission will be deprived of is the 
opportunity to confront him with this and that and the 
other.  So it is not so as if the commission will be left with 
nothing.  And apropos he only points that really I cannot – 
where I full sympathies with the commission knowing the 
history is the fact that you know we all know that the – 
there is pressure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 
ADV MPOFU SC:  To finish.  But that in my respectful 
submission if we accept the rights – the existence of the 
20 
rights one can find – we can find each other with the 
evidence leaders or with the Chair and to make it practical 
that this is not a never, never thing.  Either we have to 
report here within a particular period as to the progress or 
if it looks like that case is going to take forever, we may 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 22 of 212 
 
come back and the Chair might say, well I am changing my 
ruling or whatever. But I am just speaking off the cuff. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  So – but I am just saying that is – the 
risk of losing him completely is one that – that probably 
can be mitigated.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  But the real issue is whether I am 
correct Chair in that the Section 35 rights are still 
applicable or not.  Because if they are then the rest is 
10 
about finding ways around our problem.  As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so just to make sure I understand.  
So the – the entire basis of the application is that the 
Section 35 rights are applicable. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  That is correct that is the anchor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the – ja that is where they are – 
the argument is anchored. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Is anchored yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  And that the second leg of the anchor is 
20 
the fact that the latest amendment to the regulations at 
best create an ambiguity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Which might need to be clarified by their 
day in court. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 23 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Okay.  Okay.  No, no that is 
fine.  Let me hear Mr Pretorius. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Thank you – thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have prepared heads of 
argument. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It should be included in your bundle 
Chair, page 37. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, because this is a matter that 
may create a president or will create a president, either way, 
because it may well affect other witnesses who are going to 
appear before you.  We have taken the trouble to prepare 
comprehensive heads, which are now before you, but I will 
attempt to summarise them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For the purposes of the present. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   By way of introduction.  This 
Commission is setup to investigate criminal activity, state 
capture corruption and fraud.   
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 24 of 212 
 
 
It is imperative therefore, and contemplated by the 
president, when setting up the Commission by the court 
when confirming that the Commission should proceed full 
bench and by the scheme of the act and regulations, that 
people implicated in criminal activity will come to testify. 
 
So it is not anything exception.  It is the rule.  And this 
Commission is obliged, it is not a matter of choice, this 
Commission is obliged in Terms of Reference to investigate 
those matters, to call those witnesses particularly implicated 
persons. 
10 
 
Because if it did not call implicated persons to explain 
conduct alleged to have been undertaken by them, it would 
be acting unfairly.   
 
So the first point is that it is nothing unusual, in fact, it 
is the rule that implicated persons come to testify before the 
Commission and it is the duty of the Commission to fully 
ventilate all versions including those of implicated persons. 
 
But the law caters for that situation and so the 
application 
at 
present 
is 
opposed, 
not 
only 
in 
the 
circumstances of this case but as a matter of general 
20 
principle, both the main prayer and the alternative prayer. 
 
The first factual point that must be made is that Mr 
Mokhesi has not been arrested, nor has he been charged 
with any offence.  First point. 
 
Secondly, he is a compellable witness and does not have 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 25 of 212 
 
a right to remain silent.  Now, there is a distinction between 
the right to remain silent on the one hand and the privilege 
against self-incrimination on the other. 
 
There is no right to remain silent.  If Mr Mokhesi had 
been arrested, he could in the criminal proceedings say:  I 
am not saying anything at all.  Whether it incriminates me or 
not, I have a constitutional right to remain silent.  That is 
inherent in my right to a fair criminal trial and I am 
exercising it. 
 
What we are really dealing with here is the privilege 
10 
against 
self-incrimination. 
 And 
the 
Commissions Act, 
although it is clearly outdated, and the regulations as 
amended deal with that. 
 
I might just mention at this stage that the section quoted 
in the application of Mr Mokhesi is the old, un-amended 
section.  The section that deals with the right not to answer 
incriminating questions is in the Act 3(4) and the use 
immunity – and I will come to that technical term direct use 
immunity is in the regulations. 
 
So there are two protections.  The first is the privilege in 
20 
Section 3(4) of the act and the regulations deal with the fact 
that any incriminating answer may not be used in any 
criminal proceedings against an accused person. 
 
So in paragraph 4.5 we deal with Section 3(4) of the 
Commissions Act and in paragraph 4.4 we deal with 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 26 of 212 
 
Regulation 8(2). 
 
In paragraph 5 and following, we deal with the point I 
made initially Chair and that is simple that this Commission 
has a mandate to do what it is doing. 
 
In this case, it has a mandate to summon or call Mr 
Mokhesi to the witness stand and to get his version in 
relation to allegations made concerning the Free State 
Asbestos Project matter. 
 
Again I stress Chair.  It is not a matter of discretion.  It 
is not something that the Commission would like or not like 
10 
to do.  The Commission has to do it in order to be fair, 
amongst others, to Mr Mokhesi. 
 
So Chair, the heads deal with that at paragraphs 5 to 10 
on pages 2 and 3.  In essence Chair, the applicant, Mr 
Mokhesi, has been implicated in evidence relating to the 
Free State Asbestos Audit. 
 
I am instructed that he has not been summoned to 
testify, so that should be correct, even though, Mr Mokhesi 
says so in his founding affidavit but I may be wrong there.  I 
have not been involved in the matter from the beginning. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I seem to think it would be unlikely 
that he was summonsed but I ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Because, as I understand it, he has 
been cooperating. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 27 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But what he does seek is a 
postponement of an appearance here Chair.  I have made 
the point Chair – I am moving to page 4 of the heads – that 
the right to remain silent is only available to an arrested or 
accused person in criminal proceedings. 
 
What is important about it is, is that it relates to criminal 
proceedings, and what is important about it, it is entire 
distinguishable from the case – and you have referred to the 
10 
case of Mr Manye – you came where you ruled he had to 
answer questions but could assert a protection under the 
regulations in relation to a particular question, not questions 
in general. 
 
So in a criminal trial, an accused can say:  I am not 
saying anything at all.  You do not have to bother whether it 
is incriminating or not.  I have the right to remain silent.  It is 
a constitutional right.  It is essential to a fair trial. 
 
Certainly, Mr Mokhesi does not have that right.  The 
question is, what other protections does he have given the 
20 
overall mandate of the Commission? 
 
The legislator had decided that implicated persons must 
appear when summonsed to do so because they may appear 
on a consensual arrangement. 
 
But it says because certain questions put to you may 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 28 of 212 
 
incriminate you, you may either, in terms of 3(4) of the act, 
exercise your right not to answer, a privilege, against 
answering self-incriminating questions, or in terms of the 
regulations, Regulation 8(2), if you do answer deliberately or 
not 
deliberately, 
the 
question, 
which 
involves 
self-
incrimination, that then cannot be used against you.  You are 
protected. 
 
And that is the scheme of the law.  And if Chair, you 
refuse the application, we would be doing no more than 
applying the law.  No question of a misdirection which is 
10 
subject to review but I will come to the review point later. 
 
Chair, what the scheme of the legislation that applies 
here read with the regulation seeks to achieve is a balance 
on the one hand between the duty of a commissioner of 
inquiry to enquiry into in this case, criminal activity, fully into 
here all those involved and implicated in order to fulfil a 
stator.   
 
In fact, a constitution mandate on the one hand and the 
protection of accused or potentially accused persons on the 
other, and the manner in which the legislator and the 
20 
regulations have dealt with that, is to provide protection in 
3(4) and protection in Regulation 8(2) and I have dealt with 
that.   
 
Of course, as the learned author Jason Beer says on the 
Work on Public Inquiries when may remove in privilege.  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 29 of 212 
 
That is one option for a law-maker to say, you are not going 
to have any privilege in a commission of inquiry. 
 
The other way, and this is in 19.2 of the heads, is to 
maintain the privilege against self-incrimination but also, as 
the regulation do here, to grant some form of immunity 
against the subsequent use of the evidence. 
 
And if I may just place on record the Constitutional 
Court decision in Ferreira v Levin: 
“Legislators (says the Constitutional Court) has 
sought a legislative solution to the tension between 
10 
the 
privilege 
against 
self-incrimination 
and 
the 
interest of the state in investigative procedures of 
various kinds.   
This has been achieved by compelling examining to 
answer question even though their answers thereto 
might tend to incriminate them and at the same time 
protecting the interest of those whose examinees by 
granting 
them 
either 
an 
indemnity 
against 
prosecution or conferring some form of use-immunity 
in respect of the compelled testimony.” 
20 
 
That is the position of Ferreira v Levin.  However, in this 
case, there is the added protection under 3(4) of the act 
which says that you have a privilege and you do not have to 
answer questions even though they are incriminating. 
 
So in the scheme that governs this Commission goes 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 30 of 212 
 
further and grants more protection than that granted in 
Ferreira v Levin. 
 
And Chair, in paragraph 21, we quote the correct and 
amended version of Regulation 8(2) that was amended at the 
commencement of the Commission’s activities in 2018, you 
will recall Chair. 
 
It reads: 
“A self-incriminating answer or a statement given by 
a witness before the Commission shall not be 
admissible as evidence against that person in any 
10 
criminal proceedings brought against that person, 
instituted 
in 
any 
court, 
except 
in 
criminal 
proceedings where the person concerned is charged 
with an offence of Section 6 of the Commissions 
Act..  That is perjury.” 
 
So apart from perjury, anything that Mr Mokhesi says 
here 
before 
you 
Chair, 
even 
if 
he 
answers 
a 
self-
incriminating question and that answer incriminates him, may 
not be used against him in criminal proceedings. 
 
It is as if he exercise their right to remain silent at any 
20 
respect of that question.  But there is a further remedy that 
Mr Mokhesi can use, as I have said perhaps too often now 
Chair, Section 3(4) of the act which says you can refuse to 
answer the question and rely on it. 
 
Now Chair, there is some debate about what Section 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 31 of 212 
 
3(4) means and its apparent inconsistency with Regulation 
8(2) but as I understand, the approach that you have taken 
Chair up to now, it is that both apply together.   
 
So in summary Chair, what the position is, is that if Mr 
Mokhesi 
is 
asked 
a 
question, 
the 
answer 
is 
self-
incriminating, any answers, he is protected under the 
regulation. 
 
He may also, but in respect of a particular question only, 
not in respect of evidence as a whole, even a category of 
evidence, in respect of a particular question say to you 
10 
Chair:  I do not want to answer this because I reserve my 
right in terms of Section 3(4) against self-incrimination. 
 
So 
Chair, 
the 
principles 
then 
that 
we 
submit, 
respectfully, will guide you in your decision contained in the 
heads up to paragraph 27. 
 
The only further point that needs to be made before I 
deal with the alternative order, is the issue of how the right 
not to answer a self-incriminating question under Section 
3(4) of the act is exercised, and there is clear authority that 
a witness cannot attempt to deal with that right or exercise 
20 
that right on a blanket or category basis.  It must be done in 
relation to a particular question. 
 
So in paragraph 33, we submit, privilege cannot be 
relied upon by a competent and compellable witness to resist 
appearing as a witness or to refuse to answer at all, that is 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 32 of 212 
 
to remain silent, rather, the privilege must be tamed in 
respect of each question – and we cite the authority – and 
the judicial officer, that would be yourself Chair, before 
allowing the claim of privilege, must satisfy himself that 
there is “reasonable ground to apprehend danger to the 
witness from him being compelled to answer”. 
 
And further authorities is quoted there.  This danger 
must be real and appreciable and not of an imaginary or 
unsubstantial character.   
 
The 
privilege may thus 
not be tamed 
where 
the 
10 
possibility of criminal liability has removed, such as where a 
witness has been indemnified in terms Section 204 of the 
Criminal Procedure Act. 
 
So we say in paragraph 34 that Mr Mokhesi may indeed 
evoke his privilege against self-incrimination to avoid dealing 
with the accusations put to him but must do explicitly in 
relation to a particular question and by saying that his 
answer would tend to incriminate him. 
 
I f I could deal briefly Chair with the alternative prayer.  
Ending any clarification of the law, the witness in this case 
20 
Mr Mokhesi retains his right as I have outlined them, both in 
terms of the act and regulations. 
 
There is no basis upon which he can rely on the right to 
remain silent and your finding that Chair is certainly not a 
reviewable finding because the right to remain silent is a 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 33 of 212 
 
Section 35 right in criminal proceedings.   
 
He clearly does not and cannot have a right to remain 
silent given the statutory framework within which this 
Commission, 
which 
is 
investigating 
criminal 
activity, 
operates.   
 
If, however, you Chair – and I deal with this in an 
entirely erratically basis – were to say to Mr Mokhesi:  No, 
you must answer that question even though it is self-
incriminating.  Then there would be a right to take your 
decision on review because that would be a clear violation 
10 
here. 
 
But there is just simple no prospects of reviewing this 
case.  The reliance on the recent amendment to Regulation 
11 is, with respect in our view, incorrect. 
 
Once Mr Mokhesi has given evidence – and I am talking 
about the recent amendment to Regulation 11 which allows 
disclosure – once Mr Mokhesi has given evidence, the 
evidence is in the public domain.  One does not need 
Regulation 11 of the law enforcement agencies to the 
evidence on a website and to access the documents that are 
20 
part of it. 
 
So if Mr Mokhesi gives evidence and answers whatever 
questions he answers, subject to the protection he has, all 
that the law enforcement agencies then do is, they go 
evidence in the public domain which they can then use. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 34 of 212 
 
 
But they will not be able to transgress the provisions of 
Regulation 8(2) and use against Mr Mokhesi any answer that 
he gives.  They may use it in other cases but not theirs.   
 
So the reference to the amendment to Regulation 11 
really does not apply in this case.  If he does not give 
evidence, his statement insofar as aspects that have been 
put to other witnesses and that is also on public record, may 
be used. 
 
If they are self-incriminating, they may also be used 
because he did not give that evidence.  So the situation is 
10 
not affected by a recourse to... there is nothing that needs to 
be clarified.  It does not pertain to the facts of this case.  
Those are our submissions, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Mpofu. 
ADV MPOFU:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I agree with most of 
what Mr Pretorius is saying and so I will only really deal with 
those areas where I disagree with him. 
 
Let us start with the last point that he made.  It cannot 
be Chair that Regulation 11 has no impact on, at least the 
perception of the risk that we are talking about here. 
20 
 
Mr Pretorius, with respect, cannot have it both ways.  
Remember that the old Regulation 11 afforded certain 
protections.  It is an obvious reading of the current 
Regulation 11, that it removes those protections.  There is 
no doubt about that. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 35 of 212 
 
 
So to the extent that those protections are removed and 
information may now be accessed by the so-called state law 
enforcement agencies, that must count for something. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe we should look at the actual 
regulation. 
ADV MPOFU:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because it may well be that the fact that 
they may access certain information does not detract from 
the fact that that information may not be used against the 
person who gave evidence at the Commission but may be, 
10 
that information may be used against somebody else.   
ADV MPOFU:   No, I accept that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   But all I am saying just as a general 
theoretical statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   Surely those protections were there to 
protect somebody like Mr Mokhesi from risk – taking the risk 
in answering questions here that those questions might be 
used against him in related criminal proceedings. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   That must be so.  So the removal, ipso facto 
the removal of those protections must expose him to some 
risks.  I mean, I am not even prepared to quantify it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 36 of 212 
 
ADV MPOFU:   Of what is, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MPOFU:   Secondly, let us take an example Chair.  Let 
us assume the Chair were to say:  Okay, look I want to put it 
to... And this is just off the cuff.  So I am going to ensure 
that you give evidence in camera.  What do you say?  So 
that the law enforcement agencies who may be watching 
television not hear what you say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
ADV MPOFU:   The impact of this regulation is that, even 
10 
that, that might have protected him before the amendment to 
the regulation.  Now, in any event, he might have that 
evidence in camera but the Commission still has to share 
that information.   
 
So it would be called comfort, the fact that they do not 
get it on television but they get it a week later.  So it is a 
very impact for development.   
 
And as we say, we all know why that was done because 
it is to try and, you know, accelerate broadly accountability 
and so on. 
20 
 
But as it affects a particular person, we will have to 
sensitive to the risks that – maybe unintended risks – but 
it... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Tell me.  The clarification that you would 
be seeking to obtain from the court, would relate to what 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 37 of 212 
 
exactly?   
 
If one were to except, as I think both you and Mr 
Pretorius seem to accept , that once he takes the witness 
stand, if he is asked a question whose answer he thinks 
would incriminate him, he will have a right in terms of the 
Commissions Act, Section 3(4) to refuse to answer the 
specific question but otherwise, questions that do not 
incriminate him, then he can answer.   
 
So if one works on the basis that that is what would 
happen, what is the clarification that he would be seeking in 
10 
court?  What would it be directed at clarifying? 
ADV MPOFU:   Right.  Chair, again I agree with Mr 
Pretorius’s analyses of that issues to the following extent, 
that the... if the Chair, you were to say, after he has taken 
the oath and then he says:  I will not answer that particular 
question.  And Chair says:  No, you will have to. 
 
Then the Chair would then be exercising its discretion, 
as it were, which must be reviewable as required by the 
court of law. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
20 
ADV MPOFU:   Yes.  So I accept... let me take one step 
back, if I may Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MPOFU:   We accept that – and I said that when I was 
addressing the Chair in-chief – we accept that theoretically 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 38 of 212 
 
the right attaches to questions ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   To specific questions, ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   Yes.  That we accept. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   We accept the right to remain silent is not 
the right that we are seeking directly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   We are simply saying that right is a cousin, 
as it were, of the right against self-incrimination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MPOFU:   So is the right to have legal representation 
and so on.  That is a cluster of rights under 35(9) which are 
related. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  H’m. 
ADV MPOFU:   However, let us... we appeal to practicality 
and realism in the following way.  The only issue that this 
Commission has an interest in, in relation to Mr Mokhesi, is 
specified at Annexure M6 to our application. I am sorry it is 
not paginated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
ADV MPOFU:   All the... oh, I am sorry.  Let us start at 
Annexure M3.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   M3.2.? 
ADV MPOFU:   Yes.  That is the letter from Mr Paper of my 
instructing attorney. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 39 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   There it says that, at paragraph 2: 
“The Commission of Inquiry requires our client to 
present evidence pertaining to the Asbestos Audit 
conducted in the Free State being the very same 
issue being investigated by yourself.” 
 
So that is the crux.  There is one issue.  He has been 
told that the police are interested in the Asbestos Audit 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MPOFU:   He has been told that the Commission is 
similarly interested in the same issues.  So there can be no 
doubt 
about 
the 
coincidence 
of 
the 
issue. 
 
So 
the 
Commission... well, literally, he might be asked to come here 
and say:  What is your name?  He answers his name.  How 
many children do you have?  He answers that and so on.  
 
And then you say:  Okay now let us come to the real 
issue why you are here which is the Asbestos Audit.  And he 
says:  I am not going to answer anything.  And what is the 
point of that? 
20 
 
I mean, at a practical level, we must accept that this is a 
similar issue on sides.  The police are interested in exactly 
the same issue but the Commission is interested there. 
 
So if he has a right not to deal with the Asbestos Audit 
issues, I am putting it at its broadest, then that is the right 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 40 of 212 
 
that he will be asserting.  And if the Chair found that:  No, he 
does not have such a right.  That will be the issue that will 
be taken to court, as it were. 
 
And the court may say:  The Chair is right.  Or Mr 
Pretorius is right or me are right.  But he should be insulated 
from the risk, the very risk, of even dealing with that issue at 
any level, so to speak.  Ja, because as I said earlier. 
 
So this is not a case where... I mean, we can go through 
that exercise but it will be a waste of the Commission’s time 
because he will simply ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think what you are saying now, 
does seem to me to differ from how I understood you, what I 
understood you to be saying earlier.   
 
It seems to me that if he says:  I do not want to answer 
any questions relating to the Asbestos Project, that is not an 
exercise of the right in relation to question-by-question.  He 
is simply saying:   
 
On the topic of the Asbestos Project, I do not want to 
answer any questions at all.  Which it seems may include 
questions that do not incriminate him, you know.  So that is 
20 
how I understand your argument to be now.   
ADV MPOFU:   No, Chair, I understand the distinction.  
Just remember now I am responding to Mr Pretorius’ 
assertion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 41 of 212 
 
ADV MPOFU:   So all I am saying Chair, that is why I was 
saying I am appealing more to practicality than legal 
technicalities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   Because, technically, we all agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   He can be brought into the chair, he can 
take the oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   He can tell us all about his life and all that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   Ja, but when it comes to real issue which 
he is hear, which is the asbestos audit.  Remember, Chair, 
unfortunately in this case the – it might well be that if he 
actually had already been charged, you would be in a 
better position or the Chair would be in a better position to 
say 
yes, 
but 
you 
have 
only 
been 
charged 
money 
laundering, for argument’s sake, but not this or that or 
that.   
But here he is in a situation where the risk to him is 
20 
still ill-defined, so to speak, in the sense that he might 
answer a question which, as the Chair, says might look 
innocuous at face value about, you know, whether he 
attended this meeting or that meeting which, at face value, 
is not self-incriminating but depending on the nature of the 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 42 of 212 
 
actual risk and the charges, that might turn out to be – to 
have been a self-incriminating answer.    
So it is not your typical situation where the Chair 
could say no, but these two charges have been withdrawn 
so therefore you can answer this but this one remains, we 
understand, it is a – unfortunately a fuzzy situation. 
The other point, Chair, which I wanted to make but 
Mr Pretorius address is that – yes, no, I have made the 
point  about regulation 11, removal of – the amendment 
allows for – the fact that the amendment allows for the 
10 
disclosure of the information is the new – what Mr 
Pretorius 
is 
saying, 
would 
have 
applied 
before 
that 
amendment.   
Our 
submission, 
respectfully, 
is 
that 
the 
introduction of the amendment is the one that brings some 
ambiguity and something for a court to clarify.   
Chair, as I say, we approached this practically.  If 
the Chair says well, let us go through the motions, let us 
just take the stand and say his name and so on, well, so be 
it, but we can – I can tell the Chair now that he is not 
20 
going to answer any questions to do with what he has 
really been brought here for, namely the asbestos audit 
and it would – so it would be a futile exercise indeed to 
compel him to do so and the case that Mr Pretorius 
referred to, which is the case of Connison(?) about that the 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 43 of 212 
 
danger must be real and appreciable and not an imaginary 
and unsubstantiated in character is correct but I addressed 
that when I was addressing you in chief, Chair, namely that 
allow he has not charged, the threat to his Section 35 
rights is real in the circumstances. 
And just for completion, in the same vein Corbett 
CJ in the case of Magmoed v Janse van Rensburg 1993 in 
the old - 1991 SACR67 in the old AD called this: 
“It 
is 
a 
personal 
right 
to 
refuse 
to 
disclose 
admissible evidence.” 
10 
In other words, one accept that the evidence is relevant 
and admissible in the normal law of evidence sense but 
you have a right to refuse to give it for the reasons that we 
have already explained and it is in that context that the 
right (a) that you assert must be understood and the right 
that we seek to be clarified if given an opportunity must be 
understood.  Just check if I am leaving anything out, Chair. 
 
Yes, 
the 
Commission’s 
Act 
again, 
before 
the 
amendment, theoretically protects one against any criminal 
consequences apart from lying under oath.  That, we 
20 
accept, but again we put that into the pre-regulation – new 
regulation level position.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  It may well be, Mr Mpofu, that – 
whether it might prove to be a futile exercise or not, it may 
well be that Mr Mokhesi might have to take the witness 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 44 of 212 
 
stand, be asked questions and if he refuses and asserts 
his privilege, he does so – if he seeks to assert his 
privilege in relation to the entire topic of asbestos project, 
let us know that that is the position to the witness stand 
and that is what he gives so we know what the facts are. 
ADV MPOFU:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he may well, I do not know, but you 
are his adviser, you have indicated it may well be that he 
might say look, yes, there are questions that I can answer 
but they are questions I will refuse to answer and let us 
10 
see how it goes. 
 
If he says I refuse to answer any question then let 
us have that as an established fact that he took the 
witness stand, this is what he said, so that if he goes to 
court, that fact is established. 
ADV MPOFU:   As a factual basis, no, I have no problem 
with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That fact is established, you know? 
ADV MPOFU:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say is he entitled to refuse to answer 
20 
any question on a certain topic or is he only entitled to 
refuse to answer specific questions on the topic? 
ADV MPOFU:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   Chair, firstly, no problem whatsoever with 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 45 of 212 
 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   It is actually – if there are going to be court 
proceedings …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To clarify things. 
ADV MPOFU:   Yes.  If there are going to be court 
proceedings it actually makes it easier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   Because then we will not have this debate 
about does he have a right to take the oath and so on. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   Because will have been done, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   Secondly, Chair, let me maybe make – I will 
make an appeal to the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   To, when he does take the stand, to maybe 
in a say assist him in clarifying exactly that point with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   Are you prepared to go this far and this far. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   Beforehand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MPOFU:   Because we do not want the risk to 
materialise inadvertently, so to speak. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 46 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   But the last submission I want to make, 
Chair, is that my submission is simply this, that on these 
facts, the distinction between question to question and the 
topic is artificial because there is really one topic and one 
issue and it is – this is not as if he going to be asked about 
how the - you know, the state of housing in the Free State 
and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MPOFU:   But I have no quarrel with the Chair ’s 
10 
approach of, as it were, narrowing the issue and knowing 
where he is preparedness to answer the stats and where it 
ends.  We have no issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  No, thank you. 
ADV MPOFU:   Subject to – if that is the route that we are 
going to go, Chair, we just ask for five minutes so that we 
can consult with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, if I may, it will assist, I am 
sure, if we just clarify. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What this regulation 11 which 
seems to be at stake in this application is all about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The regulation must be read with 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 47 of 212 
 
the Act.  The regulation in essence – and we are dealing 
with 
the 
11.2 
and 
11.3 
says 
that 
the 
work 
of 
the 
Commission particularly its investigative work and matters 
submitted 
to 
the 
Commission 
are 
covered 
by 
those 
regulations and may not be released to any party.  Alright. 
 
Now that goes both to the investigative work of the 
Commission and submissions made to the Commission.  So 
those are under wraps, as it were, under 11.2 and under 
11.3.  What the regulation says is that does not apply to 
law enforcement agency.  So the real issue here is that 
10 
these files behind me can go if you – the protocol is 
obeyed, it has got nothing to do with his given evidence. 
 
The Section 4 of the Act says, however, that sittings 
must be in public.  So once the evidence is given, right, 
and this is not related to Regulation 11.3 or the amendment 
to Regulations 11.2 and .3.  Once that is in the public 
domain, that is there for anybody to use even against the 
witness concerned but for Regulation 11.2, it cannot be 
used in any criminal proceedings against the witness. 
 
So, really, the amendment to Regulation 11 is clear 
20 
in its import and it does not impact upon what the witness 
does or says.   
 
There would have to be another ground and there is 
no other ground and if I may, in fairness to Mr Mokhesi, 
just emphasise that the extent of the privilege according to 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 48 of 212 
 
the internal authorities at least is wide, it covers evidence 
directly incriminating against the person who gives it, 
evidence which might be used to inform the case indirectly 
incriminating against the person who gives it and evidence 
which might be used for the purposes of deciding whether 
to bring proceedings against the person who gives it. 
 
So, 
widely 
interpreted, 
there 
is 
an 
enormous 
amount of protection for it to witness under the rubric of 
self-incriminating privilege. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not think you want to say anything 
10 
further, Mr Mpofu, or do you? 
ADV MPOFU:   Chair, I suppose I must exercise my right to 
respond.  Again, we are not far apart with Mr Pretorius, the 
right, in South Africa, at least, and he is right that it is 
widely 
defined 
in 
other 
jurisdictions, 
but 
here 
it 
is 
anchored in Section 203 which simply says: 
“No witness in criminal proceedings shall, except as 
provided by the sector any other law be compelled 
to answer any question which would not otherwise 
have been answered to on the 30 May 1961..” 
20 
That is of such importance 
“…have been compelled to answer by reason that 
the answer may expose him to a criminal charge.” 
So it is watered down twice.  May simply expose it which it 
might not even materialise and that is why I summarised it 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 49 of 212 
 
by saying it is the risk, it simply the risk that is at stake 
and that risk on these facts manifests itself, as we say, by 
the added risk.  It might not be a big addition but by the 
added risk caused by the amendment to the regulation.  
That is the only relevance of the Regulation 11 point.   
Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Mpofu. 
The application for the postponement of the hearing 
of Mr Mokhesi’s evidence today is DISMISSED.   
Reasons can be given in due course, if they are 
10 
requested.  Mr Mokhesi will need to take the witness stand 
but he will be able to exercise his right with regard to 
specific questions not to incriminate himself, his right to 
refuse to answer certain questions.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, may we take the short 
adjournment now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, are five minutes past the tea break, 
we are at twenty past.  I will give a little bit more time, we 
will resume at twenty to. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, continuation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 50 of 212 
 
MR NTHIMOTSE MOKHESI:   My name is Nthimotse 
Mokhesi. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the 
10 
truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
MR MOKHESI:   So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Mokhesi, I am sure you were 
listening to the discussion and argument earlier on and I 
am sure you have been given certain advice but Mr 
Pretorius will put certain questions to you, questions which 
may incriminate you.  You may refuse to answer but Mr 
20 
Pretorius will ask you questions and I would think that they 
are questions that would not incriminate you and I would 
think that there would be questions which, as accounting 
officer, you would feel that you need to answer and tell the 
nation that part and only in regard to the questions which 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 51 of 212 
 
you think incriminate you would you exercise that right but 
you have been given advice that you have been given, Mr 
Pretorius will ask questions and we will take it from there.  
Okay?  You understand? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, should I talk about the advice that I 
have been given or not yet? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not necessarily – your counsel 
is shaking his head. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think you will listen to questions 
10 
and… 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi, you have in front of 
you a bundle which is FS1.  Would you go please to page 
28 and when we refer to page numbers, we are referring to 
the black numbers in the top left-hand corner of each page, 
not the red numbers.  You can ignore the red numbers in 
the top right hand corner but we are looking at the 
numbers at the top left of each page.  If you could go to 
20 
FS1 page 28 please?  Do you recognise that document? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes I do.  Page – the first one, 28? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The bundle is called FS1, that is the 
home file, it is called, bundle FS1, but you have been 
referred to a specific page and what is the page, Mr 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 52 of 212 
 
Pretorius again? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 28. 
MR MOKHESI:   Page 28. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if you would just have regard 
to the document from page 28 to page 54 of FS1 please?  
Do you recognise that document? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  Yes, I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you go to page 54 please, is that 
your signature there above the name N Mokhesi? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Remember to look at the black numbers 
10 
on the top left all the time. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is this an affidavit then attested to 
by you on the 31 January 2020? 
MR MOKHESI:   That is my affidavit, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you would have to speak up 
please, Mr Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that is my affidavit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And as far as you’re concerned are 
the contents of this affidavit true and correct? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that is my affidavit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you would look at another 
document please at FS58 to FS60, there are certain 
annexures to that document. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 53 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So perhaps you should go right 
through to FS91. 
MR MOKHESI:   FS58, you said. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Mokhesi, for purposes of 
identifying page numbers you can ignore FS and Free 
State.  When you look at those black numbers on the top 
left corner of each page just look at the last two or three 
digits.  So when Mr Pretorius says page 58 he is talking 
10 
about that page.  It says Free State 01-058, that is page 
58, that we will not be saying FS what, FS what because 
the whole file is FS1, so we do not want there to be 
confusion.  Okay, so but he has asked you to look at page 
58 and go up to page, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, including annexures to page 
91. 
MR MOKHESI:   Page 91? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes please.  It will be just before 
that blue tab.  Just before the blue tab. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   It is page 92.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, so we are going to page 91.   
CHAIRPERSON:   The black numbers top left. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have that page? 
MR MOKHESI:   91. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 54 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And if you could look at the 
signature please on page 60. 
MR MOKHESI:   Page 60? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Six zero, 60. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Whose signature is that on that 
page, in the middle of the page? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, it is my signature. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Your signature.  This document at 
page 58 to page 60, is that your second affidavit? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As far as you are concerned, are 
you satisfied that the contents of that affidavit are true and 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   May those two documents be 
admitted as EXHIBIT TT2.1 and TT2.2? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is the one starting at page 28, hey? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair, and together with 
annexures – well, it goes through to page 55, it has no 
20 
numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the affidavit of Mr Nthimotse 
Mokhesi appearing at page 28 together with its annexures 
will be admitted and will be marked as EXHIBIT – what is 
the exhibit number? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 55 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   TT2.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   TT2.1, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The second one at page 58 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Nthimotse Mokhesi 
appearing at page 58 will be admitted and will be marked 
as EXHIBIT TT... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   2.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   T.2 together with its annexures. 
PAGE 28 OF THE AFFIDAVIT PLUS ANNEXURES OF 
10 
NTHIMOTSE MOKHESI HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT TT2.1 
PAGE 58 OF THE AFFIDAVIT PLUS ANNEXURES OF 
NTHIMOTSE MOKHESI HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT TT2.2 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We understand from your affidavit, 
Mr Mokhesi, that you were appointed as the head of 
department, Free State Department of Human Settlements 
with effect from 1 January 2012. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When did you actually occupy that 
20 
position?  I see that your appointment was with effect from 
– did you actually take office on 1 January 2012 or another 
date? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, my appointment was with effect from 
the 1 January but assumed office I think two weeks later. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 56 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am going to ask you to raise 
your voice, Mr Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, sorry, Chair.  I am saying my 
appointment – my appointment letter was with effect from 
the 1 s t of …. 
CHAIRPERSON:   January. 
MR MOKHESI:   January but the actual taking of office was 
two weeks later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Two weeks later? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja.  [indistinct – dropping voice] the 
report. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, thank you, Mr Mokhesi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Keep the mic on, your mic on.  You can 
keep it on, with the red light, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi, a matter that will be of 
some interest to the Chair generally and both in – and in 
relation to the particular circumstances of the Free State 
project on asbestos is the role of the head of department.  
The head of department is also in terms of the Public 
20 
Finance 
Management 
Act 
the 
accounting 
officer, 
I 
understand, is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When you occupied the position as 
head of department and accounting officer, the Free State 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 57 of 212 
 
Department of Human Settlements, did you undergo any 
training for that position? 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not understand when you say training. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   It is about – I think it is about going to an 
interview. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And presenting yourself. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, what we are going to deal 
with in the first part of your evidence today is the various 
10 
financial controls that exist within a particular government 
department and the prescripts of the regulatory framework 
that applies in terms of regulations, practice notes – and I 
am talking about Treasury regulations, Treasury practice 
notes, the Public Finance Management Act  and the like.  
In regard to that network or collection of regulatory 
prescripts dealing with the finances of the department, did 
you receive any training? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I do not know about the issue of 
formal training but it is as a matter of course in your work 
20 
you come across those particular [indistinct – dropping 
voice] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, may I ask then, when you 
took office did you acquaint yourself with the various 
regulatory prescripts governing the finances? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 58 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And can you recall what in 
particular you would have had regard to? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, the city framework being – the main 
one being the PFMA, of course, which is the key legislative 
framework that governed the …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi, may I – I am sorry to 
interrupt you, would you remove your mask please?  
Apparently, the stenographers are having difficulty hearing 
what you are saying and please also speak closer to the 
10 
mic and loudly, if you would. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay,  No, I am saying, the key legislative 
framework that you have to acquaint yourself and that also 
include all government employees, not only myself is your 
PFMA. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the Public Finance 
Management Act. 
MR MOKHESI:   The Public Finance Management Act and 
its accompanying regulations and so on.  So that is 
basically the key legislative framework that we have to 
20 
acquaint yourself with. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So that is the Public Finance 
Management 
Act 
and 
that 
would 
be 
the 
Treasury 
Regulations published under the auspices of that Act? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 59 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But we will deal with those in a 
moment, but may I ask did you at the time of your 
appointment become aware of a supply chain management 
policy applicable within the department?  Was there such a 
supply chain management policy in the department? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, Chairperson I have been advised by 
my counsel because I can see now in terms of where we 
are going.  That I should not take questions that relates to 
the asbestos meetings and that is the advice that I got. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To supply chain management policy.    
10 
MR MOKHESI:    No, no I am just highlighting that 
particular issue to say I have been advised by my counsel 
…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:    And I take legal advice as I should. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no I understand that ja.  
MR MOKHESI:    That I should not – because in certain 
instances I will need from particularly where I am not 
certain I will have from time to time to consult with them.  
So that is basically the advice that I have – so just to 
20 
indicate that particular issue into the record.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius do you want to say 
something before? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well except to say the obvious that 
it is difficult to understand how the answer to that question 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 60 of 212 
 
can be incriminating.  But on the wide definition it is in our 
submission – I am trying to think how it could be self-
incriminating in fairness to the witness.  But I doubt that 
the mere existence of otherwise of a policy can be 
incriminating as opposed to irregular. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The question is directed in establishing 
whether when he assumed office as the HOD there was in 
place a supply chain management policy.     
MR MOKHESI:    Okay 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is all the question is directed.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  All the questions is aimed at 
establishing for the moment.   
CHAIRPERSON:   For now do you have a problem a 
consulting…[intervene] 
MR MOKHESI:    No I am just…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   At that stage – at this stage you are not 
concerned but you are saying as we go on you may have 
to…[intervene]  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Ja 
okay 
no 
we 
understand 
20 
that…[intervene]  
MR MOKHESI:    I think my counsel will also indicate it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja your counsel is here as well, ja okay.  
So I do not think that there is any discomfort about you 
answering the question whether when you assumed office 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 61 of 212 
 
as HOD.  There was in the department as a matter of fact a 
supply chain management policy.      
MR MOKHESI:    Okay.  
CHAIRPERSON:   That do you want to answer that? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you say there was one? 
MR MOKHESI:    There was one.  
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
You 
see 
the 
one 
that 
the 
investigators 
have 
obtained 
is 
dated 
May 
2015 
you 
assumed office in 2012 so that would have been a different 
supply chain management policy or more or less the same?  
10 
MR MOKHESI:    On the – there is a requirement that you 
should on an ongoing basis review your supply chain policy 
because you know from time to time, we have this practice 
you know the changes etcetera and some of the regulation.   
          So it is a requirement, it is actually a good thing to 
review at least on an annual basis even if you do not 
change the policy.  But the fact that you reviewed it and 
just to make sure that it is still applicable and it is still 
relevant.  So the 2015 there would have been previous 
policies before.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right and it would have been 
amended you say to some degree in 2015 to produce the 
one that we have.  We will deal with later but you say – all 
I wanted to establish at the moment that at the time you 
took office there would have been a policy in place in the 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 62 of 212 
 
department supply chain management policy.    
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  If I could just go to 
your affidavit please at FS1 page 28 and if it go through 
please to page 30.  There you talk about a written proposal 
being delivered to your office by a Mr Mpambani.  Perhaps 
we should identify that policy and that in another bundle 
which you have seen it is bundle FS8.    
MR MOKHESI:    Page, sorry?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Page 162 which is the file behind 
10 
you if you would go to bundle FS8.  
MR MOKHESI:    Sorry you referred to page 30. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh yes he referred to…[intervene]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, I referred to page 31.   
MR MOKHESI:    31.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 9.1 you say the 
written proposal was delivered to my office of Mr Mpambani 
I would just like to identify the proposal that we are talking 
about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Pretorius did you say page 
20 
31?   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, Chair of FS1.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At paragraph 9.1.  The affidavit 
reads the written proposal was delivered to my office by Mr 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 63 of 212 
 
Mpambani.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh I think the problem…[intervene]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now before dealing with that fact I 
need to identify the proposal.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I heard you to say what Mr Mokhesi says 
here is that no proposal was delivered and I was wondering 
because I could not see anything saying that but I maybe I 
misheard you.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is entirely my fault. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair not speaking clearly and all 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The proposal was delivered and we 
have substantial evidence in that regard already before the 
Chair.  But if you would go to FS8 please at page 162.    
MR MOKHESI:    162? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you recognise this document Mr 
Mokhesi? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, I do.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What is it? 
MR MOKHESI:    The proposal? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  This is the proposal for the audit 
handling of hazardous material removal and disposal of 
asbestos roof houses submitted to the Department of 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 64 of 212 
 
Human Settlements, Free State Province attention Mr 
Mokhesi and it is dated 28 May 2014.  Do you see that?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it is submitted by and 
underneath 
that 
submitted 
by 
you 
see 
Blackhead 
Consulting and Diamond Hill Trading, 71.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, I see it.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now that proposal has been dealt 
with in evidence before the Chair by other witnesses and 
we will return to it due course.  But for the present I 
10 
understand your affidavit to be to the effect that that 
proposal was delivered to your office by Mr Mpambani but 
you continued to say however at the time of such delivery I 
did not personally meet Mr Mpambani.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that statement correct? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, it is correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  When did you find out that Mr 
Mpambani had delivered such a proposal, can you recall? 
MR MOKHESI:    No I cannot recall exactly the date.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did you make any enquiries from 
any person or entity as to who Mr Mpambani was and who 
he represented?  
MR MOKHESI:    No, I did not.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You did not, right.  You do say in 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 65 of 212 
 
paragraph 9.2 that before the proposal was delivered to 
the department specifically my office I did not know or 
expect that either Mr Mpambani or Mr Sodi would deliver 
such a proposal.  I cannot even recall the date on which it 
was delivered.  Is that a correct statement or fact?      
MR MOKHESI:    That I did not know them before yes, I did 
not know them.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You did not know them.  You can 
feel free to remove your mask if you’re comfortable with 
that Mr Mokhesi.  And as I understand the situation both 
10 
from your statements generally and from other evidence 
that has been given to the Chair.  The department did not 
ask for a proposal.  It did not the technical word is solicit 
the proposal.    
MR MOKHESI:    No.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It did not? 
MR MOKHESI:    Ja.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Again, please if you will raise your 
voice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will l ask you to raise your voice Mr 
20 
Mokhesi.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja the department did not ask for 
proposal? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 66 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I also understand from your 
affidavit that when you received the proposal right you then 
forwarded it to Mr Matlakala.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, I did.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say that in paragraph 11.1 of 
your affidavit that we are now dealing with at page 32.  If 
you would just go there please.  In paragraph 11.2 you say 
by referring the proposal to him I was expecting him to 
make 
a 
determination 
on 
the 
appropriate 
method 
of 
10 
procurement that could be utilised to implement the 
project.   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You see that? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, I see that.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now when you received the 
proposal did you study it? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, I went through it and obviously refer 
it to the supply chain director.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright and this would have been in 
20 
May 2014.   
MR MOKHESI:    Possibly yes it would have been around 
that time.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  On that date or around that date? 
MR MOKHESI:    Around that, yes sir.  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 67 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did you understand that if the 
proposal had not been solicited by the department certain 
regulatory prescripts applied.    
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, and that is the reason ordinarily you 
will refer that to the practitioner.  In this instance supply 
chain practitioner.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well we will come back to that 
issue in due course but if I may ask you to go to another 
file at FS6 page 371 that is the file that will be behind you 
but someone will help you with that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think somebody will assist you to get 
the file.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  371.  This document is the 
transcript of the interview that you held Mr Mokhesi with 
the investigators of the Commission on the 30 t h of October 
2019.  You have been provided with this document    
MR MOKHESI:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your voice is very soft.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At page 371 you will see a 
discussion between Mr Lampbrecht the investigator and 
yourself from line 10.  The lines are marked on the left 
hand side of the document.  Mr Lampbrecht says okay so 
when you received the proposal what did you do then? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 68 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:    Is it 71, oh 371 no sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you by the black numbers?   
MR MOKHESI:    The black numbers.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja look for the black numbers.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And again, you would have to say 
yes for the stenographer sake and the Chairs sake.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Section 50 of the Public Finance 
Management 
Act 
deals 
with 
the 
fiduciary 
duties 
of 
accounting authorities and amongst other things speaks to 
10 
the 
exercise 
of 
the 
duty 
of utmost 
care 
to 
ensure 
reasonable protection of the assets and records of the 
public entity.  Correct?   
          There is a high degree of responsibility placed 
summarising as we go through, we do not want to go 
through every word, you were aware of these provisions 
and we may deal with them in more detail later.  But 
Section 51 deals with the general responsibilities of 
accounting authority and 511A says an accounting office, 
sorry.   
20 
          An accounting authority for a public entity must 
ensure that that public entity has and maintained an 
efficient - I correct myself an effective efficient and 
transparent systems of financial and risk management and 
internal control.  Is that correct?  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 69 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You recall that provision? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then 511A [iii] says that the 
accounting authority must ensure that the public entity has 
and 
maintains 
and 
appropriate 
procurement 
and 
provisioning system which is fair equitable transparent 
competitive and cost effective.  In other words, a system 
which complies with the constitutional provision of Section 
217.     
10 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It repeats Section 217.  There are 
various other duties such as the duty to avoid irregular 
expenditure fruitless and wasteful expenditure and other 
matters.  Correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry I did not mean to put words in 
your mouth I was just repeating what you said.  Section 44 
deals with the duties of accounting officers and the extent 
to which an accounting officer may delicate.   
20 
          Right now, you have said that as I understand it that 
you did not study the proposal but you sent it to the person 
in charge of procurement and that was Mr Matlakala as I 
understand it. Is that correct, for his consideration? 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
I 
said 
I 
read 
the 
proposal 
and 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 70 of 212 
 
…[intervene] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You read it.  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, I read the proposal and then referred 
it to the supply chain practitioner.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay and then let us clarify that – 
did you as I understood it your evidence was that you did 
not study the proposal in terms of the various detailed 
prescripts that would have that would have [break in audio]     
MR MOKHESI:    It is not applicable but to say what is the 
most appropriate.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:    To form a strategy.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry I interrupted you did you 
finish? [break in audio]  I might have blocked out your 
answer do you want to repeat that? 
MR MOKHESI:    I have clarified that.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You have clarified that, alright 
Section 44 …[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay, I just want to make sure the 
clarification you were making Mr Mokhesi is that after 
20 
receiving the proposal you did read it to understand what it 
was about.    
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Then you referred it to Mr Matlakala.  
MR MOKHESI:    And the relevance of it to ask…[intervene] 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 71 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja.  
MR MOKHESI:    And then refer it to a supply chain 
practitioner to see what is the most appropriate.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes, way forward. 
MR MOKHESI:    Way forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay.  
MR MOKHESI:    In terms of procurement strategy.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right Section 44 of the PFMA says 
or deals with rather the assignment of powers and duties 
10 
by accounting officers and it reads in sub-section 1.  The 
accounting officer for a department trading entity or 
constitutional institution may A in writing delegate any of 
the powers entrusted or delegated to the accounting officer 
– that is yourself in terms of this act to an official in that 
department trading entity or constitutional institution.  You 
are aware of that provision? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It goes on to say in Sub-section B, 
all – any official in that department trading entity or 
20 
constitutional institution to perform any of the duties 
assigned to the accounting officer in terms of this act.  You 
understood that no doubt to be the case?   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Was there any written delegation to 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 72 of 212 
 
Mr Matlakala in relation to any of the duties that would 
have rested on yourself? 
MR MOKHESI:    There are delegations for each of the 
staff.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And would there have – sorry would 
there have been written delegations?   
MR MOKHESI:    There would be written delegations.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And those would be available to the 
investigator should they require them.   
MR MOKHESI:    Should they require them.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Section 44 goes on to say in 
Section 44.2 a delegation or an instruction to an official in 
terms of sub-section 1 and then there are various sub-
sections again and I am going to sub-section 21D does not 
divest 
the 
accounting 
officer 
of 
the 
responsibility 
concerning the exercise of the delegated power or the 
performance of the assigned duty.  As I understand the 
position 
is 
that 
you 
may 
delegate 
but 
you 
remain 
accountable.   
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct?  Again, please sorry 
to nag you Mr Mokhesi but you, the stenographer needs to 
hear your voice. 
MR MOKHESI:    Correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let us then deal with your own 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 73 of 212 
 
policy that is in FS7 if you would go there to that file 
please. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Somebody will assist you to identify the 
correct file.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You will go there please to page 
107 of FS7 and we again referring to the black numbers in 
the top left hand corner.  Do you recognise the document 
at page 107?  
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What is that document? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:    The supply chain policy.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that the internal departmental 
financial management policy? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The supply chain management 
policy of which we spoke earlier? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is dated the 6 t h of May 2015.  Is 
that your signature there? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now of course we are dealing with 
matters that took place in 2014 so if this policy to your 
recollection differed in any respect or to any extent with 
any earlier policy with the policy in place in 2014 you will 
please tell the Chair that.  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 74 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We may go to FS7 at 110 you see 
under the heading objective paragraph 1.  Paragraph 1.1 
says since the department uses public funds to finance its 
procurement of goods and services …[intervene] 
MR MOKHESI:    Sorry Mr Pretorius you said 110? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  110, yes top left hand numbers in 
black.  
MR MOKHESI:  Okay, yes.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Under the heading objective 
10 
paragraph 1.1 reads since the department uses public 
funds to finance its procurement of goods and services it is 
obliged to ensure that the best interest of the public is 
served 
when 
these 
funds 
are 
spent. 
“Best 
interest” 
includes satisfying the requirements at the most favourable 
conditions including fairness, equitability, transparency, 
competitiveness and cost effectiveness.   
          Business and industry should be afforded the best 
possible opportunity to satisfy such requirements while 
adhering to the national government’s medium-term policy 
20 
initiatives including broad based backing.  Empowerment 
BBBEE and the preferential procurement policy framework 
Act 1.2 reads the objectives of this policy are to [i] to 
ensure compliance with all applicable legislation and 
prescripts relating to supply chain management [ii] ensure 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 75 of 212 
 
consistency and uniformity in supply chain management 
practises.  I have read that correctly have I?    
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And this would have been the 
objective of any prior policy? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And what is apparent is that right 
from 
the 
constitution 
through 
to 
national 
legislation 
treasury regulations which we will come to in a moment 
and the policy that exists within the department itself that 
10 
we are now referring to there are strict controls which 
govern 
procurement 
and 
expenditure 
of 
government 
departments.  Is that a fair summary of the position? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At page 112 we have a definition of 
fruitless and wasteful expenditure.  Briefly what is fruitful 
and wasteful expenditure? 
CHAIRPERSON:    Fruitless Mr Pretorius.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry Chair.  
MR MOKHESI:    It is expenditure in vain in short, 
20 
expenditure in vain.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. And the definition continuous 
to be expenditure that could have been avoided at 
reasonable care been exercised.  Am I correct?   
MR MOKHESI:    Yes.  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 76 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it is not necessarily unlawful 
expenditure am I also correct in that?  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if it is expenditure in vain it must be 
unlawful 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well let me put it another way Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is to be distinguished from a 
regular expenditure.  Fruitless and wasteful expenditure is 
something 
different 
from 
irregular 
expenditure. 
Do 
I 
understand the position correctly? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  This is what? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well one has the concept. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
About 
fruitless 
and 
wasteful 
expenditure. 
MR MOKHESI:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is expenditure made in vain. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That could have been avoided had 
reasonable care been exercised. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then there is a regular 
expenditure the definition is at the bottom of the same page.  
What is irregular expenditure? 
MR MOKHESI:  Hm yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 77 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you know.. 
MR MOKHESI:  You are asking me a question? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I am. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay.  It is either – it is either an 
expenditure that has – it was – I can just give you an 
example to say this is an expenditure that is against the 
policy framework that could be – that could. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Face this side Mr Mokhesi first. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay.  Expenditure – expenditure – I am just 
making a few examples Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  Just one or two examples. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKHESI:  Against policy.  You violated your own policy 
for example.  That is – that could also be part of irregular 
expenditure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKHESI:  Or you – you did not  
CHAIRPERSON:  Follow processes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Follow – yes that is one of the issues or 
20 
when it is put on the [00:46:45] those were transparent and 
so on.  One of those are missing then that will then qualify 
as an irregular expenditure.  Not necessarily also. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
So 
irregular 
expenditure 
may 
be 
expenditure which was made or incurred or made for a – for 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 78 of 212 
 
a valid reason – for a valid and acceptable objective but the 
manner in which it was made. 
MR MOKHESI:  Made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Makes it irregular. 
MR MOKHESI:  Irregular. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  And it would include would it not 
unauthorised expenditure? In other words, if before you 
spend that money you are supposed to get authorisation 
from the HOD and you do not get that authorisation that 
would still be irregular would it not? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja it does not necessarily mean that all 
unauthorised expenditure is irregular. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  It may be. 
MR MOKHESI:  It may be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we go on to page 115 please.  The 
document entitled Terms of Reference will become relevant 
later particularly in relation to what happened in Gauteng but 
I understand Terms of Reference to have a technical or a 
specific meaning.  What are Terms of Reference in the 
20 
context of this policy? 
MR MOKHESI:  Terms of Reference one perhaps could be 
meaning your specifications you know for lack of a… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry could mean? 
MR MOKHESI:  Your specifications for lack of a better word. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 79 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MOKHESI:  Now is Terms of Reference. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR MOKHESI:  Could actually in the broader sense could 
actually mean that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So if services and I am going back to 
the definition are required in terms of any procurement 
engagement between the department and a service provider 
one 
would 
look 
to 
the 
Terms 
of 
Reference 
to 
find 
10 
specifications of those services that are required.  Do I 
understand the position correctly? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja it depends on what procurement prodigy 
we are using. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  So we will come to that in due 
course. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes in due course. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then the praise unsolicited bid is 
defined there on page 115.  Let me ask you before we get 
there.  Do you understand there to be any difference 
20 
between an unsolicited bid and unsolicited proposal or are 
they the same thing? 
MR MOKHESI:  They in practice they might be the same. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event unsolicited bid is 
defined here as an offer bid submitted by any person on 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 80 of 212 
 
his/her or its own initiative without having been invited by 
the department to do so.  The proposal then that was 
received 
by 
you 
which 
we 
have 
discussed 
at 
the 
commencement of your evidence was in terms of this 
definition I understand unsolicited.  We established that I 
think. 
MR MOKHESI:  It might well be. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It might well be?  Are you saying it 
was – it could have been solicited?  I understood it to be a 
matter that did not raise much controversy certainly in 
10 
evidence thus far that the proposal submitted to you which 
we discussed earlier. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Had not been solicited by the 
department. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is correct, is it? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then if we go over the page please 
to page 116. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  116. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Under paragraph 4 Employees to 
whom the policy applies.  Basically, it applies to everyone in 
the department as I understand it. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 81 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And everybody must obey it?  Is that 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then paragraph 5 refers to 
various governing prescripts including the Public Finance 
Management Act.  And over the page on page 117 there are 
a number of other prescripts which are referred to and 
expressly which apply to Supply Chain Management within 
the department.  Do you see that at page 117? 
MR MOKHESI:  117 yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And if I may refer you to sub-
paragraph B it is 5.2b on top of page 117.  It reads: 
“To meet the requirements as set in Section 
38 of the PFMA the department will observe 
fully the five pillars of procurement set out in 
the General Procurement guidelines and they 
appear in brackets after that: [Value for 
money, 
Open 
and 
effective 
competition, 
Ethics and Fair dealing, Accountability  and 
Reporting and Equity]” 
20 
Did those five pillars apply or did you regard them as 
applying in your department? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes they do apply. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And if we could go through please to 
paragraph 8.2 on page 119 under the head Value for Money.  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 82 of 212 
 
Are you at page 119? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes I am. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If I may read it and then you can 
confirm whether I have read it correctly and whether it 
applied. 
“Value for money remains the essential test 
against which procurement outcomes in the 
department must be justified. While not a 
criteria in itself it has nonetheless the basis 
for comparing procurement alternatives and 
10 
offers from suppliers in order to identify the 
one that meets the needs in the most cost 
effective manner when all costs and benefits 
are taken into account especially the quality 
of the product that will be delivered and 
previous experience with the supplier.” 
The general point as I understand is that value for money is 
if not the most important criterion certainly a very important 
one in any procurement process.  Do I understand that 
correctly? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then if we look at the core principles 
under 8.3 they emphasise a number of principles that are 
reflective 
of 
the 
various 
constitutional 
and 
statutory 
principles that we have dealt with. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 83 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Including 8.3[a][i] 
“That 
the 
department 
has 
committed 
to 
ensuring transactions achieve the best net 
value for money outcome for the state.” 
Again emphasising the value for money principle. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The – and this may become relevant 
10 
later as well Mr Mokhesi 8.3 sub-paragraph c[i] 
“Obliges 
the 
department 
to 
observe 
the 
requirements of the preferential Procurement 
Policy Framework Act of 2000.” 
And there are a number of provisions there – at least one or 
two provisions that we may deal with later.  You understand 
that to be the position?  Again you nod Mr Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes okay sorry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then in paragraph 8.6 on page 120 
refers to the AO that is the Accounting Officer that was 
20 
yourself as I understand your evidence.   
“The Accounting Officer reserves the right to 
maintain oversight over the implementation of this 
policy in order to 
a. Ensure that the director SCM executes this 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 84 of 212 
 
policy 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
relevant 
legislative requirements.” 
In other words, the right of supervision over Mr Matlakala as 
I understand it was retained by the Accounting Officer 
yourself. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the right to maintain oversight 
was also in place if one goes over the page to page 121 sub-
paragraph c  
“To ensure compliance by all departmental 
10 
officials through the SCM Policy.” 
And then in 8.7 the various duties that rested upon the 
director of Supply Chain Management are set out.  That was 
Mr Matlakala as I understand it? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we could go through to page 139 
please.   
CHAIRPERSON:  139? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  139 FS7 paragraphs 12.13.  Are you 
there? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes I am – I am … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That paragraph deals with unsolicited 
bids and sub-paragraph a reads: 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 85 of 212 
 
“The department is not obliged to consider an 
unsolicited proposal but may consider such a 
proposal 
only 
if 
it 
meets 
the 
following 
requirements. 
i. A 
comprehensive 
and 
relevant 
project 
feasibility study as established a clear 
business case. 
ii. The product or service involves an innovative 
design. 
iii. 
The 
product 
or 
service 
involves 
an 
10 
innovative 
approach 
to 
project 
development and management or 
iv. 
The product or service presents a new 
and 
cost-effective 
method 
of 
service 
delivery.” 
And the paragraph continues under sub-paragraph B to 
talk of the unsolicited proposal it seems that you are correct 
when you say that the terms may be used interchangeably.  
There is not much substantial difference between a bid and a 
proposal.   
20 
Now we are investigating that with the experts but if 
necessary, we will come back to you on that Mr Mokhesi. But 
for present purposes bids and proposals the phrases are 
used interchangeably in this provision here at 12.13. 
Now when you read the unsolicited proposal that we 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 86 of 212 
 
have referred to in evidence did you consider whether it met 
the requirements in 12.13 [A]? 
MR MOKHESI:  What we or what we normally do when you 
receive a proposal and that is precisely the reason why you 
have a specialist in the department and why you will refer a 
specific issue of procurement to the practitioner to determine 
whether what is the most appropriate way of – of procuring 
that specific need. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  You will recall the passages 
in the transcript which were put to you earlier today Mr 
10 
Mokhesi.  As I understood the position there was an in-
principle decision made by yourself to proceed with the 
procurement process and for that purpose you having made 
that decision referred it to Mr Matlakala to advise you or to 
decide what processes must be followed to conclude the 
process.  Do I understand your previous evidence correctly? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Alright.  Now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Is the answer yes? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And if you look at 12.13[a] it is quite 
strict as I read it in any event and you can comment if you 
like.  It says: 
“The department is not obliged to consider 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 87 of 212 
 
an unsolicited proposal.” 
 
So it was open to you having received the proposal 
simply to put it aside and take it no further.  Do I understand 
the position correctly? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But the provision goes on it says: 
“You only – you may only consider the 
proposal or you may consider the proposal 
only if it meets certain requirements.” 
 
In other words, unless the requirements in 12.13[a][i-
10 
iv] have been met you may not even consider the proposal.  
Do I understand the position correctly? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja let me – let me try and perhaps put a 
perspective.  The application of – or the use of I will call it 
an instrument that was used for this particular one.  I admit 
that it was not the correct one.  In terms of what does the 
Supply 
Chair 
practitioner 
advise 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
procurement for that I will say he applied an incorrect 
principle and not the unsolicited?  So to me there is no point 
in us debating around the issues of the unsolicited bid while 
20 
I understand what it says.  What the application of – was a 
problem.  The application of when that proposal came how it 
was applied, I would say yes indeed it was an issue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well let us if we may just try and 
summarise the position from your answer.  I understood you 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 88 of 212 
 
to concede that Mr Matlakala applied the wrong prescripts in 
this procurement process or advised incorrectly.  Could you 
just explain that to the Chair please? 
MR MOKHESI:  I am saying when we choose – look the 
16.6A that we are talking about and the various others 
unsolicited bids etcetera, etcetera we must not create an 
impression that they are – they do not have an underlying 
competitive bid in [01:05:09] all those particular issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please look this side Mr Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:  Oh sorry. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Sorry I must address the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We must not think they do not have an 
underlying? 
MR MOKHESI:  I am saying we must not create an 
impression that the only way to satisfy the constitutional 
requirements is your conventional tender as we know it.  All 
those particular issues like your – your unsolicited bid and 
so on and so on all of them underlie – underlying – the 
underlying issues there is all of them – they comply with the 
20 
constitutional requirements transparency etcetera, etcetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is what you mean that the application of is 
it regulation 6 or the application … 
MR MOKHESI:  Precisely now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of that is part of the law? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 89 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:  It is part of… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is part of the procurement law and if I am 
making another example.  If you – if you use a deviation that 
is still part of procurement law that you are supposed to 
apply and if you applied correctly there is no problem. 
MR MOKHESI:  There is no problem. It is how you apply it.  
Now I do not want to get into the debate about the 
unsolicited bids and so on and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  I am [01:06:36] I am saying. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  The applicant – the role – let me put it there.  
And incorrect application or the law was used when it comes 
to this particular issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  This is what I am trying to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ja.  You say the law was applied 
wrongly. 
MR MOKHESI:  Incorrectly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Incorrectly.  Ja okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well let us deal with that because I 
am not sure what you mean by the law was applied 
incorrectly.  As a first step would you concede because it is 
pretty clear from the evidence that we have been given that 
the department could not have applied the provisions in 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 90 of 212 
 
regard to an unsolicited bid in respect of what was proposed 
to you on the 28 May 2014 by Blackhead Consulting and 
Diamond Hill. 
MR MOKHESI:  If let me – 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright it seems if… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe – maybe Mr Pretorius can we 
start this way? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because you said what you are prepared 
to say the law was applied incorrectly.  I think that is what 
10 
you said. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. I am saying… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now maybe we should start by saying 
would you elaborate on why you say the law was applied 
incorrectly?  Maybe if you – we come from that angle you 
give your own explanation that is going to be easier? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja in – perhaps we should try and simplify it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  You apply 16.6[a] where you should be 
applying … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Something else? 
MR MOKHESI:  Something else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine. I think that – that 
may clarify. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well not entirely Chair.   
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 91 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. No, no that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So I might have to go the long route. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And I do not know whether this is an 
appropriate time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ja I think we will have to take the lunch 
adjournment.  We will take the lunch adjournment now and 
we will return at two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mokhesi, 
before the long adjournment, we were speaking of the motion 
of an unsolicited bid and you offered a statement to the 
Chair that an incorrect approach or application of the law 
had been occasioned by Mr Matlakala, the Supply Chain 
Management official in your department.  Would you explain 
that, please? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay.  I will say in this instance for 
20 
example, the wrong prescript of the regulation was to have 
an unsolicited bid which I think was also what the PP found.  
And instead of using the unsolicited bid approach, the 
16(6)(a) was applied.  And that is in short what I am trying to 
answer, yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 92 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say the 16(a)... 6.6 
approach was incorrectly used? 
MR MOKHESI:   Incorrectly used or applied. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe that was still... are you saying 
that was not applicable in this case, another provision 
should have been applied? 
MR MOKHESI:   I think... let us ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Let us for a change assume that everything 
was fine in terms of, you know, it has been  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   An open tender? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja.  Let us assume that everything was okay 
in terms of the 16t h... ag, in terms Gauteng contract and so 
and so on and so on. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, yes.  Ja.  H’m. 
MR MOKHESI:   Now even if, I think that is also what... even 
if the 16(6)(a) was applied and it was correct and everything 
was okay, it would have still been the problem because it will 
have applied an incorrect regulation, so to speak.  I think 
that was the finding. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you basing what you say on what the 
public protector said?  I heard you referring to PP. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So in other words, the public 
protector has made a certain pronouncement and you agree 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 93 of 212 
 
with that pronouncement.  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   In terms of the wrong application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Wrong... wrong application? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, the choosing of the wrong...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Provision. 
MR MOKHESI:   ...provision of the law and applied in these 
instances. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   So there is disjunction in that respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and you would say the correct one 
10 
would have been which one? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, on hindsight I would say, the correct 
one would probably would have been unsolicited. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Unsolicited? 
MR MOKHESI:    The unsolicited. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Yes, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let us go back then to the 
Department Supply Chain Management, the policy, which in 
fact, and I do not think there is much controversy on this 
point, mirrors the PFMA and Treasury Regulations insofar 
20 
they deal with unsolicited bid. 
 
Let me put that to you.  The provisions of your Supply 
Chain 
Management 
police 
would 
always 
mirrored 
the 
legislation and the Treasury regulations.  Would that not be 
the case? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 94 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, the provisions of? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The provisions of your Supply Chain 
Management police in the Department of Human Settlements 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Okay? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...would always have mirrored the 
provisions of the Public Finance Management Act and the 
Treasury Regulations ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Treasury Regulations. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...dealing with unsolicited bids. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  So let us just deal quickly 
then because it does not appear to be too controversial from 
what you said.  If you go to FS7 page 139, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is where we were before lunch. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that is where we were? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, that is where we were before 
lunch.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you go to 12(13)(a), that is the 
provision we were discussing before lunch, which says that 
you can only consider unsolicited proposal if that proposal 
meets certain requirements and those requirements are set 
out in Roman 1 (i) to Roman 4 (iv) of paragraph 12.13(a) on 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 95 of 212 
 
page 193.  Do you see those requirements? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I see. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now as I understand the proposal 
and if you want to take me there or take the Chair there, we 
can go there but they did not comply.  That proposal did not 
comply with those requirements or certainly did not comply 
with all of them.  We can go into the detail if you want. 
MR MOKHESI:   Maybe with not all of them but with some of 
them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say some but not all? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Which ones did it not comply with? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, if you say around the issue of a 
business case, there was certainly a need.  The product or 
service involves an innovative design.  There is no element 
of that innovative ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There was no innovative design in 
that bid? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   But it was necessary. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Similarly, I would understand that 
there was no innovative approach, apparent from the bid at 
least. 
MR MOKHESI:   What? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 96 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There was no innovative approach 
as required by (iii) in the bid, would you agree with that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And then (iv), I do not 
understand the bid to have shown a new and cost-effective 
method of service delivery.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, is it not ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Well, it does not... sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Mr Pretorius, is it not 3, 4 and 
5 – are they not optional?  I see that or after (ii) and/or after 
10 
(iii)?  In other words, is the position not that the first two, (i) 
and (ii) are compulsory but if you... maybe if you do not meet 
(ii), at least you must meet (iii) or (iv) but you do not have to 
meet all five... all four of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is why I need to put them all. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  No, no, no.  I understood you 
to be... your question to be based on an understanding that 
they all have to be complied with.  That is why I wanted to 
clarify that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Well...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is your understanding the same as mine? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair.  Subject to...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But they need to be put to him, maybe one 
by one to make sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By one.  One by one.  Well, let 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 97 of 212 
 
us...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   To make sure that is your understanding. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is maybe a different approach that 
I was adopting but I think it has the same effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because if there is no innovative 
design and no innovative approach and it is not new and 
cost-effective, then none of the alternatives would apply.  
And I understand, we are almost there Mr Mokhesi that it 
was not innovative in design or approach and it was not new 
10 
and cost-effective.  Can we agree on that? 
MR MOKHESI:    Well, I do not know about the cost-
effectiveness of your ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry.  I cannot hear you. 
MR MOKHESI:   I am saying, I am not so sure about the 
cost-effectiveness.  I will agree in certain instances, 2 and 3 
perhaps, but certainly 1, there was a need for that.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let us put it to you.  Was the 
design, was there an innovative design apparent from the 
proposal? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   The project was about assessment and 
ultimately Phase 1 and assessment and auditing.  And 
secondly, Phase 1, the removal.  So that what it was about. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but was there anything 
innovative about it, anything new about identifying houses 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 98 of 212 
 
and assessing their condition? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I must ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It was apparent from the bid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understood you earlier and maybe I 
misunderstood you and you must tell me if I misunderstood 
you.  I understood you earlier to accept that (ii) was not 
complied with.  Am I right? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I said so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  I think that is the 
answer Mr Pretorius. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but the same applied to (iii), an 
innovative approach that was not complied with. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I understood you to say that but I 
may be wrong.  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And (iv), the service presented a 
new and cost-effective method.  Let us leave aside cost-
effective for the moment.  That is for later discussion.  But 
was it a new method that was being proposed? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Certainly... maybe to ask, as the province it 
was new because we used largely or in the main, we 
followed the Gauteng route. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, it was quite ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   ...because we did not know anything else. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 99 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us go then to the proposal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But before you do that Mr Pretorius, I just 
want to make sure.  (i), what did you say about it? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I indicated that there was a need. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was or there was no feasibility 
study?  (i) says, there must be a comprehensive and relevant 
project feasibility study that has established a clear business 
case.  Was there a comprehensive project feasibility study 
that established a clear business case? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, that... as I have indicated earlier, we 
10 
relied mostly on... you know, somebody else had done it 
already. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:    And in this instance and that is why I am 
specifically referring to Gauteng because they have done it 
and we knew that being the member of the same unit 
settlement family, we knew that they have done it.  And 
indeed, it was also part of the discussions at the main, this 
issue of the removal of eradication of asbestos.  So we 
merely followed up in terms of what Gauteng had done. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  I take it that when the policy refers 
to a comprehensive and relevant project feasibility study, it 
contemplates a document which contains that study.  Would 
that be the same understanding that you have as well about 
that requirement? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 100 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:    Can you perhaps repeat? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me... okay, let me repeat.  When (i) 
says there must be a comprehensive and relevant project 
feasibility study that has established a clear business case, I 
assume that what it contemplates, is that there will be a 
document which constitutes that feasibility study.  Would 
your understanding be the same? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or would you be your understanding be 
that there not need be a document? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:    The studies around asbestos are there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are there? 
MR MOKHESI:    Ja, there, you know.  And in terms... also 
the dangers and so, I do not think that is an issue at this 
stage around the affects and the dangers of asbestos and 
that they needed to be eradicated.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:    And that is not... they are there.  They are 
widely available.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you would say that there was such a 
20 
comprehensive study? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, there is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It may not have been provided by the 
entity that put in a proposal but the study was there? 
MR MOKHESI:    The studies are there. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 101 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MOKHESI:    The information is widely available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MR MOKHESI:    And as I have indicated as well, this has 
been 
one... 
these 
discussions 
were 
continuing 
on 
at 
minimum(?) level as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MOKHESI:    So that information is widely available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I just wanted to make sure that 
before we proceed further down the page, we know what the 
10 
answer is in regards to (i). 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  But perhaps... understand 
one thing you have said.  You said you relied on what had 
been done in Gauteng. 
MR MOKHESI:   What I am saying is.  The removal... I mean, 
the assessment, the work in Gauteng had already been 
done.  So Gauteng, I will say was a... they had already 
established a principle in terms of the work that they have 
already done around ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There was a president? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   There was a president already. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Well, then what was new about 
the message of service delivery in the Free State? 
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was new then in the Free 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 102 of 212 
 
State? 
MR MOKHESI:   We... every township in the Free State has 
got asbestos. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Every township in the Free 
State has what? 
MR MOKHESI:   Every township in the Free State has got 
asbestos roofs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Roofs. 
MR MOKHESI:   Asbestos roofs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And coupled with the fact that in 
10 
the... in one of the State of the Province Address, an issue 
was also discussed around the eradication of the two-roomed 
houses which in essence also, those two-room houses also 
have asbestos roofing in the main.   
 
Now as we speak, the province is incrementally also... 
because... incrementally also removing... ag, eradicating 
those two-room houses because of the historical facts.  In 
terms of those two-room houses, they were also meant for a 
specific operation. 
 
And coupled with that, because all those two-room 
20 
houses have got asbestos roofs as well.  So we sort of 
tapped on what Gauteng has done because... to have a 
holistic approach in terms of, one, getting rid of the two-
room houses and, in the process, also look at removing the 
asbestos, both on the two-rooms and on the four-rooms and 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 103 of 212 
 
then all the depilated houses.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The questions remains Mr Mokhesi, 
what was new about the service proposed in this document, 
the unsolicited bid?  What was new about it, about the 
service?  You yourself said you had Gauteng as president.   
MR MOKHESI:   Well, Mr Pretorius I suppose you... what you 
are trying to push me on is on the issue of the unsolicited 
deed and whether we did anything new or not.  And I think I 
responded to that question. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I wanted to ask that... I was wonder 
to say... well, maybe first the question should be, whether 
you say there was anything new because I had understood 
you before, and I may have been wrong, that you were not 
saying that there was anything new but I may have 
misunderstood you. 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not understand.  Perhaps, maybe the 
question of what was new.  Safe to say this is within our 
mandate ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   ...as a department. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   It is part of the housing quote.  So it is part 
of our ongoing like in any event. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But I understand that it might be part 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 104 of 212 
 
of your mandate.  I think that is well-established on the 
papers ...[indistinct] [coughing].  But let me ask you then.  If 
you go to 12.13. 
MR MOKHESI:   Twelve point...? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thirteen.  On FS7-193.  That is 
where we are. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you see (iv) as being a 
10 
requirement, not of any other document but of the proposal?  
Do you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    
“The proposal may only be considered if it meets the 
following requirements.” 
 
And then we go to 4.  Now this is your document and 
your department Mr Mokhesi.   
“The product or service presents a new and cost-
effective method of service delivery.” 
20 
 
Perhaps you could explain to the Chair what news 
means in that context, it being your document? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I suppose the new will refer to the 
methods and certainly the removal of asbestos is within our 
mandate.   
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 105 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we are not doubting it was 
within your mandate ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   It is within our mandate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi, we want to understand, 
or at least, we would like to understand, this side of the 
room, what you mean by it must be new.  A new method of 
service delivery. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just your understanding, your own 
understanding of what this means.  In other words, Mr 
Pretorius is asking for your own understanding of what this 
10 
part of your policy means. 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, you know, it might mean that it has 
never been done before. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:    That is a... that is also new. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOKHESI:    Or it is, they are differently than 
conventional way but it is... but it was done before. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes, it might be that.  It might mean that it 
20 
is a completely, completely new thing.  It has never been 
done before but, obviously, as we apply that it must be within 
your own mandate.  It is not something that is outside your 
mandate.  Or it might be a different method. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of doing things. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 106 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:    Of doing things. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If we were to accept for the moment 
that it is was within your mandate, that is not a matter of 
dispute.  The description that you have given of a new 
method of service delivery, I would understand is in 
accordance with the ordinary meaning of those words.   
 
There is, and you can correct me if I am wrong, there is 
in this proposal at Free State 8164 nothing new or nothing 
different about what was done in Gauteng or what had been 
before anyway.  Would you like to have a look at Free State 
10 
8164? 
MR MOKHESI:   Nothing... nothing, in fact, nothing new. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is nothing new.  Nothing 
unprecedented.  Nothing that had not been done before.  
Nothing new as described by yourself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If I can assist?  You have said that (iv) at 
12.3(13) means that the proposal comes up with a new 
method of doing things.  Now Mr Pretorius is putting to you 
for your comment that in this proposal that was submitted, 
there was no method of doing things that was apparent from 
20 
the proposal.  What do you say to that? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept? 
MR MOKHESI:    Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 107 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So we do not need to go to the 
document then for the moment at least.  But let us go 
further.  Let us go with the National Treasury Circular.  And 
to assist you here, we also have that document.  It is at page 
193 of the bundle that is in front of you.  Maybe I am 
misleading you.  FS7-196.  This is a Treasury Circular. 
MR MOKHESI:   193? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, 196.  I am sorry.  This is a 
Treasury Circular which is dated 28 October 2004.  That is 
apparent from the stamp at the bottom of page 196 and its 
10 
heading is:  Implementation of Supply Chain Management.   
 
At page 197, it deals with unsolicited bids and I stress 
unsolicited bid and if we... what we are dealing here with in 
unsolicited bid, the Treasury Circular places some duties on 
an accounting officer in paragraph 2.2 on page 197.  Do you 
have that? 
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if it reads: 
“If you as an accounting officer, authority decides to 
consider an unsolicited bid, he or she may only do 
20 
so if the product or service offered in terms of the 
bid is a unique innovative concept that would be 
exceptionally beneficial to or have exceptional cost 
advantages with the institution.” 
 
Let us leave aside exceptional benefit and exceptional 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 108 of 212 
 
cost advantages.  We can deal with that later.  But I 
understand that the product or service offered in terms of 
that unsolicited bid or proposal is conceded by you to be not 
unique and innovative.   
 
Firstly, others have done it and secondly, it was not new.  
Would you accept that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry, you cannot nod with...  
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh. [laughs] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I mean, you can nod but you should 
also say yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, when you nod, the microphone does 
not capture the nod. [laughs] 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But your answer to that question 
was:  Yes, I understood. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then B: 
20 
“The person who made the bid is the sole provider 
of the product or service.” 
 
Now given the experience of Gauteng, we know that not 
to be the case.  Would you accept that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja.  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 109 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And C what applied because we 
understand that there have been some strategic planning 
around removal of asbestos. 
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You know that/ 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  But then let us go to the 
National Treasury Practice Note 11 of 2008/09.  Now that 
appears that at Free State 7-202. 
MR MOKHESI:   What page are we on Mr Pretorius? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Free State 7-2...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us just say file ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Free State 7-202. 
MR MOKHESI:   202? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  This is a document which 
appears 
on 
page 
212 
to 
have 
been 
issued 
on 
the 
16t h of March 2009 and issued in terms of Section 76 of the 
PFMA, Public Finance Management Act.   You see that on 
page 212? 
MR MOKHESI:   212? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And this is a practice note dealing 
expressly with unsolicited proposals. 
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry, 212? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 110 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We go back to 202 but the 
proposition I just put to you is at page 212, that this practice 
note was issued under the authority Section 76 of the PFMA 
and was issued on the 16t h of March 2009.  Do you have 
that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I have it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This document deals expressly and 
particularly with unsolicited proposals and it appears as such 
on page 202.  Do you have that? 
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Under the heading purpose, 
paragraph 1.1. reads: 
“This practise note provides precise guidelines for 
institutions 
dealing 
with 
unsolicited 
proposals/concepts.   
An 
unsolicited 
proposal/concept 
means 
any 
proposal/concept received by an institution outside 
its normal procurement process that is not an 
unsolicited bid that is a submission that must be 
innovative, unique and provided by a sole supplier.” 
20 
 
What we know is that the proposal that you received was 
not an unsolicited... well, it was received by you outside of 
the 
normal 
procurement process.  It was unsolicited.  
Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 111 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  So we go on then to 2 
on page 203.  There are set out criteria for consideration of 
an unsolicited proposal.  Again, the provisions of your 
supply chain management policy are mirrored here.  2.1: 
“Institutions 
are 
not 
obliged 
to 
consider 
an 
unsolicited proposal.  It may consider such a 
proposal 
only 
if 
it 
meets 
the 
following 
requirements.” 
And then requirements we have just dealt with are set out.  
Do you see that?   
10 
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Those are the same requirements 
as contained in your policy, your departmental supply chain 
management policy. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then, if one goes over the 
page to paragraph 2.3: 
“The requirement is that the unsolicited proposal 
must set out the following information in terms of 
the product or services offered.  Firstly, a concise 
20 
title and abstract approximately 200 words of the 
proposed product or service.” 
We can debate whether that is applicable or not but it is 
perhaps not necessary to do so. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, on 2.2. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 112 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   2.3 on page 204. 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think, Mr Mokhesi, Mr Pretorius is 
leaving both of us behind.  I was still on 2003 as well.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now we are on 204.  Well, I am at 
least, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am there now. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 204.  Are you there?  
Paragraph 2.3: 
“The unsolicited proposal must set out the following 
10 
information in terms of the product or service 
offered.” 
 Firstly, a concise title and abstract approximately 
200 words of the proposed product or service.” 
Let us go immediately to subparagraph (c). 
“A 
statement 
describing 
how 
the 
proposal 
is 
demonstratively 
innovative 
and 
supported 
by 
evidence that the proponent is the sole provider of 
the innovation.” 
Can we accept that that was not contained in the proposal 
20 
that we referred to? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  (d): 
“A statement of the anticipated benefits or cost 
advantages to the institution including the proposed 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 113 of 212 
 
price or total estimated cost for providing the 
product or service in sufficient detail to allow a 
meaningful evaluation by the institution.” 
As I read it, at least, it should have the price of the 
product or the total estimated cost, total estimated cost for 
providing 
the 
service 
in 
sufficient 
detail 
to 
allow 
a 
meaningful evaluation by the institution.  Would you accept 
that the proposal did not contain that information or that 
statement? 
MR MOKHESI:   Contain what?  The costs? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, it did not contain the total 
estimated cost for providing the service?  Well, let us go 
there, if you like you can show me where it is contained, if 
you like. 
MR MOKHESI:   Chair …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am just putting to you that it does 
not contain that information to try and move on. 
MR MOKHESI:   The proposal did not have the costs. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry. 
MR MOKHESI:   You say the proposal did not have a…? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did not have the total estimated 
cost for providing the service in sufficient detail to allow a 
meaningful evaluation by the institution. 
MR MOKHESI:   It certainly did have a unit cost. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let us have a look.  If you go 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 114 of 212 
 
to Free State 8, FS8 page 164 and to assist you we can go 
straight to page 166 under the heading rate per house.   
There is a cost per house.14.30. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But there is not a total cost of the 
service.  In other words, you did not know how much at the 
end of the day the department would have to pay for the 
whole service. 
MR MOKHESI:   At the beginning, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At the beginning, yes.  That came 
10 
later. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But not at this stage.  Are we 
agreed on that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Then paragraph 3 on page 
204 says under head …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   Paragraph 3 on a different, not on that 
one, hey? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, that is still the same – no, not 
20 
that document, the one before you, FS7, 204. 
“Unacceptable unsolicited proposals” 
Is the heading in paragraph 3.  It says: 
“The accounting officer must reject the unsolicited 
proposal if certain conditions apply.” 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 115 of 212 
 
Right?  And let us just go to 3.1 (a).  Okay? 
“If 
that 
proposal 
relates 
to 
known 
institution 
requirements…” 
Now we know that your department had a requirement, it 
was within your mandate to remove asbestos.  Are we 
agreed thus far? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The answer is yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If the stenographer complains 
anymore, I am going to get into big trouble, Mr Mokhesi. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   I think this thing is a little bit far.  Yes? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So it related to known institutional 
requirements and would you say that it could within 
reasonable 
and 
practicable 
limits 
be 
acquired 
by 
conventional competitive bidding methods?   You could 
have gone out tender reasonably and practically. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja and this is what I was trying to say to 
you, Mr Pretorius, the other processes, whether it is 
unsolicited bid, regulation 16.6 A and so on, those are 
recognised bidding instruments. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please look this side. 
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry.  Ja, those are recognised bidding 
instruments that also have an underlying constitutional 
imperatives.  So let us not create an impression that the 
conventional tendering system is the only one because 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 116 of 212 
 
things can go wrong even in that particular – in that 
conventional tendering process.  Things can go wrong as 
well.  So that is basically what I am trying to say, let us not 
create the impression that it is the only …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Pretorius’ question was based 
on 3.1(a) at page 204 because that provision requires, at 
least it seems to me, the accounting officer to reject and 
unsolicited proposal if certain conditions exist.   
 
The first one, that is (a), is: 
“If 
the 
proposal 
relates 
to 
known 
institutional 
10 
requirements 
that 
can, 
within 
reasonable 
and 
practicable 
limits 
be 
acquired 
by 
conventional 
competitive bidding methods.” 
And, as I understand what paragraph (a) means it seems to 
say do not accept, as an accounting officer, an unsolicited 
proposal if it would be reasonable and practicable to obtain 
the 
same 
thing 
through 
the 
conventional 
competitive 
bidding methods.  That is my understanding of what it 
says.  Is it the same as your understanding? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of paragraph (a). 
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is my understanding of paragraph (a) the 
same as yours, namely an accounting officer must reject 
and unsolicited proposal if the proposal relates to known 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 117 of 212 
 
institutional requirements that can within reasonable and 
practicable limits be acquired by conventional competitive 
bidding methods.  In other words, as I understand it, the 
paragraph seems to say you must remember, accounting 
officer, that the preferred method, is the conventional 
competitive bidding methods, those are the preferred but it 
is acknowledged that there may be circumstances where 
you do not have to use those but it therefore says if, what 
is proposed, is known institutional requirements that you 
can, as a department within reasonable and practicable 
10 
limits obtain by using conventional bidding methods, use 
conventional bidding methods, do not go for the unsolicited 
proposal.  That is my understanding of what paragraph (a) 
says.   
My question is, is my understanding the same as 
yours? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, I hear what you are saying, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MOKHESI:   All what I am – you see, the fact of the 
20 
matter is, we did not use …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The competitive conventional. 
MR MOKHESI:   Or the – we did not use… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Conventional. 
MR MOKHESI:   Or, even for that matter, at the time, apply 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 118 of 212 
 
to - you know, to come to a decision that says this - you 
know, with the advice of the practitioner at the time.  This 
we think will qualify as unsolicited bids because what was 
in 
the 
mind 
in 
that 
particular 
point 
was 
the 
most 
appropriate method will be the 16.6 A and that is where we 
are because right now Mr Pretorius is questioning me on 
the issues of the unsolicited – while I consider, this like 
unsolicited bid, I accept, I accept that, on hindsight, say 
this is what would have happened but the fact of the matter 
is, it did not happen that way. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   We apply, as I have indicated earlier on, 
that we apply a… 
CHAIRPERSON:   A wrong… 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Law or vision(?). 
MR MOKHESI:   The wrong section. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Yes, but what Mr Pretorius is trying 
to do is to try and make sure that we all understand where 
there is common ground including your own understanding 
20 
of the situation so that we can see where there may be 
differences so that is why he was saying this requirement 
here contemplates that the accounting officer should reject 
an unsolicited proposal if it relates to known institutional 
requirements that can within reasonable and practical 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 119 of 212 
 
limits be acquired by conventional and competitive bidding 
methods. 
My understanding of what you are saying - and I am 
trying to make sure we make progress - my understanding 
of what you are saying is, you accept that this requirement 
– 
you 
accept 
that 
this 
proposal 
related 
to 
known 
institutional requirements and it is not your case that the 
department could not within reasonable and practicable 
limits acquire these services by conventional competitive 
bidding.  My understanding is that you are not contesting 
10 
that. 
MR MOKHESI:   I am contesting …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   I am not contesting this particular issue 
because it was never applied in the first place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay.  No, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Similarly, …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   I think it will save the Commission’s time 
as well, not to dwell on things that we never applied them 
in the first place. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, no, no, that is helpful because 
it makes us to understand what issues you do not contest, 
you accept and then we can get to the ones which may be 
contested as early, as quickly as possible. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let us just try and summarise 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 120 of 212 
 
the position, as I understand your answer, Mr Mokhesi.  
The provisions in relation to unsolicited bids or unsolicited 
proposals could not be applied in this case, they were 
simply not applicable.  That is how I understood your 
answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me see if I can …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, please assist, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   My understanding of your position is that 
you accept that even the provisions relating to unsolicited 
proposals were not complied with in this case. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes because we never …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You answered that. 
MR MOKHESI:   We never applied …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You never applied them, therefore 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   We instead used a different method. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Which turned out not to be the correct 
method. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But you have already said you 
20 
accept that in hindsight – you say what should have been 
done is to see whether these provisions were – could be 
applied. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 121 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:   It will serve no purpose to discuss what 
we did not do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   When I have admitted that this is possibly 
on hindsight should have happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.  So maybe to take that 
one step further because I think that is where Mr Pretorius 
was 
going, 
looking 
at 
this 
provisions, 
at 
these 
requirements for applicable to unsolicited proposals, you 
would accept that still it would have been difficult to apply 
10 
them or to say the requirements were met …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because, for example, there was nothing 
innovative about this report(?). 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that?  Yes? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I am saying correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think that should… 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, just to summarise them, Mr 
Mokhesi, not only did you not apply these provisions, you 
applied different provisions but you could not apply these 
provisions because the bid did not comply with the 
provisions that are set out in the prescript.  Is that a far 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 122 of 212 
 
summary? 
MR MOKHESI:   [indistinct – voice muffled] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We know what you did and did not 
do, that is the subject matter of evidence, it is in your 
statement.  You did not seek to apply the provisions 
relating to unsolicited bids or unsolicited proposals.  That 
much I think you have said now, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja and I think …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Please take the mask off. 
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry, sorry.  I think even in my statement 
10 
because the issue of unsolicited bidding is a finding, to say 
this is what we should have done and [indistinct – dropping 
voice].  Nowhere do I make a reference on the issue of 
unsolicited bidding. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, no sure.  The …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   Emphasis has always been on the issue of 
the application of the 16.6 A. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  So we will get there, I 
promise.  But, for the moment, not only did you not apply 
but the proposition that is apparent from what we have – 
20 
the work we have just done is that you could not do so in 
any event.  You did not do so and you could not do so 
simply because the bid, the unsolicited bid did not comply 
with the requirements of the statute and the regulations 
and the practice note.  Is that a fair summary. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 123 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, we – if at the time we …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Tried to apply them. 
MR MOKHESI:   We it will – I, you know, it will not pass 
so… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Good.  Okay, then we are on the 
same page.  Just for the sake of completeness although we 
know you did not do it and you did not consider doing it for 
other reasons, it is important to place on record that even 
where an unsolicited bid results in an agreement, there is 
10 
still a procurement process that must be gone through.  In 
other words, the agreement must be advertised and other 
people must be given a chance to enter the competition, as 
it were. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, the solicited, unsolicited bid also is 
process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, has its own process. 
MR MOKHESI:   It has its own process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if I may just refer you to 
paragraph 5 on page 208 that even if an unsolicited 
20 
proposal or unsolicited bid is accepted, it must still be 
subject to a competitive process. 
MR MOKHESI:   So is all other … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but the answer is yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   all other processes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 124 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Whether it is 16.6 A, underlying to that it 
is a competitive bidding process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the way it works in this case, 
as I understand it, and I am trying to summarise so we can 
move on. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that once an agreement is 
reached with a person who has submitted an unsolicited 
bid or unsolicited proposal, rather.  Unsolicited proposal, 
10 
let me stress that, you must still go out …[intervenes]    
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   …to the public and allow other 
people to make competing bids, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  Alright, then let us 
move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The answer was yes? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And those provisions are contained 
in the circular at page 208 and following, Free State 7 to 
108 and following under procurement, paragraph 5.   
 
And what is also interesting about the procedures 
that follow the acceptance of an unsolicited bid is the 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 125 of 212 
 
provisions in paragraph 6 on page 209, that external 
consultants may be approached for advice in relation to the 
bid that has been accepted.  Do you see that in paragraph 
6? 
MR MOKHESI:   209? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    6, page 209.  Do you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just very briefly, it makes 
provision for an accounting officer or institution to seek 
advice from independent consultants or experts where 
10 
there may be a need to do that. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   I see it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, if we may then go to the 
topic that you have mentioned a number of times and that 
is the regulation 16A 6.6, that is the provision that you 
have mentioned earlier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where do we find it?   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is in FS7. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Same file that we have? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, same file.  Just to identify the 
document it is page 4 of FS7.  This is a document entitled: 
“Treasury 
Regulations 
for 
departments, 
trading 
entities, 
constitutional 
institutions 
and 
public 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 126 of 212 
 
entities issues in terms of the Public Finance 
Management Act of 1999.” 
And the regulations are dated March 2005, that is apparent 
from page 4.  Do you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, now if we go to 8.1.1 and I 
am talking about paragraph 8.1.1. 
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, the same document. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I will get there in a moment.  It is 
on page 33.   
10 
MR MOKHESI:   33? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   8.1 deals with responsibility of the 
accounting officer in relation to payments made from funds 
of a department, for example in your case.  Do you see 
that in 8.1.1? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I see. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And 8.2.1 says that: 
“An official of an institution may not spend or 
commit public money except with the approval 
either in writing or by duly authorised electronic 
20 
means of the accounting or a properly delegated or 
authorise officer.” 
Do you see that?  
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us then go through to 16A 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 127 of 212 
 
which appears – if you would bear with me for a moment, 
Mr Mokhesi.  Under the head Supply Chain Management on 
page 60.  These now are the regulations that have been 
issued 
under 
the 
auspices 
of 
the 
Public 
Finance 
Management Act, they are part of that hierarchy of control 
provisions that we spoke about earlier but if I may refer 
you to 16A 3.1, just to confirm the position in terms of the 
regulations.  It reads: 
“The accounting officer of accounting authority of 
an institution to which these regulations apply must 
10 
develop and implement and effective and efficient 
supply chain management system in his or her 
institution 
for 
the 
acquisition 
of 
goods 
and 
services.” 
That is consistent with provisions and other instruments 
that we have referred to. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then 16A 3.2: 
“A supply chain management system referred in 
paragraph 
16A 
3.1 
must 
be 
fair, 
equitable, 
20 
transparent, competitive and cost effective.” 
And then there are various other provisions that apply, 
again mirroring both your prescripts in your department 
and your supply chain management policy at the bottom of 
the pile and the constitution at the top of the pile, correct? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 128 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then, 16A 6.6, if you would go 
there, please? 
MR MOKHESI:  The following page?    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is on page 62. 
MR MOKHESI:   62. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This is the provision that was 
sought to be applied in the present matter, although you 
have made certain concessions that it could not be.  Do I 
understand you correctly? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, it reads: 
“The accounting officer or accounting authority may, 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
department, 
constitutional 
institution of public entity participate in any contract 
arranged by means of a competitive bidding process 
by any other organ of state subject to the written 
approval of such organ of state and the relevant 
contractors.” 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius, precisely where 
under 16A, A6 are you reading? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   16A 6.6 on page 62. 
CHAIRPERSON:   16A 6.2? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Point 6. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 129 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Point 6? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes on page 62. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright I have found it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There are several requirements 
contained in that provision but perhaps we could short 
circuit the whole debate or the whole series of questions if 
you just said to the Chair in what respect it was incorrect 
to apply this provision in the case of the asbestos contract. 
MR MOKHESI:   I think I will – in the main I will mention 
three things.  Yes.  Because which is what I asked the 
10 
supply 
chain 
because 
more 
often 
than 
not, 
as 
an 
accounting officer, you get to know about problems when 
they will get or when they are picked up by an auditor. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, just raise your voice again? 
MR MOKHESI:   I am saying you pick up more often than 
not, as an accounting officer, you pick up when they have 
occurred, when problems have occurred. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And through either internal audit or 
external auditors.  That is when you realise that there are 
20 
problems.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOKHESI:   That is when you realise that there are 
problems.  Now the questions that I ask, there are only 
three things, to the Supply Chain.   One, why 16(a)(6) in 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 130 of 212 
 
other words if you are participating in a contract of another 
institution if it is not a joint venture there it cannot be a 
joint venture here.  That is the first – those are the – 
secondly…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it reads: 
“The 
above 
has 
reference 
to 
your 
proposal 
submitted to this department and your appointment 
by the National Department of Human Settlements.” 
Is 
there 
any 
reason 
why 
you 
addressed 
Blackhead 
Consulting Pty Limited and not the joint venture? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry to interrupt you, Mr Mokhesi 
but I didn’t hear that, if you could repeat that please. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, I’m saying the three issues that I 
requested when picking up that there is a problem in terms 
of the irregularity, so say, one, the joint venture, you know 
the 16(a)(6) requires that it must be the same company if 
you participate you must participate in a contract with the 
same company.  Two, did you request documents, right, 
because that’s the first process of – that’s where the due 
diligence starts because you don’t want to -  you know if it 
20 
is a regular on the other side you can’t regularise it 
yourself and the only way that you can be in a position to 
know is to get all the documents, you know from the 
advert, how they were appointed, who were the participants 
etcetera, etcetera, all that information.  Then you’ll be in 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 131 of 212 
 
the position to identify possible risk of any irregular 
expenditure.  Now the third issue is around the issue of the 
unit price, right 650 there, you can, up to a point, if you 
participate increase the price because, indeed, the Free 
State Province, it’s a vast province but they know that you 
have to get – make a motivation to Treasury, Treasury 
would have to allow you to be able to increase that.  If, for 
any reason, you have to deviate from the existing price.  
So, those three issues, because they were not complied, 
that’s what made us to be where we are in the main.  
10 
Obviously, you know, there are other processes when 
irregular expenditures, there’s a framework that defines 
what you have to do and so on and so on. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, well perhaps you could 
assist us with the provisions that you refer to in due course 
but 
if 
I 
may 
just 
see 
if 
I 
understand 
you 
correct…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second, had you finished? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The first issue you raised was that, 
in order to apply this provision, 16(a) 6.6 of the Treasury 
regulations, in order to participate in a contract that has 
been entered into an executed elsewhere you must actually 
participate in that very contract, is that correct and that did 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 132 of 212 
 
not occur in this case? 
MR MOKHESI:   You – not only that, but you must – it must 
be like for like. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, right so it must be the same 
parties, same terms and conditions, same price? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct and that didn’t occur in 
this case? 
MR MOKHESI:   It could not – you know, they could not 
pick it up because they did not request the documents, I 
10 
mean this is one of the things, they could not – in other 
words, that’s where the due diligence start.  Your first – 
because – well they gave three answers which they – 
maybe If I can – the answers around – maybe let’s start 
with this issue of the JV, say why.  In their opinion, they 
did not see that as an issue because I think in one of the 
affidavits a mention is made that, one, that was appointed 
there was a lead consultant and therefore did not find it 
necessary for – did not think it is an issue but it is an 
issue. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, they may be having that view but 
your view is different. 
MR MOKHESI:   It’s an issue, ja it is an issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKHESI:   Secondly, on the issue of the due 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 133 of 212 
 
diligence to say, let’s get – why did you not get documents 
from Gauteng, you know, all documents…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which would have given them a full 
picture. 
MR MOKHESI:   It would give you the full picture of 
whether this is – this is where we should participate or not.  
Now, one of the things that has been – I think even before 
the 90 you know before the 19 Gauge issue, because that’s 
the one that actually clarifies what must happen, for the 
application of the 16(a)(6), also take into consideration 
10 
that this particular issue happened, we had different 
interpretation but the fact of the matter is, if you have to 
do a – if you have to avoid the risk of irregular 
expenditure, you still have to do more and see – so that 
you don’t transfer your problem to you basically and the 
response is that there is nowhere, either in the Act itself, 
in the regulations that say you must seek documents, that 
was some of the – but as a matter of course you need to 
do that so that to avoid this particular – indeed it doesn’t 
say that, simply, their interpretation was that, as long as 
20 
the Accounting Officer of the other institution assures you 
that you, you know, due process has been followed and so 
on and so on that’s all that you need to do but with the 
advent of the 90 Gauge it emphasises that you must get 
documents. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 134 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words part of what you are 
saying is, you might be hearing whatever view they had, 
you are saying, they had to satisfy themselves that, what 
happened in Gauteng was regular and the way to do that 
was to ask for documents and they did not do that. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, because at the time – at the time 
when this – it was only declared irregular subsequent, at a 
later stage but you could have probably have been in the 
position to identify risk that because of X, Y, Z there’s a 
possibility that this particular contract might be declared 
10 
irregular.  Now, you can’t regularise it if it has been 
declared irregular at the source. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If we could just summarise so that 
I make sure I understand your answer, Mr Mokhesi.  In 
order for the Free State Department to participate in a 
contract that had been entered into between the Gauteng 
Department of Human Settlements and a service provider, 
certain requirements had to be in place.  You’ve described 
it appropriately, I think, when you used the words like for 
20 
like, it must be the same service provider, it must be the 
same terms and conditions in relation to performance and 
price and that, that should be evidenced by an examination 
of the documentary record. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 135 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And …[intervenes]. 
MR MOKHESI:   Because that – if you do that at least 
you’ll be in the position to reduce the risk. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, so as I understand what didn’t 
happen in the Free State Department was that the evidence 
to show that the regulation could indeed apply, like for like, 
was not called for or examined. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, remember, I think the 19 Gauge case 
also came up with a lot of other issues in the process but, 
indeed, even then, you know, like for like, yes that should 
10 
be. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, well had they looked at the 
documentation 
in 
your 
Department 
they 
would 
have 
discovered that it wasn’t like for like, it wasn’t the same 
service provider, it wasn’t the same terms and conditions 
of contract. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, in other words, it was not, for 
example the JV issue that I alluded to…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well we’ll come to those issues in 
a moment when we get to the detail at the moment we’re 
20 
just dealing with the general principles. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Lets then, look at what actually 
happened and hopefully we can deal with this more quickly 
than we’ve dealt with the issues thus far but before we go 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 136 of 212 
 
there, did you know that the Premier ’s office in 2010/2011 
issued a directive that all procurement documentation 
should be sent to the legal advisor in the office of the 
Premier? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I was not even…[intervenes]. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
they 
pre-dated 
your 
appointment. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja it pre-dates my appointment. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
but 
did 
you 
know…[intervenes]. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   But what I’ve seen in the files was, simply 
that there’s a contract, I don’t know whether it implied 
procurement documents, I thought I saw, in the files it 
simply says the contracts be sent to the State Law 
Advisors…[intervenes]. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Well 
we’ll 
get 
to 
those…[intervenes]. 
MR MOKHESI:   That’s what I saw. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just before we go there then, we’ll 
look at the documents, they’re in FS7 page 305, if you 
20 
want to go there. 
MR MOKHESI:   305? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   305, now at page 305, and perhaps 
this is the only one we need to refer to, is a document 
dated the 23 r d of June 2011, it signed by the Director 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 137 of 212 
 
General, in the office of the Premier and it says, 
“Submission of contracts, agreements to the State 
Law Advisors and the office of the Premier, and it 
reads, 
it 
was 
brought 
to 
my 
attention 
that 
Departments submit contracts/agreements without 
submission 
of 
the 
relevant 
background 
and 
supporting documents which includes procurement 
documents”,  
It then goes on to say that, procurement must be 
fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost effective 
10 
and it say, what should be supplied to the State Law 
Advisor in the office of the Premier, do you see that?  That 
includes all procurement documents, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, the letter – okay the document that 
I’ve seen is this one, I think 307 which emphasis the  
[indistinct – dropping voice] contract ...[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well let’s deal with the one at 305 
first and then we can go to 307 if you wish. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The one at 305 is dated 23 r d of 
20 
June 2011, the one at 307 is dated a year earlier, 1 s t of 
July 2010.  So, in other words, I would assume that the 
document at 307 cannot override the directive in 305 to 
306, you’d accept that, I’d presume? 
MR MOKHESI:   It cannot? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 138 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It cannot override it because it pre-
dates it, in other words, it was a valid instruction in 
305/306 the letter of 23 r d June 2011, I’m not sure we 
should be arguing about this. 
MR MOKHESI:   305. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you talking about the one at 305? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes Chair, 305 and 306. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got that page Mr Mokhesi? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja I have 305 but I don’t understand Mr 
Pretorius …[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The question, the proposition okay do 
you want to try again Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let’s just deal with the 
document at page 305 to 306, correct?  You’ve got that 
document? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I have it, 305. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That document says that all 
procurement 
documents, 
background 
and 
supporting 
documents to contracts and agreements entered into by a 
Department…[intervenes]. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Are you reading somewhere Mr… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I’m looking at paragraph two, 
I’m paraphrasing but perhaps I should read it for clarity. 
 “It was brought to my attention, says the  
Director 
General 
of 
the 
Premier ’s 
office, 
that 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 139 of 212 
 
Departments submit contracts/agreements without 
submission 
of 
the 
relevant 
background 
and 
supporting documents which includes procurement 
documents’, 
 
And then paragraph three, 
“In order to further clarify what is expected from 
Departments 
when 
contracts/agreements 
are 
submitted for scrutiny, the following must at least, 
accompany all contracts/agreements submitted to 
the 
State 
Law 
Advisors. 
 
3.1 
Procurement 
10 
documents relating to the service provider, which 
could 
include 
the 
tender 
documents, 
quotation 
documents or submissions for deviation.  3.2 Soft 
copies, electronic of all contracts/agreements.  3.3 
Inputs/comments 
of 
provincial 
Legal 
Advisors 
relating to the specific contract/agreement.  3.4 Any 
other information that could be relevant and should 
be taken into account”, 
 
In other words what the office of the Premier is 
saying to every department, give us full information of all 
20 
procurement and contracts entered into, is that a fair 
summary of this directive? 
MR MOKHESI:   In terms of this letter? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry? 
MR MOKHESI:   In terms of this letter? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 140 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, in terms of this letter. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now the question I have, it’s pretty 
clear what this letter says, I don’t think there can be much 
debate about it but were you aware of this when you took 
office in 2012? 
MR MOKHESI:   No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, do you know whether or not 
your Department complied with this directive in relation to 
the Free State asbestos project? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   I don’t know, certainly, from my side I’ve 
never submitted any procurement documents through all 
this. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay and do you know – or how 
long before you arrived in the Department, Mr Matlakala 
had been there? 
MR MOKHESI:  He arrived after me.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He arrived after you, okay thank 
you. If we could go to FS6 - 445, that is once again to the 
transcript…[intervenes]. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   FS? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   FS6, so that’s another file, Ms 
Ragata will help you.  If you could go to page 445 please.  
There Mr Lampbrecht asks you, in the first third of the 
page, 445 so can you then confirm that this contract, and 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 141 of 212 
 
they’re talking about the contract in the asbestos matter, 
was never sent to Mr Venter ’s office and you say, not to my 
– not that I’m aware of but then you clarify to say, maybe it 
was, maybe not.  So, is it correct that the position is, you 
don’t have any knowledge as to whether it was submitted 
or not? 
MR MOKHESI:   We have our own legal division – legal 
unit, Chairperson, so all the contracts will, ordinarily be 
referred to – and they are responsible for compiling the 
contracts and so on.  If they choose to use the State Law 
10 
Advisors in the name of Mr Venter, it doesn’t mean that we 
don’t use Mr Venter from time to time because of his 
experience, it does happen but I cannot say certainly, in 
this instance…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, would you have had a legal 
advisor 
in 
your 
own 
office, 
that’s 
the 
Free 
State 
Department of Human Settlements? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes, we have a legal…[intervenes].  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that person would have had a 
duty to look through this contract and the procurement 
20 
process. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did that happen? 
MR MOKHESI:   The practitioner, in the main, in other 
words the person who hold or who advises, particularly in 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 142 of 212 
 
matters of supply chain processes will be the Director 
Supply Chain, however, in the formulation of the contract 
and so on he will then, in the process, also consult with 
the legal department.  I assume that it did happen because 
it should happen that way…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you check whether it had 
happened? 
MR MOKHESI:   I didn’t check whether it has happened it’s 
a matter of course it must happen that way, he knows. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, well this was an unusual 
10 
circumstance it’s not every day that 16(a) 6.6 would apply, 
I understand, this was an unusual circumstance, correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was it not a circumstance that 
would require the Accounting Officer to make sure that the 
process and the resultant agreement was subject to legal 
scrutiny? 
MR MOKHESI:   I was given an assurance that it has 
happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who told you that it had 
20 
happened? 
MR MOKHESI:   The Supply Chain Practitioner. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The Supply Chain Manager? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, the Supply Chain Practitioner. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Matlakala? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 143 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:   Mr Matlakala. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you go to FS6 again please, once 
again to the transcript of your interview at page 460, 460-
FS6. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There, once again, the contract in 
this matter was being discussed and two thirds the way 
down the page Mr Lampbrecht asks, 
“Was the Premier aware of this contract, and your 
answer was, Premier will be aware of all the 
10 
contracts of all the contract in – because you know 
in the province not specifically for this particular, in 
the same way as my because I report to the MEC, 
they will know”, 
 
Simple question is, would the Premier have known 
about this contract? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, I cannot say for certain but I report 
to the MEC. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, you would have reported this 
to the MEC, this contract? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   That’s who I report to. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The MEC would have known and I 
take it from your answer there that you infer that if the 
MEC knew it was likely that the Premier knew, do I 
interpret your answer here correctly?  Where you say the 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 144 of 212 
 
Premier will be aware of all the contracts because I report 
to the MEC. 
MR MOKHESI:   I cannot say with commitment that the 
Premier would know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But are you prepared to stand by 
your statement here on 460? 
MR MOKHESI:   To say – in respect of? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well you say here, Mr Mokhesi,  
“The Premier will be aware of all the contracts of all 
the contracts because you know in the province, not 
10 
specifically for this particular, as the same way as 
my because I report to the MEC, they will know”, 
 
Now, I understand that it’s not entirely clear what is 
said here but I’m suggesting to you that what you’re saying 
here, the Premier would know because I report to the MEC 
and the MEC knows. 
MR MOKHESI:   The Premier will be aware of – generally 
of the projects in the province. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, let’s then deal with the 
process that actually occurred, and I’d like to put to you 
20 
some of the correspondence between parties, including 
yourself, if you’ll just bear with me a moment.  If you would 
go to FS8 please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got FS8? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, FS8. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 145 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Pretorius, is still going to say 
the page number. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 169, that is a letter 
addressed by yourself, that’s your signature is it? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Dated 19 June 2014 to the CEO of 
Blackhead Consulting Pty Ltd. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it says that the above has 
reference to your proposal submitted to this department 
10 
and your appointment by the National Department of 
Human Settlements.  Now, to be fair to you, if you look at 
the top right-hand corner of the letter you’ll see there, 
enquiries J Matlakala, did he draft this letter? 
MR MOKHESI:   He did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, did you pay attention to 
what was contained in this letter when you signed it? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, we did have a discussion and 
obviously it is through – you know I act through his 
recommendation. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, because if you remember 
the proposal to – was submitted by Blackhead and by 
Diamond Hill, do you remember that, on the cover page? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, but this letter is addressed 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 146 of 212 
 
only to the CEO of Blackhead Consulting, do you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it reads, 
“The 
above 
has 
reference 
to 
your 
proposal 
submitted to this department and your appointment 
by the National Department of Human Settlements.” 
 
Is there any reason why you addressed Blackhead 
Consulting Pty Limited and not the joint venture? 
MR MOKHESI:  It was not – you know the issue of – of the 
Joint Venture you know we subsequently came.  I think I 
10 
have already – I have already Chairperson addressed how it 
happened.  Because if you see on all the letters that are 
written here the enquiries has always been the Supply Chain 
practitioner.  Now the only reason why it was addressed to 
Blackhead in my understanding there was that it was 
Blackhead which was doing the work in Gauteng and had a 
contract – sorry – and had a contract.  Now that Diamond 
Hill was not part of Gauteng it only became apparent later 
and as I have indicated you know some of these particular 
issues but ...[indistinct] in our accounting office, is when 
20 
they were you know where the bananas hit the fan for lack of 
a better word.  It is when you pick up not through this – the 
practitioners have said for the people who are doing the 
work but because of external auditors either internal auditor 
or external auditor it is them that those particular issues 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 147 of 212 
 
come up. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Because I understand your answer Mr 
Mokhesi it is that you addressed this letter to Blackhead 
Consulting Pty Limited because you knew that it was 
Blackhead that had entered into the Gauteng contract and it 
was only Blackhead that could participate in a contract that 
had been sourced from Gauteng. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja but also let me just – you know I earlier 
on spoke about the – the issue of – of the deal – documents.  
Now in this you know my understanding at that particular 
10 
time because normally if you get documents then you will 
know that it was not only Blackhead that was appointed it 
was a couple of other people.  And even in that particularity 
you need to have sort of a – of a bidding sort of.  There were 
so many people that were – there were so many companies 
that were appointed there to do this particular [01:12:48].  It 
was set aside the issue of irregularity first.  But it was not 
only Blackhead that was appointed it was Alice.  So what – 
what – what present – how this presented itself you know in 
the beginning it presented itself as if it is Blackhead that 
20 
won the bid basically.  I mean this is how it presented itself. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. Well if you look at the content 
of this document at 169 of FS8 you will see references made 
to the Department of Human Settlements Free State wishing 
to extend the contract that Blackhead had with the National 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 148 of 212 
 
Department of Human Settlements in line with Treasury 
Regulation 16a66 of 2005.  Do you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now that we understand from other 
evidence and you can correct this evidence if you feel it is 
incorrect. That was the appointment of Blackhead Consulting 
Pty Limited to a panel of service providers.  Do you 
understand that to be the case then? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want to draw his attention to the 
specific paragraph in the letter? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you look at paragraph 1 reads: 
“That the department wishes to extend your 
current 
contract 
– 
that 
is 
Blackhead’s 
contract 
– 
secured 
by 
the 
National 
Department of Human Settlements in line 
with Treasury Regulations Number 16a6.6 of 
2005.” 
MR MOKHESI:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now it is apparent from other 
documentation which I can show you in a moment as well as 
20 
the evidence of the bid of department in the National 
Department of Human Settlements that what was being 
talked of here was the appointment of Blackhead to a panel.  
It was not an individual instruction to perform work. 
MR MOKHESI:  Oh okay. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 149 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Which had terms and conditions. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You agree with that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you accept that? 
MR MOKHESI:  There was no contract it was a panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But what is sought here – well let me 
just ask you this question?  It seems from an answer you 
10 
gave to an earlier question that even in relation to the 
documentation which would have existed in the National 
Department the Free State Department might not have 
requested all the documentation to understand exactly what 
was being requested. 
MR MOKHESI:  Repeat that Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Remember you said Mr Mokhesi that 
there was a problem about requesting documentation in this 
process. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That the documentation was not 
requested and was not examined. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And therefore, there could be no 
proper understanding of what was going to be extended and 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 150 of 212 
 
whether it complied with the regulation. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now I am asking does that same 
comment apply to the National Department.   We know that 
you did not ask or no one in your department asked for 
documentation relating to the Gauteng contractual position 
or the panel position.  Does the same comment apply to the 
National Department? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It does.  
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now at the time of sending this letter to 
the CEO of Blackhead did you know that the appointment of 
Blackhead by National – by the National Department of 
Human Settlements was an appointment to a panel as 
opposed to an appointment or conclusion of a contract for 
performing work? 
MR MOKHESI:  Personally, at that time it was not clear that 
20 
– Chair your question is that did I know at the time? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  At the time you sent this letter to the 
CEO of Blackhead and you wrote as you did in paragraph 1 
of this letter.  Did you know that the appointment of 
Blackhead to – by the National Department of Human 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 151 of 212 
 
Settlements was simply a panel? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja a panel and not a contract? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Did you know that at that time? 
MR MOKHESI:  No I did not know that it was a panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By that time? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You thought it was a contract? 
MR MOKHESI:  It is – ja.  Until – until later to say no but this 
is a panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Actually, the work did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKHESI:  In you know in the National Department it 
happened in Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And at this stage I take it at the 
stage of this letter I take it that you would have known about 
the fact that there had been – that Blackhead had been given 
a contract in Gauteng.  You would have known that by this 
time? 
MR MOKHESI:  No not – I would – I would have known. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes because that was the first thing that 
was… 
MR MOKHESI:  That Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Had engaged. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 152 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  In the removal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Sorry the assessment.  Because what trigger 
that I think was the storm.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKHESI:  What happened there in Gauteng and then it 
became necessary for them to you know – to determine what 
is the size of the problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  That is was specifically Blackhead. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What I did not understand when previous 
evidence was given previously with his regard to this letter 
was why you would have thought that – you would have gone 
to the National Department – you would have gone to the 
appointment – the appointment of Blackhead by the National 
20 
Department for purposes of finding a contract when in fact 
you ought to have known that it was in Gauteng where 
Blackhead had been given a contract.  That is what I did not 
understand. 
MR MOKHESI:  What – what – you know without – because I 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 153 of 212 
 
assume my colleague is going to come. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  You know at some stage – here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry you are soft – your voice is… 
MR MOKHESI:  I am saying I am informed that the director 
Supply Chain will also come before the commission at some 
future.  You know I would – because at all material times in 
respect of this particular letter as to why it went to National 
Department and not Gauteng.  It probably was you know 
during his engagement when he was giving or you know 
10 
investigating 
what is the 
most appropriate 
method of 
procuring this contract.  Indeed, we started in – in National 
Department because this was where we thought only to find 
– to discover that it is actually a panel it is not a contract.  
There it is not National Department that was responsible for 
– for eradication of – for the asbestos project per se.  So it 
is Gauteng and of course the DG who served did indicate 
that issue to say here is a panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes 
MR MOKHESI:  It is not a contract. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We understood from evidence already 
given Mr Mokhesi that the National contract was – or the 
National arrangement rather I should not say contract was 
the establishment of a panel nationally for general housing 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 154 of 212 
 
matters.  Do you understand the same?  It was not an 
asbestos related panel. 
MR MOKHESI:  No it was a general… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It was general housing matters. 
MR MOKHESI:  General housing matters. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now I understood… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that a yes? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes, Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR MOKHESI:  It was clarified. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You of course signed the letter.  Did 
you know at the time and I think you have answered this 
already what contract you were seeking to extend?  Did you 
make any enquires of your supply chain director?  Did you 
say well what contract are we extending here? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes I did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And what did he say to that? 
MR MOKHESI:  To – it is the asbestos contract. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So did Mr Matlakala say to you when 
you signed this letter addressed to the National Department 
that the contract sought to be extended here was a contract 
for the removal of asbestos – identification and removal of 
asbestos?  Did he actually say that to you? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 155 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Identification okay removal because it had 
two phases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Just repeat the answer and 
look this side ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did Mr Matlakala say this National 
Department arrangement or contract was about? 
MR MOKHESI:  The – proposal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKHESI:  Was about the removal and the 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Disposal. 
MR MOKHESI:  Audit assessment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  And disposal.  It was in two phases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  So this is the contract that will be 
participating on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  Or participating – yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 
MR MOKHESI:  Now in all this particular processes that 
followed subsequently there the intention was exactly that.  
To participate in – because we knew that Gauteng had 
already done it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You knew that Gauteng was? 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 156 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:  Gauteng had – had done it already. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes we know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But you – I think Mr Pretorius asked 
a question and your answer seemed to suggest that when 
you were signing this letter or before you signed this letter 
you asked Mr Matlakala what contract or arrangement 
Blackhead 
had 
been 
appointed 
to 
in 
the 
National 
Department. 
MR MOKHESI:  Okay the confusion was – was initially that 
10 
this was done by National Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  Initially. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:  And hence – and that is the reason we wrote 
to which I will imagine to the National Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKHESI:  And actually, it was done by [01:25:52]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  So are you saying at the time of 
signing this letter you were not aware that it was Gauteng – 
20 
the Gauteng Provincial Government? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That had given an asbestos contract to 
Blackhead. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 157 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were not aware of that? 
MR MOKHESI:  No I was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At this time. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what you are saying? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you say you discussed it with Mr 
Matlakala and he also – his understanding was also that … 
MR MOKHESI:  It was a National Department. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
The 
National 
Department 
of 
Human 
10 
Settlement is the one that had provided Blackhead. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With a contract for asbestos. 
MR MOKHESI:  Whereas it was only a panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOKHESI:  I am saying whereas it was only a panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes but you say that was the 
understanding of both of you? 
MR MOKHESI:  That was the understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yourself and Mr Matlakala? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:  And Matlakala. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So I understand your evidence when 
you signed this letter you actually asked Mr Matlakala well 
what contract is being extended here that was entered into 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 158 of 212 
 
by the National Department of Human Settlements and you 
say that Mr Matlakala told you that it was an asbestos 
related contract. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Did 
you 
ask 
to 
see 
any 
documentation in this regard? 
MR MOKHESI:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  To assure yourself that this was in 
fact correct. 
MR MOKHESI:  Remember we – when we – when it later 
10 
turns out that it is actually not you know in – in National 
Department it is only in  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Gauteng. 
MR MOKHESI:  No, no.  It is only a panel.  So when it later 
turned out that it is only a panel there is no contract actually 
the work was done by Gauteng.  I have already eluded 
earlier on that the documents that normally – you know when 
you do – when you participate in a contract of this nature the 
thing that you have to do is also to request the documents.  
And sometimes these documents are voluminous.  The mere 
20 
assurance – because I am not talking about an intern          
here we are not talking about and intern we are talking about 
a senior manager. If you give me an assurance that indeed 
you have done your work that is sufficient for me particularly 
if you this – you know because documents – procurement 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 159 of 212 
 
documents are voluminous.  Now I do not have – I simply 
have to get an assurance that indeed you have followed due 
process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well that is… 
MR MOKHESI:  In that … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is… 
MR MOKHESI:  So that assurance was given to me. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes that is a further question but the 
question is and I think you have answered it that you did not 
ask for documentation you relied on an assurance? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes we – we all do.  Also take into 
consideration you know I – how many people report to me 
and it is eleven people who are my direct reporting plus the 
district and the district as well they report – my sphere of 
control is – it is very wide.  Now I am not talking about 
interns here.  I am talking about senior managers who in 
their own right can also be in future the Accounting Officer.  
So if a person who has been – or people who have been in 
the supply chain – I mean they – they – the supply chain 
practitioners almost on a monthly basis you know they have 
20 
their own supply chain forums.  They attend – and that is 
also the reason why they – they have to be in all the 
committees of procurement to advise other members as well.  
So we are not talking about a – you know somebody who – 
who is an intern and so on. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 160 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think – I think you… 
MR MOKHESI:  So it depends what the level of assurance 
that we – you know how far should I really in certain 
instances demand all those particular documents.  He knows 
I do not have to tell him.  I do not have to tell anybody 
particular.  He knows.  He has been employed for that he is 
being paid for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I guess the – the short answer is that 
you did not ask for documents but Mr Matlakala gave you an 
assurance that put you at ease, is that right? Ja okay. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Would you have expected as his 
reporting official – would you have expected him to have 
looked at the documents? 
MR MOKHESI:  I would have expected him to do so.  I will 
have – to have documents – all the documents with us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And would you accept as other 
witnesses before on this topic have testified that you cannot 
extend a panel.  You can only extend a contract with terms 
and conditions. 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja we participate in a contract not in a 
20 
panel.  A panel – a panel ordinarily has – you know you are 
at the functionality base you know.  You qualify them and say 
right the 10 or the 15 or the 30 of you qualify to do – to be 
on the panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 161 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:  But even then, as you go forward, they still 
have to compete.  Because what will remain now is a price in 
the main. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes on the same day that you wrote 
to Blackhead Consulting Pty Limited you appear to have 
written to the Director General Department of Human 
Settlements Mr Zulu and that letter appears at page 214.9 of 
FS1 and I am sorry to make you shuffle bundles yet again Mr 
Mokhesi but if you would go to Free State 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  FS1. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Page 214.9.  It is not the most legible 
document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  214.9 
CHAIRPERSON:  214.9.  Are you managing there Mr 
Mokhesi?  Do you need assistance from somebody?  I think 
he is fine. 
MR MOKHESI:  This one.  Oh.    
CHAIRPERSON:  214? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Point 9 Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Point 9.   
MR MOKHESI:  Page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Page 214.9.  I must apologise it is 
not entirely legible hence the dark background but it is more 
or less in the same terms as the letter we have just referred 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 162 of 212 
 
to addressed to Blackhead.  It is asking for participation in a 
National contract.  Do you see that? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And I presume the same comments 
that you made about documentation and the like would 
apply?  Correct and your reliance on Mr Matlakala’s 
assurances. 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then if we could go to another 
document.  It is a letter from yourself to a Ms Diedericks 
dated 15 July 2014 and it appears in FS2 at page 111. 
MR MOKHESI:  FS2. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair I see it is four o’clock may I 
ask what the intentions are? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us talk about whether we – what we 
will do.  I suspect that everyone prefer that we finish if we 
can but it might not be possible. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well that is an understatement Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you – you are on the podium there 
what do you suggest? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know how long you still… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am quite willing to proceed if that is 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 163 of 212 
 
in order with everybody else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have a witness and other parties 
present who should perhaps be consulted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no, no we – I will be – I will be asking 
Mr. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But we must bear in mind that I will 
not finish today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that both Mr Mokhesi and Mr 
10 
Sodi have to come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And we could try and arrange for 
them to come back on a single day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes of course the more we do today even if 
we do not finish the better the chances are that we can find 
another space. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Somewhere you know and there is not a lot 
of space. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No I understand that entirely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We are pressured. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Provided we… 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 164 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  As long as your… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Have a reasonable limit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is your own estimate of how much 
time you might still need? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Three hours Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Three hours? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Mpofu what is your situation? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You may be more persuasive than 
me. 
10 
ADV MPOFU SC:  I can just speak from here? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can speak from there ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Thank you.  I am sorry Chair I have to sit 
down this is – these are too… 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Too low yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Chairperson you have – you take – you 
took the words out my mouth.  My first question was whether 
there is a likelihood of finishing or not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Because if there is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Then at least we – we do not need to 
invest more – much more time.  And my second question was 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 165 of 212 
 
how much longer? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Mr Pretorius has indicated another three 
hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Chair to put it blindly I would prefer 
therefore 
that 
we 
stop 
as 
soon 
as 
possible 
on 
the 
understanding that we all going to have to come back and 
what I understand is that Mr Pretorius wants to – to for the 
next occasion to have two witnesses back to back let us say 
10 
maybe use the three hours for us and then another couple of 
hours for somebody else.  So that – we are quite comfortable 
with that Chair.  The – well of course in the – I am sorry.  In 
our case the three hours might actually not be three hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Because as soon as we get to the stage 
where we feel that there is a risk of self-incrimination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  It might well be shorter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV MPOFU SC:  But so far, we are still fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well my inclination is that if Mr 
Pretorius says it is about three hours that he estimates he 
might take would be that maybe we – we continue even if it 
is just for one more hour.  Because if what is left should take 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 166 of 212 
 
two hours that should be easy even to fit into an evening 
session.  Like starting at four o’clock or five o’clock. It is 
easy to finish two hours if we cannot find time during the day 
you know. So – so that would be my inclination. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have no problem with that? 
ADV MPOFU SC:  I can live with that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Mokhesi you hear what we are 
talking about what is your situation?  Are you happy that we 
continue for about another hour? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja one – one hour I am fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are in line with your Counsel? 
MR MOKHESI:  Ja one hour it is – I think one hour from now 
it is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It should be fine. 
MR MOKHESI:  Is okay but… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  After that I will feel… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might be exhausted? 
MR MOKHESI:  Because I have other issues. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:  That I have to attend – to attend. But 
certainly I am available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MOKHESI:  Even I think I have indicated that earlier on 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 167 of 212 
 
even for the evening sessions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay no I think maybe then we are 
going to – let us take a short break now and then we will 
come back and we go for an hour and then we adjourn. 
ADV MPOFU SC:  Thanks Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are at four minutes past shall we 
resume at twenty past four? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  So we will adjourn now and 
resume at twenty past four. We adjourn. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Let us continue.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Sorry.  I had my 
back to you.  If you would go to FS2, please Mr Mokhesi at 
page 111. 
MR MOKHESI:   Page 111? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Another letter addressed by 
20 
yourself, on the face of it at least, to the Head of Department 
Gauteng dated the 15 t h of July 2014.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, yes. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 168 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you look at paragraph 3 of that 
letter.   
“It is, therefore, in this regard that the privilege 
hereby sought, that you provide written confirmation 
to extent same in line with your approved terms and 
conditions 
as 
contained 
in 
your 
instruction 
to 
perform.” 
 
There it seems that what is sought to be extended is an 
instruction to perform work which would have contained 
approved terms and conditions such as specifications, price 
10 
and the like.  Do you understand that in the same way? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay.  My understanding here is, obviously 
the instruction to perform work is, it is the one that gives a 
contract to execute the work but there will be a contract that 
is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what you had in mind? 
MR MOKHESI:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But we have seen... you recall the 
phrase that we referred to this morning, Terms of Reference, 
we had seen the Gauteng Terms of Reference but what we 
20 
do know is that the, at least the terms and conditions 
relating to performance and the price in Gauteng, were 
different than that entered into in the Free State.  You are 
aware of that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 169 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And so we know then that the 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   The 6(50).  This is the 8(50). 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry? 
MR MOKHESI:   That is what you are referring to? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The 6(50) and 80... 8(50)? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Per unit.  There are other 
10 
differences but I do not necessarily want to go into those, 
unless you wish to.  I do not think it is relevant for the point 
that we make now. 
 
Is that I understand your evidence to be, you would not 
have looked at the documentation in Gauteng to establish 
what those terms and conditions were. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, simply because of the voluminous.  You 
know, procurement documents are voluminous in that.  And 
each one of us has got a role to do his or her work.   
 
I mean, the documents, I would have expected that 
20 
Supply Chain in Gauteng to have supplied by request, per 
request, of course, which is part of the due diligence to say, 
please give us all the documents, you know, from the 
advertisement. 
 
And you know documents, tenders, those who... even 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 170 of 212 
 
those that were disqualified, you know.  Because you have to 
have that information.  You have to have that information as 
if it is you who is doing it, you know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, you know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   That information by itself will be voluminous 
because then you also have to look at the rest of the reports 
to different committees.  So you have to request all 
information from A – Z.   
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am not sure that it would have 
been too difficult and too voluminous a task to simple 
establish what the price per unit was in Gauteng.  Would it?  
Simple question, what was the price per unit in Gauteng? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, the unit in Gauteng was R 650,00 a 
unit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But what I am saying is, it would not 
have been too difficult to establish just that fact before 
entering into a contract in Free State at R 850,00.   
MR MOKHESI:   I think what I have indicated previously Mr 
20 
Pretorius.  You know, I said, you know, after the fact I have 
asked three questions.  And one of them was:  Did you ask... 
did you get permission from Treasury?  In other words, did 
you make as a Supply Chain Practitioner your contract to... 
did you make a ...[intervenes]  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 171 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Look this side again, Mr Mokhesi. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay sorry.  Sorry, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   You asked three questions. 
MR MOKHESI:   I asked three questions.  One of the 
questions is:  Did you request and make motivation to 
Treasury to...?  You can... we can... you can vary the price 
but it should be provided.  Treasury has approved and saw... 
given the motivation to Treasury.  Because those are the 
three questions that they asked.  And one of them was that.  
So it did not happen.   
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Good.  When you asked Mr 
Matlakala, did you seek approval of Treasury to adjust the 
price, what was the answer? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, they could not... you could not, you 
know...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You could not respond? 
MR MOKHESI:   I could not respond. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When did you ask them? 
MR MOKHESI:   Well, at the point when the... remember, 
there was a finding, okay?  A contract... in other words, the 
20 
contract was... and one of those... and one of the issues that 
was raised around it was precisely that particular point but 
you could not provide a motivation... ag, a proof that there 
was a Treasury approval.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the question is, when did you 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 172 of 212 
 
ask him and when did he give you this false assurance for... 
the inability to assure you? 
MR MOKHESI:   Upon... you know, upon... when one of the 
issues in the contract.  In other words, one of the issues 
upon the finding.  Let me put it that way. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Of the Public Protector? 
MR MOKHESI:   No.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What findings? 
MR MOKHESI:   The finding by the AG.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Well, we have not really 
10 
canvassed that but were you aware that the Auditor General 
in the Gauteng Province had declared the Gauteng contract, 
Asbestos Contract, invalid? 
MR MOKHESI:   I became... we became subsequently aware 
of that particular issue. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Yes 
and 
were... 
when 
did 
you...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   At that time when this participation was 
happening.  It had not been declared. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Not the Gauteng Contract. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But ultimately the Free State 
contract was also declared invalid by the Auditor General in 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 173 of 212 
 
the Free State.  
MR MOKHESI:   By extension.  In other words, if it is 
irregular in Gauteng, they cannot be irregular with you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  But I understand that... well, 
when did you become aware of that finding?  At the time it 
was made?  You must have, surely. 
MR MOKHESI:   The audit of... I think it was 2015. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now do you know that payments 
were made pursuant to the Gauteng... to the Free State 
agreement?  Payments 
were made 
after the Attorney 
10 
General... not the Attorney General, the Auditor General had 
declared the contract invalid, whether by extension or not? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, but the work had already been done by 
that time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But... alright.  Well, let us just... let 
me just take it step by step and take a deep breath.  In the 
Free State, the Auditor General declares the contract invalid.  
Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Irregular.  I do not know if that means the 
same. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you become aware of that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, we became aware through the audit but 
this particular contract, irregular in Gauteng ...[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is it correct that after you became 
aware of this fact, payments were still made to the service 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 174 of 212 
 
provider in relation to the Free State contract? 
MR MOKHESI:   Because the work was done. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, is that...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I did not hear that answer. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay.  I am saying the work was already 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let me ask ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Now what we could not continue with is a 
certain phase. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Of the contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOKHESI:   The only thing that we could... because 
ordinarily Chair, if something is declared irregular, that there 
is a certain formula that you will have to follow that what 
happened, who was responsible for example and whether 
there was money that was received. 
20 
 
Now, they always say and who is responsible, obviously 
will 
lead 
to 
certain 
consequences 
for 
that 
particular 
individual 
or 
individuals 
that 
caused 
the 
irregular 
expenditure because you would have to investigate it and so 
on and so on. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 175 of 212 
 
 
Now in this instance, work was done, completed.  Now 
the questions is, overpayment of money, which is a point of 
contention even right now.   
 
You would recall also, that was a... there was a case or 
a judgment which was sponsored by a political party.  Now I 
am aware that it was not, or perhaps going forward it was... 
what was decided there was not on merits. 
 
In other words, whether the contract is irregular or not 
but part of what was in that particular judgment, which 
perhaps may be for people like ourselves, created a 
10 
confusion, 
was in a finding that says there was no 
overpayment because that was also part of the issue.   
 
And so whether we paid... the department paid too much 
for that or not.  Now that... in that was... in that judgment, it 
says there was no overpayments.  Perhaps on probabilities.  
Now if you have that, that is the... that assertion that says, 
there is no overpayment, it sort of in a way suggests that, 
you know, money was received.   
 
So what remains is irregular expenditures occurred.  
Who is responsible?  Then we will have to do that particular 
20 
investigation to say:  Okay how did it occur?  What systems 
are we going to put in place to ensure that there is no 
recurrence of that in the future.   
 
Now... so those payments were made on those in terms 
of that understanding that says at the time money was 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 176 of 212 
 
received.   
 
However, subsequently, then came in the investigations 
by the Public Protector which then is of the view that, you 
know, instead of assuming.   
 
You know, there is an investigation that is going on.  So 
let us wait for the outcome of that particular investigation 
because it is done independently and see to what extend can 
you apply the consequence management thereafter. 
 
I think that has happened now with the event of the 
release by the Public Protector of the report which is another 
10 
leg because we thought we should not do it internally 
because the alternative was to do that internally but now you 
run the risk that if you blame individuals while you are... and 
the Public Protector comes in. 
 
Now at a later stage and finds against, you will then 
have to revert back.  So the consequence management of, 
you know, of that action is now happening because of what 
the Public Protector is... 
 
And I think it also applies to me as an Accounting Officer 
and this is what is happening.  Now, the other part is... okay.  
20 
Okay that is... Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The position is as follows then.  The 
Auditor General in the Free State declares the contract, the 
Asbestos Contract, irregular or invalid.  You continue to 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 177 of 212 
 
make payment nevertheless and you say the reason you did 
was because the work had been done. 
MR MOKHESI:   The work ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And there was a judgment which said 
there was no overpayment. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you gave those reasons. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I understand that but that we 
can investigate as to whether that is...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOKHESI:   But also Chairperson, I think... you know, if 
something has been...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not put...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Oh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   If something has been declared irregular, 
depending on irregularities, you know.  Let us make a simple 
example.  I ask you to build a house.  You complete the 
house.  And after you have completed the house, I have to 
pay you.  The auditor comes and say it is irregular, right. 
20 
 
Now you cannot say, I am not paying you and keep the 
benefit, you know.  And those are some of the considerations 
that we have to take into account when you decide to...  
 
Look, obviously, you cannot continue with the contract.  
The contract ends there.  And we could not also continue 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 178 of 212 
 
with the second phase. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  I do not want to debate the 
law with you but the principles upon which... in which we 
claim, which the legal term would be calculated, would be 
entirely different from the contract.   
 
If the contract is declared irregular, my understanding of 
the law is, that the contract cannot therefore be enforced 
from either side.   
 
But 
if 
a 
party 
has 
benefited 
unduly 
from 
the 
implementation of the contract, there may be circumstances 
10 
where that party may still recover payments but the 
principles are entirely different.   
MR MOKHESI:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It would have resulted in a different 
financial outcome.  But I do not want to debate the law with 
you in that regard. 
MR MOKHESI:   No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We know the facts.  Let us just go to 
another letter, please.  But before we go on.  when the 
Public Protector issued her report, payments were stopped.  
20 
Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that a yes? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 179 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:   And the reason being...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR MOKHESI:   The reason being that one of the issues that 
was mentioned by the Public Officer, was looking for money, 
right.  Now you do not continue when there is already that 
particular finding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can continue only...? 
MR MOKHESI:   I am saying, the reason being, one of the 
issues that was raised by the Public Protector, was value for 
money.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   So it needed... that also needed also to be 
exhausted indeed, to find out, indeed, is this correct or is 
this not correct?  And it is also going to come out perhaps 
because there has been a proclamation on this matter by 
the... sorry, by the SIU which I think in their mandate, that is 
also what they have to determine.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say, value for money was one of 
the issues raised? 
MR MOKHESI:   It is one of the issues. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  But I must say for the record 
that if the contract was invalid of a result of anything found 
by the Auditor General in the Free State, the same or similar 
principles of value for money unjust enrichment principles 
would have applied but again, perhaps we should not debate 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 180 of 212 
 
that law.  It is quite complex. 
MR MOKHESI:   But you know this... when irregular 
expenditure has been determined, you know there is a 
process what they referred to as a write-off. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the process? 
MR MOKHESI:   Of write-off. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, of write-off.  Writing off something, 
yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Writing of the irregular expenditure.  Right? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   And you also go through that particular 
process.  Now the AG will never allow you to write that off if 
he is not satisfied with what we have done.  Now, you know, 
it has been written off basically.  So I do not know as to... 
because the determination of the value for money as well, is 
also part of whether you will be allowed to write off that 
particular irregular expenditure or not.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Perhaps you could answer this 
question and then we can move on.  In terms of all the 
regulatory prescripts that would bind an accounting officer, if 
20 
a contract is declared irregular or invalid, I an Auditor 
General, as happened in this case, what are the duties that 
rest upon an accounting officer? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay the first thing is you investigate. You 
investigate. Okay. As I have indicated, what happened, 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 181 of 212 
 
right, who is responsible, did we receive value for money 
because sometimes terminating the contract can actually 
be very costly in certain instances.  I am not saying all 
instances but it there might be particularly in construction, 
you can actually end up with a bigger bill than you 
anticipated simply because you chose to [indistinct – 
dropping voice] 
Also taking in consideration that, you know, your 
own internal issues cannot be – okay, I suppose I am 
talking to a judge and a lawyer here but your own internal 
10 
issues cannot be at the prejudice of external parties who 
are not part of your processes.  They have delivered what 
you asked for and then you come up at a later stage and 
say no, no, this contract it is irregular and therefore I am 
not going to pay you but you keep the benefit. 
I understand – look, I do not want to, as you say, Mr 
Pretorius, you know, I am not a lawyer, so – but that is 
basically sometimes where you have to, you know, apply 
your mind in terms whether you have to not to pay and if 
you are not going to be – why are you not paying if you 
20 
have received a value and what informs that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us avoid legal terminology then 
because it seems to me that the principles that you have 
been dealing with now are reflected at least to an extent in 
the law but let us leave the law to one side.  As I 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 182 of 212 
 
understand your proposition now is that once you had 
learnt that the contract was irregular you would have 
investigated whether there was value for money received 
by the department for which it should have paid or should 
pay.  Do I understand the proposition correctly? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you – you say yes? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, I am saying you investigate and… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And what happened. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes and particularly under the 
heading value for money. 
MR MOKHESI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because, as I understand your 
proposition, if you have received value for money you 
should pay for it. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you investigate whether the 
department had received value for money? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, we – obviously we use the internal 
20 
expertise to say okay, fine.  In respect of this particular 
project, did we receive – did the work – was the work done 
as it was supposed to have been done? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   They are two different questions, 
Mr Mokhesi.  The first question and what you have been 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 183 of 212 
 
speaking about is value for money, not whether the 
contract – the performance under the contract was carried 
out. 
 
The 
question 
is 
value 
for 
money. 
 
Because, 
remember, the contract is now set aside, it is irregular.  So 
we are now looking at value for money.  Did you 
investigate whether the department had received value for 
money? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, we did investigate whether the 
department [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who did that investigation? 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   The product management unit did that 
investigation in terms of the terms of what was supposed 
to happen and that.  So that we did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, once again, I am asking about 
the prospect – or, not the prospect, the concept of value 
for money which you have just raised.  Did you ask for an 
investigation to be conducted when it was drawn to your 
attention that the contract was irregular, be conducted into 
whether the Free State department had received value for 
money as opposed to whether the terms of the contract had 
20 
been carried out? 
MR MOKHESI:   Mr Pretorius, I think I have answered that 
question, I said we did.  You might not agree in terms of 
what just transpired perhaps right now, Chairperson, to say 
- I do not think you did and so …[intervenes] 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 184 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was this investigation carried – I 
am sorry …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let him finish, Mr Pretorius. 
MR MOKHESI:   In the normal course of events.  You know, 
when an irregular expenditure happens, that is exactly 
what you did and the AG will never allow you because they 
will also do independently, of course through a sample 
basis because it is not about – the sample, there are 
investigations as well to say fine, was - you know, on the 
basis of a spot check.  If for any other reason they are not 
10 
happy around what we did, they will not allow that to be 
written off, they will not allow that irregular expenditure to 
be written off.  
 
So maybe not to your satisfaction, I do not know, 
but we did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, the question that arises out 
of what you have said, Mr Mokhesi, let us take it step-by-
step.  When you learnt, as accounting officer, of the fact 
that the contract had been declared irregular, right?  You, 
as accounting officer, must have been concerned having 
20 
received that information, surely? 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, right? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was important to the 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 185 of 212 
 
department and particularly yourself in regard to whether 
further 
payments 
should 
be 
made 
was 
whether 
the 
department had received value for money. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you ask anyone to investigate 
whether the department had now received value for 
money? 
MR MOKHESI:   I just said we did, alright? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who did you ask? 
MR MOKHESI:   There are two – no, the production – ag, 
10 
sorry, the project management unit and the head of the 
project management unit is Mr [indistinct] 30.17, but 
coupled with that, we also had this court judgment which, 
in a way, suggested that there was no overpayment 
because that was also the concern because we might have 
overpaid in this instance. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
MR MOKHESI:   And it was also a matter of contestation in 
court as to whether we did or did not but, you know, the 
court did not pronounce itself on whether the contract was 
20 
irregular and that was not [indistinct – dropping voice] but 
they did pronounce on that part, that… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That court judgment, you could 
give us a reference, I presume? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, that is how I understood it, that 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 186 of 212 
 
…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The investigators may ask 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   And also, internally got assurance from - 
you know, from the legal division that indeed it says – it 
basically says we did not overpay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, the evidence before the 
Commission to date indicates that there was a gross 
overpayment but let us put that aside for the moment, I 
would like to interrogate that judgment and perhaps we 
10 
could a reference from your attorneys in due course.   
 
But the question I have is, you asked the project 
management unit to investigate the issue of value for 
money.  Did they provide you with a written report?  Yes? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, normally what will happen is that – 
because the preparation of – we would have a register of 
all the irregular expenditures that have been identified and 
then 
there 
will 
be 
a 
preparation 
on 
those 
irregular 
expenditures that we – you know, that we have been able 
to resolve and this one included and that – and then there 
20 
will be that report that says – which we can – which we 
can, I think we can – which we can also make it available 
to the Commission around how that was written off. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, well, I am not sure whether 
we are necessarily talking about the same report but I 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 187 of 212 
 
understood your evidence to be that as an accounting 
officer you would received information that the contract in 
the asbestos project was irregular, you would have asked 
your project management unit to investigate whether you 
had received value for money and my question is, did you 
receive a report pursuant to that request? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that report, was it in writing? 
MR MOKHESI:   It was in writing with all other identified 
irregular expenditures and not only that. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You see, the question I have, did 
you in this particular case ask the project management unit 
to report to you in relation to whether in this particular 
contract there was value for money?  Did you make that 
request or are you relying on a general procedure? 
MR MOKHESI:   In every irregular expenditure value for 
money comes into play in all of that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   Not only the asbestos one but in all 
irregular expenditures that have been identified, value for 
20 
money is always …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that a practice that exists? 
MR MOKHESI:   It is a practice, it is a practice that 
…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I am not asking about a 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 188 of 212 
 
practice, I am asking you about a particular request arising 
in the particular circumstances of this case.  You receive a 
report that a contract is irregular, you know that certain 
payments may still have to be made, you then decide that 
the value for money is an important consideration as to 
whether these monies should be paid or not and I am 
asking 
you 
whether 
you 
requested 
your 
project 
management unit to give you a report.  You say yes.  Now I 
am not talking about the practice that exists in relation to 
all irregular expenditure, I am talking about a particular 
10 
report and a particular circumstance.  Did you ask for such 
a report? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, the report – the – what happens is that 
in a particular year there will be an issue that says the 
following 
contracts 
or 
the 
following 
expenditure 
are 
irregular.  Some are easy to resolve, some not.  Now those 
that are easy to – or those that have been apparently 
resolved, then there will be a one report on all of those 
particular irregular expenditures. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that happens in that practice? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   And that is how they have been treated.  
Whether it is the right thing to do or not, but this is how it 
has been done and that information will then be made 
available to the auditor general in terms of whether he 
agrees or not. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 189 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, I understand that if it is. 
MR MOKHESI:   So, I do not know what more I should say. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No. 
MR MOKHESI:   On this particular issue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, perhaps just deal with the 
questions. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, Mr Pretorius, maybe part of 
the problem is that at some stage or another on both sides, 
I think, the one starts talking before the other one finishes.  
10 
So let us try and avoid that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, point taken, Chair, but it is 
necessary to be laborious over this issue, I am afraid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have referred, Mr Mokhesi, to 
a practice that exists in relation to a report or reports on 
all irregular expenditure.  That would happen regardless of 
whether you instructed a particular report to be provided 
for you.  Do I understand it correctly? 
MR MOKHESI:   I do not why you want to single out this 
20 
particular one to say it should happen differently. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us put the question this way.  
Is it true that when there is irregular expenditure there will 
be a report dealing with irregular expenditure without 
necessarily you instructing that such a report should be 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 190 of 212 
 
prepared in general. 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
That 
happens 
as 
a 
– 
you 
know 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   As a practice. 
MR MOKHESI:   It must happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   It must – you know, that is what is 
required. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja, so your answer is yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  Now the question is, who is in the 
10 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So do not go to the next question.  So 
the position is that if there has been irregular expenditure 
there will be a report.  You do not have to instruct 
particularly that a report be prepared because it is a 
practice or it is required, all concerned know that it is 
required, is that right? 
MR MOKHESI:   [No audible reply]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Now, Mr Pretorius, I think 
that clarifies at least part of your question, you have a 
follow up question I think? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 191 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So I understood you to say now in 
this series of questions, Mr Mokhesi, you said in this 
particular case you asked your project management unit 
head to give you a report on the issue of value for money 
in the asbestos contract, is that correct or not correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Because they will have to do it because it 
is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Mr Mokhesi, hang on. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At this stage you just need to confirm 
10 
whether you did instruct a particular unit to prepare a 
report for you on whether there was value for money in this 
contract.  Is that factually true? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you do that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Normally – normally what happens, we 
have a committee which we refer to as an irregular 
expenditure committee, okay? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Irregular expenditure committee. 
MR MOKHESI:   Irregular expenditure committee.  I am not 
20 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is for the department. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, I am not part of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Because those – the reports that comes 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 192 of 212 
 
from there will then ordinarily come to me, right? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
MOKHESI: 
 
 
Now 
all 
those 
identified 
irregular 
expenditure will then go to that committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   And they will be deliberated, it has got a 
Chairperson and so on but the key players in that irregular 
expenditure will be the CFO and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOKHESI:   And some of the senior managers. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay.  Now out of that, will then come a 
report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To you. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, on every irregular expenditure that has 
happened, alright, to say okay, this particular one, this is 
how we are going to deal with it.  This is how it must be 
dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   With those recommendations. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And included in that report 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   There will be minutes on that and so on.  
Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Included in that report would be 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 193 of 212 
 
the topic of whether there was value for money.  In each 
case where there was irregular expenditure or would it not 
be like that? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, there will be – in certain instances it 
is easy to determine whether there was value for money or 
not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   But in certain instances …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not easy. 
MR MOKHESI:   …you still need a technical unit like the 
10 
PMU to so go out and find out whether there was 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Value for money. 
MR MOKHESI:   Value for money and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But would it be correct to say that report 
that comes from that committee that – the report that 
comes to you on irregular expenditure, would it be correct 
that it has to address that issue of value for money 
whether it says yes, there was value for money or no, there 
was no value for money? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   It has got to address …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It has to address that issue. 
MR MOKHESI:   It has got to address that issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That issue. 
MR 
MOKHESI:  
 And, 
you 
know, 
in 
this 
particular 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 194 of 212 
 
instances, I am not saying, you know, value for money, 
etcetera, was actually – I do not know at this particular 
point, I cannot with conviction say that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Right?  Because, you know, I relied 
originally – we relied originally on that court case but there 
have been subsequent investigation thereafter and now the 
SIU – I think that will settle it to some …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, let us stop there.  So, as 
I 
understand 
you, 
there 
is 
an 
irregular 
expenditure 
10 
committee that looks at all irregular expenditure within the 
department? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that committee interacts will all role 
players affected by irregular expenditure, items of irregular 
expenditures in the department. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And they prepare a report that comes to 
you and one of the issues they must address in that report 
in regard to each contract is whether there was value for 
20 
money.  Even without you saying anything, they know that 
that report must say whether there was value for money or 
there was no value for money. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 195 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And is it on the strength of that 
report, Mr Mokhesi that you or the department decided that 
payment should continue to be made to the service 
provider in the asbestos project. 
MR MOKHESI:   On the strength of that plus, as I have 
indicated, on the …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, so …[intervenes] 
MR MOKHESI:   On the order. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So is it fair to say then now, with 
your recent answers, that in this particular case having 
10 
received a report from the auditor general in the Free State 
that the asbestos contract was irregular, you did not of 
your own initiative cause an investigation into value for 
money to be made?  You did not do that.  
MR MOKHESI:   What? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You see, what the Chair has made 
very clear, Mr Mokhesi, is that this is a practice that occurs 
regardless of whether you intervene in any particular case 
or not.  All irregular expenditure …[intervenes]   
MR MOKHESI:   Was investigated. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   …was examined by the committee 
and the department and it will then report to you without 
your initiative having been taken in any particular case, 
correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, and the AG might agree or disagree 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 196 of 212 
 
with …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  No, but my question is, 
earlier I understood you to say that in this particular case 
you approached - at your own initiative you approached the 
project management unit and you asked them to give you a 
report on this particular case as to whether there was 
value for money.  Is that correct or incorrect? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, I – you know, the issue of – once 
irregular expenditure has been identified, it is practice, you 
know – because if you do not deal with it, you know, if 
10 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, hang on, hang on, Mr Mokhesi.  We 
know now what the practice is, you have told us, okay?  Mr 
Pretorius’ question is whether his understanding of what 
you said earlier is correct and his understanding is that 
you said earlier on that you had asked a particular unit, I 
think project management unit, to prepare a report for you 
in regard to this contract on whether there was value for 
money. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, let me put it Chair ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...on whether it was ...[indistinct] for 
money.  So your answer should be yes you understood me 
correctly or no you did not understand me correctly. 
MR MOKHESI:   Chair, okay let me put it this way, every 
irregular expenditure I asked the responsible because we 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 197 of 212 
 
sit in ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I’m sorry, just repeat that. 
MR MOKHESI:   I’m saying in every irregular expenditure 
that occurs in the department I asked the relevant user 
department which is what the expense is on, to investigate 
that because it is also part of – you know we have an audit 
action plan that will identify specific areas of concern and 
so on, to say okay this is what the AG’s, this is what the, 
this is the findings in that particular area, and in those 
findings one of them would have been irregular expenditure 
10 
and this is how it has been paid, right.   Now all those 
issues that have been raised we then put that in terms of 
the action plan and say right you do it, who you know the 
monkey is whose back, it is on this particular one it is you, 
on that particular it is corporate services for example if it 
is something that involves issues of employment, which 
were done properly, and, and, and. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay Mr ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   So it is – it is – and this is what I am, I’m, 
I’m, I’m trying to say – to say when the audit – when the 
20 
AGS has finished or has done with his report we take that 
particular report, we put it up in a form of an action list 
that says which – who is responsible for what and that will 
also have included this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Mokhesi it may be that it has 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 198 of 212 
 
been a long day and you are the one who was being asked 
questions the whole day, but it is a very narrow question, 
forget about what normally happens, Mr Pretorius’ question 
is in regard to this case is it correct that you said earlier 
on that you instructed or asked the Project Management 
Unit to prepare a report and tell you whether there was 
value for money.  Is his understanding of what you said 
correct, did you say that or not earlier on, or are you not 
sure? 
MR MOKHESI:  Chair yes as you say it is a long day. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m?   
MR MOKHESI:   How we – because I am trying to explain 
by saying every year right ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I don’t want you to explain now, 
I just want you to try and remember whether you did tell me 
that 
in 
regard 
to 
this 
case 
you 
asked 
the 
Project 
Management Unit to prepare a report. 
MR MOKHESI:  And so is on all other cases, I don’t want to 
– and so is on all other cases where the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes but ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MOKHESI:   ...expenditure has occurred that will 
happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   To say this is yours, that is what I am 
trying to say. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 199 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you see the question is not 
about other cases. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in this case you did? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Just one more question 
then on this issue Mr Mokhesi.  Apart from the system 
you’ve described that was in place whereby all irregular 
expenditure is examined in relation to value for money and 
10 
other topics and the report is presented to you, apart from 
that was there any other specific request by you to the 
Project Management Unit to report on this particular case? 
MR MOKHESI:   Are you not asking me the same question 
again? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay the question is whether with regard 
to the Project Management Unit. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was there any other request you made 
to them in regard to this case other than the request that 
20 
they must prepare a report which would deal with whether 
there was a value for money.  Is there another request that 
you ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Another report? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whatever request in relation to this 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 200 of 212 
 
contract, is there another request you made to them in 
relation to this contract that you can remember? 
MR MOKHESI:   There is – Chairperson the request 
happened in the ordinary course of business and it was 
once, it was a report with all these others submitted to the 
AG to say look at what are you – you are happy with what 
you have done and so on, and then particularly for – there 
for the write off, and intrinsically that is there value for 
money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Now if, if, if in certain instances the AG 
has refused to write off in certain – and has requested us 
to 
do 
further 
work, 
in 
other 
instances 
of 
irregular 
expenditure he has instructed us to do other work to say I 
am happy with this, and do some few tests and explain why 
they are not, they are happy, and then we had to do other 
work.  In certain instances, we also had to particularly 
when it comes to irregular expenditure that because we 
had 
instances 
where 
we 
had 
to 
deal 
with 
irregular 
expenditure of 2010/2011 and we had to outsource that 
20 
part, so I don’t know what more I can say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Pretorius it may be that if you – 
it may be that you need to be more specific to say did he 
request ABC, then maybe that might help. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, well let me just do it once, or 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 201 of 212 
 
attempt to clarify once more.   You have described in detail 
Mr Mokhesi to the Chair a system that was in place 
whereby all irregular expenditure is investigated from 
various points of view including value for money by a 
committee and you are not a member of that committee.  
That routinely happens whether you instruct them in a 
particular case or not, am I correct?  There is a standing 
practice 
and 
set 
of 
instructions 
whereby 
irregular 
expenditure ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think don’t go back to it Mr Pretorius, it 
10 
was clarified. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes.. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That’s correct, well now the 
question  have is apart from that process which happens in 
any event, whether you initiate it or not, did you in this 
particular case, when you received the report from the 
Auditor General go to your Project Management Unit and 
20 
say I want you to investigate this particular case as to 
whether there was value for money in this particular case 
please give me a report? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, not – I don’t want to say in this 
particular case and separate this particular issue from the 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 202 of 212 
 
others that we are doing, which – of which are of similar 
importance, which are of similar importance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay Mr Mokhesi I think we have 
been to – along that road.  The answer that Mr Mokhesi 
gave earlier on was that he did give such an instruction in 
this particular case, but he did say that it does so in other 
cases as well, but in this particular case he said he did 
give, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let the record, it will be an 
exhaustive read but let the record be read and we can 
10 
decide what it says. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, if I misunderstood him, I am sure we 
will pick it up, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright, perhaps you can go then to 
8, FS8, at page 176.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I mention for what it is worth that we are 
five minutes away from finishing an hour, we can stick to 
that or we can go to half past and stop at half past if we all 
agree. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair I had a cordial discussion 
20 
with Mr Mpofu in the break and our understanding of the 
arrangement was five o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was five o’clock? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Five o’clock so ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughing] 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 203 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So I think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it is now quarter past five. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, I understand that, so we have 
conceded that point already ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh you’re saying we have gone beyond. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But I am not sure we are happy to 
concede yet another extension. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughing]   Okay, no, no I understand 
why you – I thought that what I said was the hour would be 
calculated from twenty past when we came back, but it is 
10 
not an issue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, no I have received advice from 
behind Chair, your interpretation was correct, and that we 
were clutching at straws, but we are happy to settle for 
twenty past. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright then. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If that is okay I mean if you insist 
Chair obviously to be serious ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no I just wanted to make sure 
because twenty past might be seen as an awkward time to 
20 
stop, I thought in case you say let’s – you all agree let’s 
finish at half past I am quite happy that we do that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Twenty past is not awkward at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughing] I won’t insist on going 
beyond that because you are the only one standing Mr 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 204 of 212 
 
Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, the only one left standing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so we will stop at twenty past. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair, but to be serious 
for a moment if you want to continue ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no it is fine, it’s fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokhesi if you would go to Free 
State 8, FS8 at 176 please.  That is a letter that refers 
back to your letter of 15 July which we spoke about earlier.  
Remember that we spoke about an instruction to perform 
10 
work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 176 of Bundle FS8? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, do you have that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a letter from Ms Diedericks to you, 
you have got it? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is dated the 4 t h of August 2014 
and it appears to refer back to your letter of 15 July which 
we have already discussed.  Now here she says: 
“Request to appoint a professional resource team.” 
The second paragraph reads: 
20 
“I hereby confirm my decision taken on 21 July 2014 
that the Gauteng Department of Human Settlements 
granted approval in terms of Treasury Regulation 
16[A] 6.6 for the Free State Department of Human 
Settlements to participate in the contract arranged 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 205 of 212 
 
by means of a competitive bidding process from the 
database of the Gauteng Department of Human 
Settlements or professional resource teams where 
Blackhead Consulting Pty Limited was appointed 
from.” 
That appears on the face of it to be referring to a panel 
arrangement, do you agree with me? 
MR MOKHESI:   On the face of it you say it appears to be 
from a panel arrangement? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you agree? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes?  Sorry? 
MR MOKHESI:   On the face of it yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the face of it yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On the face of it.  And once again 
at this stage reference is to Blackhead Consulting Pty 
Limited, not to any joint venture or other entity.  Do you 
see that in paragraph 3? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Paragraph 3, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You see that?  He is giving her 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   In the paragraph that says the approval, is 
that the paragraph that you are ...[intervenes]  
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 206 of 212 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, the approval is subject to the 
conditions 
that 
Blackhead 
Consulting 
Pty 
Limited 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   So that is the paragraph that you are 
referring to? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He is referring to Blackhead, not to 
the joint venture. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Alright, let us go on then to a 
letter that was written to Mr Sodi by yourself on the 11 t h of 
August 2014, perhaps we should deal with this letter and 
then bring proceedings to a halt Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MR MOKHESI:   What page is that? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is at page FS8 179.  This is a 
letter dated 11 August 2014, it is addressed to the CEO 
20 
Blackhead Consulting Pty Limited and it concerns the 
appointment of Blackhead Consulting Pty Limited for the 
asbestos 
eradication 
programme 
in 
the 
Free 
State 
Province, and paragraph 1 reads, and this is under your 
hand Mr Mokhesi: 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 207 of 212 
 
“The 
above 
has 
reference 
to 
the 
concurrent 
approval by the Gauteng Province Department of 
Human Settlements dated 4 August 2014 [the letter 
we 
have 
just 
referred 
to] 
regarding 
your 
participation in an agreement currently secured by 
them and it will be appreciable [you say] if you 
could confirm in writing the following: 
1. You formally agree to participate and extend your 
services to the Department of Human Settlements 
in line with terms and conditions of their IPW 
10 
instruction to perform.” 
Now just to put one question for the present Mr Mokhesi, it 
seems that on the one hand Ms Diedericks was talking 
about a panel arrangement, which we know cannot be 
extended, or participated in.  On the other hand, you’re 
talking about an instruction to perform work with particular 
terms and condition of contract. 
 
Is that observation a correct one? 
MR MOKHESI:   No my understanding is that there was a 
contract, there was an existing contract in Gauteng of 
20 
Blackhead to do this work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Don’t lower your voice. 
MR MOKHESI:   Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Don’t lower your voice too much. 
MR MOKHESI:   Okay, Chairperson my understanding was 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 208 of 212 
 
that there was a contract, an existing contract with 
Blackhead in Gauteng which we participate on.   You know 
the like for like issues that I mentioned earlier on.   Now 
for you to or to start doing work it is one thing to say you 
have a contract, but in order for you to be able to start 
doing you have to wait for – there must be an instruction – 
an IPW, an instruction to perform work, and that is what we 
wait for.    You can have an appointment and so on and a 
contract but then you have to also wait for the IPW. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, that seems to be your 
10 
understanding Mr Mokhesi but it does not seem to have 
been the understanding of Ms Diedericks.   Let us leave 
that aside for the moment.  The point about the instruction 
to perform work that wouldn’t have been concluded after a 
competitive bidding process, you agree with that, but you 
looked at the documentation? 
MR MOKHESI:   That wouldn’t have? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Been concluded as a result of a 
competitive bidding process.  That was – those terms and 
conditions were unilaterally imposed on the panel by the 
20 
Gauteng Department, did you know that or had you looked 
at 
the 
documentation 
you 
would 
have 
discovered 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Which also suggests that you know my 
earlier point on to say if the documents have been 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 209 of 212 
 
requested you could have picked up. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If the documentation had been 
examined as you say you would have discovered that the 
instruction to perform work was not the result of a 
competitive bidding process and therefore 16A wouldn’t 
have been applied. 
 
Perhaps we could take it that far for the present 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let me just ask this question, was 
your understanding at the time that Blackhead Consulting 
10 
and Diamond Hill made a proposal to the Free State 
Department ...[intervenes]  
MR MOKHESI:   Can you repeat that Chairperson, I think I 
missed something. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes was your understanding at the time 
that Blackhead Consulting and Diamond Hill made a 
proposal to your department, was your understanding that 
Blackhead was still continuing with the work or with some 
work in the Gauteng Department of Human Settlements or 
was your understanding that they had done their work and 
20 
finished it? 
MR MOKHESI:   No, my understanding was that they have 
an existing contract, there is work that they are doing in 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In Gauteng. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 210 of 212 
 
MR MOKHESI:   In Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which would explain why Ms Diedericks 
made the point that Blackheads commitment to do, to be 
involved in the Free State should not negatively affect 
them. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The work in Gauteng. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, and that is why you are required also 
to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   To get approval. 
10 
MR MOKHESI:   To get approval and get the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOKHESI:   That undertaking. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but if at the time they made the 
proposal there was – the proposal to the Free State 
Department there was no existing contract for work, but 
there was simply an appointment to the panel then that 
would not justify extending any contract because there 
would be no contract to do work, there would simply be an 
appointment to the panel, is that right? 
20 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, you know the panel is not a contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, that is what I am saying that in 
order for there to have been an extension or participation 
in a contract by the Free State Department then the 
contract for work or Blackhead in Gauteng had to be in 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 211 of 212 
 
existence in the sense that they were still continuing? 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes it had to be in existence at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It should not have expired, it should not 
have – they should not have finished the work. 
MR MOKHESI:   Yes, in other words the contract should 
have been valid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, should have been continuing. 
MR MOKHESI:   Ja, forget about whether it was irregular 
but there must have been a contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, ja, ja, okay, no that’s fine.   
10 
Okay we are going to stop here.  I must thank everybody 
for your cooperation, I think we made a lot of progress, I 
think everybody was cooperating, we made a lot of 
progress, so I think next time we will be able to finish, but 
it has been a long day, but clearly for Mr Pretorius and Mr 
Mokhesi, Mr Pretorius because he was standing, Mr 
Mokhesi because he was answering questions, but thank 
you to you Mr Mokhesi, thank you to Mr Mpofu and the 
legal team and to Mr Pretorius and his team that we have 
been able go up to this time and cover as much as we 
20 
have, so another date will be determined as indicated it 
may be that it will be an evening session, starting at four 
o’clock or five o’clock so – but I understand everybody 
wants to cooperate to make sure we can finish. 
 
Thank you very much. 
28 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 257 
 
Page 212 of 212 
 
 
Just for the sake of the public on Monday the 
Commission will hear evidence from Ms Thomas, the 
former PA to Ms Nomvula Mokonyane about BOSASA 
issues.  
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 31 AUGUST 2020 
