 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
22 MARCH 2021 
 
 
DAY 365 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 108 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
22 MARCH 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 3 of 108 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 22 MARCH 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Seleka, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning Chairperson. 
MS BROWN:  Good morning Chair 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Brown. 
MS BROWN:  Good morning Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Good morning to your legal 
team, good morning to everybody.  I must just once again 
thank you Ms Brown for making yourself available on a 
10 
public holiday.  I must thank your legal team for their 
cooperation so that we could have this session on a public 
holiday.  I must thank Mr Seleka and his team, the 
technicians, the commission’s staff, everybody for making 
it possible for us to sit even on a public holiday.  Thank 
you very much.  
 
Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Brown the oath you took on Friday 
will continue to apply today.  Is that alright? 
20 
MS BROWN:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MS BROWN:  That is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 4 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Brown we were – 
when we adjourned last time dealing with the composition 
of the sub-committees I will back to a particular aspect of 
it in due course but I wish to ask you this.  You are aware 
that the Fundudzi Report – the Fundudzi has made an 
investigation into some of the emails exchanged between 
infoportal email address and Ms Kim Davids.  You are 
aware of it? 
MS BROWN:  Yes I am aware of it. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And they have produced a report 
that shows extensive exchange of emails between Ms 
Davids and infoportal in regard to CV’s of persons that 
ultimately 
became 
appointed 
either 
to 
the 
board 
or 
including in this case Mr Richard Seleke who gets to be 
appointed at the DPE as a DG.  I – I understand you have 
seen that report? 
MS BROWN:  Yes I have answered the questions and I also 
put in an affidavit on that matter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  I have read your affidavit.  I see 
20 
that your response in regard to denying knowledge that Ms 
Davids was acting on – either on your instruction or with 
your knowledge in exchange in those emails. 
MS BROWN:  I – I said that in my affidavit yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  But I think what is not dealt with 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 5 of 108 
 
in 
your 
affidavit 
is 
the 
very 
fact 
of 
her 
having 
communicated and received CV’s from this email address 
of infoportal which is presumed to be the email address of 
Mr Salim Essa.  What is your comment on that? 
MS BROWN:  My comment on any emails received by Ms 
Davids would have to go to the Legal and Governance Unit.  
So she would not set – she would not send the emails to 
me she will send it directly to the Legal and Governance 
Unit.  And the Legal and Governance Unit will then sift 
through those emails. 
10 
 
Now 
we 
have 
had 
many 
walk-ins 
and people 
phoning to say can we apply and all I have ever – well 
personally I said just contact number on the – the advert or 
contact my office. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Are you saying to the Chairperson you 
would not have been aware that she was receiving CV’s of 
would 
be 
board 
members 
from 
this 
email 
address 
infoportal? 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  There is one email which one also finds 
20 
in info – in the Fundudzi Report in which she writes – and 
this in regard to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want to tell me where to find that 
first? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair.  That you will find Ms Brown 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 6 of 108 
 
in Eskom Bundle 7 for hardcopies Chairperson is 7(b) on 
page 1140.   
MS BROWN:  Is that 1140? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  1140 yes in Eskom Bundle 7.  Are you 
there? 
MS BROWN:  Yes.  Maybe we should contact the infoportal 
– ja I am here. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja that will be under 14 – paragraph 
14.9 with a heading Appointment of Giovanni Leonardi at 
Eskom. 
10 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So the report says: 
“We determine that on 16 April 2015 Davids 
forwarded an email titled CV for DPE Data 
Base from kimdavids@dpe.gov.za to anc – 
they give the full email address.  Attached 
to the email was Giovanni Leonardi’s CV.  
We further determine that on the same day 
16 April 2016 Davids sent an email to 
infoportal1@zoho.com stating FYI below.  
20 
Send me please – send me please an 
answer for Ma’am to revert to this below.  
Much appreciated kind regards Kim Davids.” 
MS BROWN:  Hm.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Then paragraph 14.9.3 says: 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 7 of 108 
 
“We 
noted 
that 
infoportal1@zoho.com 
responded to Davids’ email by stating that 
will do please give me till noon.  Davids 
responded to the email by stating okay 
thanks very much.  Kim Davids.” 
The report carries on. 
“We determined that Giovanni Leonardi was 
appointed onto the Eskom board during 
Minister Brown’s tenure as DPE Minister.” 
Then they refer to an exchange within the department and 
10 
14.9.6 says: 
“In the email Davids indicated that as 
discussed with Minister Brown and her 
direction the following was the Eskom board 
nominations for cabinet memorandum.” 
MS BROWN:  And Miriam Cassiem and Leonardi Giovanne 
is included there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes that is correct.  But what appears 
from the report is that the discussion with you which she 
says she had in this email follows after the exchange of 
20 
emails 
between her and infoportal in regard to the 
composition of in this case certain boards.  SA Express, 
Denel and Eskom.  The question is, did she come to you 
with a list of proposals for composition of these boards? 
MS BROWN:  There was a fellow – the Giovanni issue I 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 8 of 108 
 
remember quite clearly.  When she said how would you feel 
about having a foreign person on the board?  So I said no 
well it is not excluded.   
And I for all intents and purpose thought that CV 
was given to her by the Chair of Transnet and even though 
it was given to her by the Chair of Transnet it is had to go 
through the process of Legal and Governance.   
And so in my mind her bringing me that board I do 
not remember Miriam Cassiem in that – in the way you 
putting it as if Miriam Cassiem and Leonardi Giovanni were 
10 
brought at the same time.  
But I do remember that Leonardi Giovanni was an 
Electrical Engineering with International experience which 
– which I was very happy with.  But I do not remember her 
bringing me a list of any – anybody.  Because I do not 
really take a page from anyone.   
You have got to bring me a decision memo then that 
is the only time I actually really consider it.  You must – as 
I said to you before I – I firstly let me also just say I do not 
know who infoportal is. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  When I – when I heard about infoportal and 
at some point it was linked to my former DG I went to him 
and I asked him is infoportal your address and he said no.  
I never considered that anybody else was having any 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 9 of 108 
 
contact with infoportal or portal at the time.   
And for – I cannot remember much about the 
Fundudzi Report because they asked me a number of 
questions and the answers I gave them to the questions 
were that I did not know which names and who – I mean 
because they – they mention particular names of particular 
incidents and I do not re – I do not have any knowledge of 
that.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Could you please explain to the 
Chairperson how would you have gathered that the CV was 
10 
obtained from the Chairperson of Transnet – the CV of Mr 
Giovanni? 
MS BROWN:  Because that is the one CV she did bring to 
me and she told – Ms Davids told me that the Chairperson 
of Transnet her name escapes me now – Mabaso – Ms 
Mabaso gave her – gave her that email. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I see but you would have seen from the 
Fundudzi Report that the findings are different. 
MS BROWN:  Well from the Fundudzi Report I saw post my 
departure from the department I did not see the Fundudzi 
20 
Report before that.  In fact I did not – when I read through 
the report the fact that it was not a signed off report, the 
fact that it – the report made assumptions based on – a 
whole 
number 
of 
assumptions 
without 
asking 
me 
specifically about those because they had access to me.  
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 10 of 108 
 
They sent me a list of questions and I answered the list of 
questions and that was the first time that I saw infoportal 
within my – my ministry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  It was the first time that I actually saw it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm.  Yes.  What I am – what I am only 
saying is – I am not suggesting that you would have seen it 
at the time but I am saying insofar as the aspect of where 
the CV of Mr Giovanni came from just that aspect you 
would have seen from the Fundudzi Report that the finding 
10 
is different.  They make a finding that the CV came from 
infoportal. 
MS BROWN:  I did not know that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.   
MS BROWN:  I – the Fundudzi Report was quite a long 
report and I must be very frank when I did not see a – a 
signature on the report I did not – I did not read the detail 
of the report I looked for my stuff and I responded to my 
stuff in your affidavit I put to you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm.  The report goes further to say in 
20 
regard to Mr Giovanni that there is no evidence that he 
was subjected to a shortlisting, screening and vetting 
process as required by the department  What is your 
comment on that? 
MS BROWN:  Oh I – it is untrue.  Unless the department 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 11 of 108 
 
said that they did not feel that they should vet – no not 
vetting but in my mind I believe that everybody who goes 
through the process gets vetted because I get a decision 
memo that says the following people this has happened – 
you know they have been vetted and these are the people 
who will go through the process.   
I have to say that the only ever time where 
somebody was not vetted before they were appointed was 
when I appointed the 2018 board.  Prior to that the 
decision memo did not bring me a list of people who were 
10 
not vetted or they did not tell me that those people were 
not vetted.   
And people were vetted to such an extent that there 
were really good candidates who had and I remember this 
one very well without remembering the person’s name who 
had car fines – speeding fines outstanding and they could 
not get onto the board.  So I am – I am – I do not believe 
that they were not vetted unless somebody says so. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well the Fundudzi Report says so. 
MS BROWN:  Well I do not know if I – look I think the 
20 
Fundudzi Report is an interesting report.  It makes a whole 
rank 
of 
assumptions 
without 
actually 
giving 
factual 
information about it.  I am – I must be – I did not think I 
was reading the Fundudzi Report this morning because I 
would have prepared differently for it but just off the top of 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 12 of 108 
 
my 
head 
it 
intended 
– 
the 
Fundudzi 
Report 
makes 
assumptions like the emails they say this email went to Kim 
Davids from this number and therefore the Minister was 
supposed to know that.   
They make a lot of 00:17:58 of those comments.  
The assumption is that I checked Ms Davids’ email every 
day and check who she gets emails from.  I do not and I 
did not.  I had no reason at that time to believe I should. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Well putting aside … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Seleka.  Ms Brown you 
10 
have said that you did not understand that you would be 
questioned on the Fundudzi Report today and if you knew 
you would have prepared.   
Now I do not know what Mr Seleka has to say but if 
that is the position and if it did not fall within what was 
arranged as the issues that you would be questioned on 
from – from Friday then maybe what we would do it is say 
answer as far as you are able to but where you are not 
able to answer without having refreshed your memory then 
we can take it from there.  Mr Seleka. 
20 
MS BROWN:  Okay 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would like to say something about 
what Ms Brown said? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair.  I – these are issues arising 
from the questions that were sent to Ms Brown. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 13 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  She has dealt with them in her affidavit 
in a particular way.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  For instance like I – we pointed out and 
she says what she has denied in her affidavit is her 
knowledge of Ms Kim Davids communicating with her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  But she does not deal with the fact that 
there is that communication. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And it is only to the extent that I am 
trying to bring to her attention and hear what her comment 
is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does that mean that questions on the 
Fundudzi Report as far as you are concerned fall within the 
scope of what she was to be asked about from Friday? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well on the Eskom work stream Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  In it – insofar as the composition of the 
20 
Eskom board is concerned and the sub-committees. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ms Brown Mr Seleka says he 
believes that insofar as the Fundudzi Report refers to the 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 14 of 108 
 
composition of the Eskom board he believes that fell within 
the scope of what you were to deal with from Friday.  Is 
that – is that your understanding as well? 
MS BROWN:  That is not – I do not mind answering the 
questions Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Because I have put it in the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS BROWN:  The issue is that today in my mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MS BROWN:  We would probably end off somewhere with 
the suspension of the executives even though I think I 
have clarified the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  The removal of Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  And the Baloyi.  The secondment of Molefe 
and Anoj Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  And then being questioned on the affidavits.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Now in my mind the affidavit is the – the 
supplementary affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  That I have to answer on. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 15 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS BROWN:  And where issues arising from it.  I do not 
mind answering the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  As long as Mr Seleka accepts my answer to 
the questions as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well accepts the – except your answer is 
another thing but I think the – what we will do is you – you 
will answer as much as possible and to the best of your 
ability 
depending 
on 
when 
we 
finish 
and 
depending 
10 
whether – how far we have gone on this issue we might see 
what can be done because. 
MS BROWN:  Perfect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would be good if we could use today’s 
time as much as possible.   
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us see how it goes.  Okay alright.  
Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Thank – thank you Chair.  What – 
you 
– 
Ms 
Davids 
what 
the 
Fundudzi 
Reports 
of 
20 
Investigation Report shows and this is really what one 
seeks to bring to your attention is that apparent from the 
emails exchanged with Ms Kim Davids it would appear that 
an outside third party outside of government, outside of 
SOE’s had a hand in – in influencing who gets to be 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 16 of 108 
 
appointed on committees of SOE’s.  Your comment on that? 
MS BROWN:  You mean – you mean on board or do you 
mean on committees? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  On – on both the boards and the 
committees because if you tie it – if you tie this report with 
Mr Tsotsi’s version of and I am putting that to you not 
because I am saying that is what happened but I am just 
saying Mr Tsotsi’s version of Salim Essa’s sending him a 
list so you have his version and you have what you see 
here in the Fundudzi Report of emails exchanged between 
10 
infoportal and Ms Kim Davids the picture emerges that an 
outside person is influencing decision making of who sits 
on the boards and who sits on sub-committees.  Your 
comment? 
MS BROWN:  My – as I told you before unless proven 
differently. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm. 
MS BROWN:  By yourself Mr Seleka – Advocate Seleka 
unless proven differently my recollection of what happens 
in the appointment of boards is very simple. 
20 
 
Now for some odd reason somebody said that they 
had a data base and – and I am – I am taking you through 
so that I can answer your questions.   
 
They had a data base but I insisted that the data 
base must be opened.  Now I would only know that the 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 17 of 108 
 
data base can be reopened if I knew that that was 
something that was viably possible. 
 
So the data base is – rarely gets opened because I 
try to work it why you were asking the question you were 
asking me yesterday or the day before. 
 
And so whatever CV even if it comes from the 
President that CV still has to go through to the Legal and 
Governance Unit.  The Legal and Governance Unit looks at 
it.  It then has a separate body – a separate company 
vetting all of the candidates and the list of people who 
10 
eventually come to me are all part of the list. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  And they then become part of the list.  So it 
does not matter who sends the email or sends the CV or 
sends the name the issue is it has to go through the Legal 
and Governance Unit.   
Not once did the Legal and Governance Unit tell me 
that they did not vet anyone.  It was one day in 2018 that I 
phoned the Legal and Governance Unit person Ms Ruthman 
and I said to her we are adding these three names because 
20 
that came from another meeting with the President and 
Deputy President.  
That was the only time ever I processed the board 
without it being vetted before by the – by the Legal and 
Governance 
Unit. 
 
So 
in 
my 
mind 
the 
Legal 
and 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 18 of 108 
 
Governance Unit has almost the final say on it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Just – just bear in mind that the 
commission is investigating so these questions are meant 
to help us determine where the truth lies.  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Insofar as Ms Davids’ would have said 
to you the CV came from the Chairperson of Transnet can 
you recall who was the Chairperson of Transnet at the 
time? 
MS BROWN:  I said Ms Mabaso. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mabaso.  Did you confirm with her that 
she sent that CV? 
MS BROWN:  No. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No. 
MS BROWN:  I did not at all because Chair Mr – Advocate 
Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  The point is those CV’s had to go through a 
process it did not matter who the people were.  The still 
had to go through the Legal and Governance Unit process. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
MS BROWN:  And this process took a long time that is 
what is – what I – nobody – nobody in my four years as a 
Minister came and told me that they were some – what you 
telling 
me 
today 
that 
Giovanni 
Leonardi 
– 
Leonardi 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 19 of 108 
 
Giovanni was not vetted or did not go through the process. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let us move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so as I understand the position Ms 
Brown what you are saying is you gave instructions that 
the pool or data base be opened up so that more people 
could 
have 
the 
opportunity 
of 
being 
considered 
for 
appointments to various boards, is that correct? 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And the process was – or the pool 
was then opened up and once that had happened anybody 
10 
and everybody could send his or her CV or someone else’s 
CV to the department for consideration to be included in 
some or other board.  Is that correct? 
MS BROWN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And our evidence is that it was the 
responsibility of the Legal and Governance Unit within the 
department to vet everyone whose name or CV was to be 
send to you to ensure that by the time such a person’s 
name was send to you to consider to a point, they would 
have been vetted.  Is that right? 
20 
MS BROWN:   I am not sure if everybody who comes 
through the process...  Look, Chair, I am not meaning – I 
am not meaning to demean any profession but people who 
are hairdressers also applied. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 20 of 108 
 
MS BROWN:   So very often they were not...  This is my 
assumption ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   They did not go beyond a certain stage? 
MS BROWN:   Do not...  They go beyond what criteria has 
been set up ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   by...  I signed off on the criteria. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   So I signed off on the criteria.  There are 
thousands and thousands of people who come.  If my 
10 
memory serves me well, too, Chair.  I also remember them 
saying that the database is old and stale.  That it is people 
– and that other ministers before me have also advertised.   
 
So the advertising, I also got to know about in 
the department but that just on the side.  So the people 
who had been vetted, I think and I really do think they 
would only be the people who actually met the criteria for 
any of the six or that were in my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Your portfolio. 
MS BROWN:   Yes, in my portfolio. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Yes.  But I think what you are 
saying is in line with what I was saying.  
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Namely, on your understanding that the 
Legal and Governance Unit of the department had a duty to 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 21 of 108 
 
make sure that nobody – nobody’s name was sent to you 
who had not been vetted. 
MS BROWN:   Yes, that is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  There may be people whose CV’s 
they received that they might not have vetted.  You might 
not have issues with that as long as they do not send them 
to you without vetting them. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is the point you are – that is part 
of the point you are making.  And if you appointed anybody 
10 
who had not been vetted, you are saying that you would 
have assumed that they had been vetted because that is 
what the Legal and Governance Unit in your department 
was supposed to have done.   
 
And if they did not vet somebody for any 
particular reason, you would have expected them to bring 
that to your attention before you could appoint that person.  
Is that right? 
MS BROWN:   Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MS BROWN:   Absolutely, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And then, 
Ms Davids(sic) on – we see that it is not only in respect of 
the board and sub-committees that infoportal features but 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 22 of 108 
 
also in respect of the appointment of Mr Richard Seleke.  
And that, just for reference purposes, is on page 1143 of 
Bundle 7.   
MS BROWN:   Is that the bundle we are still on? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is correct.  Page 1143, you will 
see there is paragraph 14.12 which is appointment of 
board members at Alexkor and below that big paragraph, 
you have appointment of Richard Seleke at DPE.   
MS BROWN:   It is actually quite totally, I have to say to 
you that – because I – if you would like me to, I can tell 
10 
you how Richard Seleke was appointed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, please, we want you to tell the 
Chairperson. 
MS BROWN:   So Fundu – that Fundudzi report say that I – 
and I think that – I cannot remember but they say I 
postponed two meetings until Richard Seleke’s CV arrives. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.   
MS BROWN:   And I mean ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can I assist you there? 
MS BROWN:   You can correct me saying the wrong – 
20 
because I have not read it for a while. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  It is about the advert.  The 
position of DG in the DPE was advertised.  It was for the 
first time around.  The advert did not – or the appointment 
was not made and it was said that there was non-
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 23 of 108 
 
compliance 
with 
the 
Department 
of 
Public 
Services’ 
guidelines or requirements.  Ms Makholo testified about 
this as well.   
MS 
BROWN: 
 
 
Let 
me 
tell 
you 
what 
happened 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   ...besides who was there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m? 
MS BROWN:   There was a meeting on a Friday, late 
afternoon, and the composition of the people who make the 
10 
appointment, they are two Ministers, your Deputy Minister, 
a DG and the full complement of the HR Department.  On 
that Friday, the Ministers who were supposed to come, did 
not attend.  So I postponed the meeting and it was actually 
only one meeting that I postponed.  They say I postponed 
two meetings until the third meeting.   
 
My preferred choice as DG was the person who 
was acting DG.  He worked very closely with me.  He was, I 
thought, was very close to understanding the issues 
around 
state-owned 
companies 
in 
the 
way 
that 
I 
20 
understood.  So she was my preferred choice.   
 
However, she fell out of the first advert that was 
placed because she did not meet all the criteria.  And if my 
memory serves me well, then the criteria that she did not 
meet was that she still had to do a module or two modules.  
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 24 of 108 
 
I do not know how many modules but she still had to do a 
module.   
 
And I remember still asking her:  Can you not 
get to do that module before the appointment?  And I can 
tell you the reason why I felt so strongly about her was 
because she understood the portfolio that we were in.  She 
was there for a very a long time.   
 
Then I re-advertised and there were two people 
who got shortlisted and I did not know that Seleke’s CV 
came through that email address.  I still do not know that.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   So I do not know whose email address that 
it.  You must remember, I said earlier, that I asked him 
when he became my DG:  Were you – is that your email 
address?  And he said no.  So I got the then Minister 
Oliphant, Mildred Oliphant and he is still a Minister now, 
Thulas Nxesi.   
 
And it was some – I cannot remember who the 
DG was and I cannot remember if my Deputy Minister was 
present.  And we had two applicants.  We had many 
20 
applicants for the job but there were no natural fit or, even 
not natural fit, even close enough fit for us to appoint a DG 
for the department.   
 
And it had largely to do with things, like, no 
understanding of the Public Service, no understanding of 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 25 of 108 
 
state-owned 
companies, 
not 
an 
economic 
– 
a 
developmental economist.  It was those kinds of areas.  
Even a lawyer, I think, would have helped but we did not 
get people like that to apply and then the advert went out 
for a second time and then two people were...   
 
At this time, Ms Makholo actually was to her 
nomination and we made a decision – we then met as that 
group of Ministers and we made the decision for Richard 
Seleke.  So that is my recollection of the whole event.  And 
it was to do with an advert that went out and a response to 
10 
the advert.  That is how I understood it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was the...  I am sorry, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was the – was one of the requirements 
in the first advert, maybe also in the second advert, in 
terms 
of 
academic 
qualifications 
that 
the 
candidates 
needed to have a senior degree or a masters?  In other 
words, a junior degree not enough or what was the 
position?  If you can recall ...[intervenes]  
20 
MS BROWN:   I cannot actually remember Chair but I think 
that you had to have at least a probably a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Postgraduate? 
MS BROWN:   A post degree.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Ja, I think it ...[intervenes]  
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 26 of 108 
 
MS BROWN:   You know, I think – it was quite – it is quite 
a 
high-end 
job 
and 
so 
you 
had 
to 
have 
a 
post 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
MS BROWN:   ...maybe not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Seleka has got ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   ...a speculation – speculating on what I 
think. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   This is just what I think would be. 
10 
[Parties inventing each other – unclear.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I think Mr Seleka has got the 
relevant document.  What were the requirements? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is correct Chair.  This advert is of 
13 – the closing date is 13 February 2015.   
:The requirements for the job is an appropriate 
postgraduate qualification, at least ten years 
of experience in relevant senior management 
positions preferable in the Public Sector, an 
appropriate postgraduate qualification...” 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then there is the second one.  If I may, 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   The one – the second one, the closing 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 27 of 108 
 
date is the 23 r d of September 2015.   
“The requirements are a relevant degree, an 
appropriate postgraduate qualification will be 
an added advantage plus minimum ten years’ 
experience 
in 
relevant 
senior 
management 
positions preferable in the Public Sector...” 
 
That is the distinction between the two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is my understanding correct that in 
terms of the first advert, a postgraduate degree was an 
essential requirement in regard to the second advert, a 
10 
postgraduate degree was a recommendation? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
It 
was 
no 
longer 
an 
essential 
requirement? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It would have been an added 
advantage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Does that accord with your 
recollection Ms Brown? 
20 
MS BROWN:   It does not but it could have mean.  I mean, 
I do not see why it should change.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   But it could be that we had so few 
applicants who actually – and I remember I have had 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 28 of 108 
 
actually in DG and the Public Services Commissioner was 
on my back on this one, that after a year, I mean, she 
should be appointed but then she does not have the 
requisite qualification for it.  So in some respects, and I 
know that the candidates may – the person involved 
actually spoke quite much about it.   
 
And so, I did not realise that she was hurt to 
such an extent by the fact that she did not make it.  But let 
me get back to the qualifications.  I do not actually have a 
recollection of that but I am kind of thinking that it might 
10 
be that we were not able to have – we are not getting the 
requisite people to apply.   
 
So a post grade would be of benefit – would be 
beneficial and but the, you know, a degree is what we are 
expecting from you.  So that might be so but I cannot – I 
really cannot – I cannot say that I can stand on my head 
here and tell you that this is my – this is just my view.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine.  It is just that if the 
second advert relaxed the academic qualifications a bit 
compared to the first one and therefore no longer made a 
20 
postgraduate degree an essential requirement.  It would 
mean that even if your preferred candidate did not have 
the – not completed her postgraduate degree, she would 
be eligible to be considered.   
 
And of course, I would imagine that if somebody 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 29 of 108 
 
else had a postgraduate degree and which she did not 
have, maybe she was left with only one module but taken 
together with her experience in the department and her 
acting streak of about a year, I think you said, she might 
well have been considered to be, you know, the most 
suitable candidate despite not having a postgraduate 
degree.   
 
Now I mention that, being alive to the fact that 
you said she withdrew her application.  So I am alive to 
that.  But I am just saying, it is interesting that, first, a 
10 
postgraduate degree was required and then in the second 
advert she withdrew even though the requirements had 
been relaxed.   
 
But I do not know now whether she withdrew 
before the second advert went out or after but she was no 
longer a candidate.  But she would have been eligible to be 
considered, at least.  If ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   No, I do not think so Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   I think, if my memory serves me well and 
20 
you know, I would really like – I am saying my memory 
must serve me well, but I think she was also in the Public 
Service for eight years and not ten.  I think if I faltered in 
anything is that I wrote – I – if I were to have a hand in 
writing that second advert, then – because the Seleke has 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 30 of 108 
 
a post grade. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   But if I had a hand in – I could have said:  
But why do we not relax?  We now have an expert.  The 
only problem with this expert is that she does not meet 
criteria.  And that the criteria, actually, is more a barrier to 
us having a good candidate than it is a barrier to us having 
a poor candidate.  She is a good candidate and I might 
have – I do not know.  I do like interfering in the writing of 
that ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Second advert. 
MS BROWN:   ...advert but I – I must tell you, honest, she 
was my preferred candidate.  I still think she is one of the 
best people who understands state-owned companies.  And 
so I still think that but I think she did not qualify for it.  And 
then the other fellow.  Within that meeting that we were in 
with the two Ministers, the DG and so on, Seleke actually 
performed much better than the other candidate and a 
number of issues but, I mean, just on that alone.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Seleka. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Brown, when we 
go back to this report where you talk about the CV of 
Mr Seleke 
being 
exchanged 
with 
Ms 
Kim 
Davids.  
Paragraph 17.48 – well, I can start at 17.47 which reads: 
“We 
determined 
that 
on 
21 
June 
2015, 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 31 of 108 
 
blueberries.sok [a Gmail] sent an email sent 
an email to infoportal, titled:  Richard CV, 
stating the following: 
Evening, sir.  Please find attached my CV and 
supporting documents.  Regards Richard...” 
 
And 17.48 says: 
“We 
determined 
that 
on 
the 
same 
date, 
21 June 2015, 
infoportal1@zoho.com 
forwarded Richard Seleke’s CV to Davids on 
email address anckimwc@gmail stating: 
10 
Hi, Madam.  As per sir, this is the candidate 
for DG.  Is it possible to for him to meet 
Madam on Tuesday?...” 
 
Now this is in June 2015.  The closing date for 
the advert has long closed in February 2015.  You are yet 
to advertise in September 2015, the CV is sent in the 
middle of the year and there is a request.  Well, an 
indication, this is the candidate for DG and a request to 
meet with Madam on Tuesday.  Could the meeting with 
Madam be a reference to yourself? 
20 
MS BROWN:   I do not know.  I received a request from 
Mr Seleke himself and it asked if he could have a word – if 
he could speak to me about it and I took off a long, you 
know...  I do not know if an official, an advisor to have a 
conversation with me.  I did not get that – all that stuff that 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 32 of 108 
 
you are speaking about now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I received a letter from him.  Well, not a 
letter.  Yes, a letter, actually from him, asking to meet with 
me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   I took it all – it took a long before I did 
because there were lots and lots of requests like that and 
other requests but I did eventually meet him.  And it was 
out of my head until the issue came to me having to 
10 
appoint candidates for – or having to approve candidates 
for the appointment of DG. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  Can you recall, when was the 
meeting? 
MS BROWN:   Oh, I ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   I mean, which ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   I do not ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which year?  Which time ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   I cannot tell you.  It is 2015. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
20 
MS BROWN:   I am sure it is in 2015 somewhere.  That is 
at least six years ago. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   And it was a very short meeting 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 33 of 108 
 
MS BROWN:   I met him, had a coffee, said to him please, 
put in your CV.  You know, you sound fantastic.  With any – 
what I will say to anybody else as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   Put in your CV and then I had forgotten 
about it until I saw it in the questions of Fundudzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was – do you recall whether the reason 
why he wanted to meet with you was to indicate that he 
was considering making himself available for consideration 
as a candidate for DG? 
10 
MS BROWN:   Yes, I think that could be the reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I think that is the logical – for me that would 
be a logical explanation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I might not and he might not have a 
conversation with me to say:  Look, I really want to be the 
DG of this and that and so on.  In a short while after I have 
met – and I think this surprise most people.  After I met 
somebody, I sort of assess what it is that they want to talk 
20 
about because often say:  I would like to speak to you 
about the economy.  Or:  I would like to speak to you about 
my relationship with Eskom.  Or something. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   But some of the people I meet and I call 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 34 of 108 
 
them into the office.  Numerous meetings happened in my 
office.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   But I remember that he – he came 
downstairs and could not get into the building for some odd 
reason and I said just meet me at the coffee shop.  I am 
walking down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   And I did that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MS BROWN:   I think that is what I did because it is a long 
time ago. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS BROWN:   But I did not go alone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   I, actually, went with – I think with an 
advisor because it was in Cape Town.  So my officials at 
that time were not necessarily in Cape Town with me.  So I 
went with an advisor. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I guess, you are probably right that 
20 
he must have wanted to talk to you about the possibility of 
him making himself available because you say you told him 
to put in his application or CV.  So that seems to tie in with 
a discussion about ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 35 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the position.  Would you actually 
accept that? 
MS BROWN:   But not the central part of the discussion.  
The central part of the discussion, I – and that is why I am 
saying to you that it probably led to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   And I say:  Put your application in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  So you ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   But I agree...  Chair, I am agreeing with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but is the point you are making that 
10 
the purpose of the meeting might have been something 
else and the issue of him making himself available for the 
position of DG might have come in at the end of the 
discussion ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   Yes.  Yes, it was something like that.  It was 
not as straightforward as:  I would like to be the new DG. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So.  But you cannot remember what 
the main point was that he wanted to canvas with you? 
MS BROWN:   No, I do remember that I liked the idea that 
he was a development...  I do remember this very 
20 
specifically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   That he was a developmental expert in the 
area of Land and Agriculture and so forth and that he 
managed 
big 
companies. 
 
Not 
big 
companies, 
big 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 36 of 108 
 
parastatals.  So I remember that part of it and talking a bit 
about the economy and so on but, you know, that could 
have also been in the conversation that we actually had. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MS BROWN:   I do not know, Chair, it was a long time ago. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, no.  And is your recollection 
that that meeting that you had with him took place at some 
stage after the first advert had gone out and before the 
closing date in terms of the second advert? 
MS BROWN:   I think it makes sense. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I cannot tell you that that is my actual 
answer but it makes sense that it could have been like 
that.  It was not for the first adverts.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Just to – Ms Brown, just to 
finish off on this, has it surprised you to see the level to 
which emails were being exchanged between Infoportal and 
Ms Kim Davids? 
MS BROWN:   I am always very unsure why you want to 
20 
ask whether I – the emotional part of the question but I 
was very surprised. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Okay.  I would like to deal with, 
Chair, if I may …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I am sorry, Ms Brown – well if what 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 37 of 108 
 
the Fundudzi report says is correct in terms of lot of 
communications between Ms Davids and this Infoportal 
email address, if the emails that they say were exchanged 
between the Inforportal address and Ms Davids and the 
content of at least some of those emails, if that is true, it 
seems to be that it could be concerning, it should be 
concerning at least in regard to some of the emails 
because without going to any specific one some of the 
emails seem to involve an outside person quite a lot so I 
am wondering whether that is part of what, you know, 
10 
surprises you or it is something else? 
MS BROWN:   No, it does surprise me, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As you see I am saying if all of that is 
true, you know? 
MS BROWN:   That is part of the dilemma I have, Chair, 
part of dilemma I have and, you know, at one state when 
the Fundudzi report came out – or not – I never saw it until 
the Commission gave it to me.  The Department of Public 
Enterprises Minister set up this investigation when he was 
Finance Minister into the Department of Public Enterprises.  
20 
So it did not bother me at all that there was this 
investigation and then there were all these questions and I 
sat down and the late Simmy Lebala was my advocate and 
he said to me do you want help with it?  I said no, I can 
answer these questions myself and I said – in about twenty 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 38 of 108 
 
minutes I sent him all the answers and then he said look, I 
have got to put it into a particular format and so on. 
 
Around the time when I received it from the 
Commission as a fixed report, I actually wanted to take the 
matter on review, now because – mostly because it makes 
so many assumptions based on particular wording or a 
particular this or that and it kind of also used the 
newspaper stuff as ways of getting it.  So I was – I must be 
honest with you, my lawyers then said to me we will hold 
back the Commission because then they still have to rule 
10 
on that and I did not think – I actually did not think too 
much about it, I thought well, the Commissioner will see, 
you will see that it has not been a signed document and so 
on and then they will make a decision about how, how it 
will be dealt with.   
 
So, in some respects, there is a part of me that 
wish I did take it on review.  At other respects, yes of 
course I am surprised, I am shocked about some things 
and so on, if it is true, but that is just the point I wanted to 
make about the Fundudzi report because the Fundudzi 
20 
report goes further to say that I gave some land to 
somebody who – and then I sent a CV of somebody’s to 
UWC.  They go further to say all those kind of things and I, 
you know, frankly, did I commit fraud, corruption in it?  No. 
I think it is just to nothing else but to put – did I give land 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 39 of 108 
 
– did I give Transnet land to anyone?  No, I did not.   
 
So I feel like that about it but I am in your hands 
with it and I am happy to answer the questions that you 
ask and I think it is important to get to the bottom of all 
these things. 
 
Yes, no, no, no, that is fine, as you hear I said if it 
is true because some of the things we – the Commission 
needs to look into much more deeper to see what the facts 
are then take it from there.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Ms Brown, I want to deal 
with a slightly different aspect.  The executives that were 
suspended, let us look at their position.  Mr Matona had 
just been appointed effective 1 October 2015.  He was in 
that position for about five months before his suspension 
on 11 March – sorry, appointed 2014, I beg your pardon, 1 
October 2014, about eleven months into that position he 
gets suspended on 11 March 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not say about eleven months 
20 
into his position. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   About five months into his position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Five months, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am looking at my notes, seeing the 11 
March, Chairperson, sorry.  Okay, so 1 October 2014 to 11 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 40 of 108 
 
March 2015 he gets suspended.  On the day of his 
suspension in the morning prior to you joining the board, 
Ms Brown, he was busy presenting his turnaround strategy 
which he reports to the board that he had shared with the 
Deputy President beforehand.  Why was he …[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   Where are you on?  Sorry, Advocate Seleka, 
I do not know where you are now.  We were just on one 
thing and you have moved to something else, can you send 
me to the page you are on? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think you need to …[intervenes] 
10 
MS BROWN:   Or are we just going to jump around? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You need to tell us whether you are still 
on the Fundudzi report or we can take that away. 
MS BROWN:   Because I would like to go for – Chair, I 
would like a two minute break. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, no, no, no.  Shall we make it 
…[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   Just a two minute break quickly.  I had too 
much water. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, no, let us make more than 
20 
that, let us make it ten minutes and then we will come 
back. 
MS BROWN:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS BROWN:   Thank you. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 41 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take an adjournment. 
MS BROWN:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue, but maybe I 
should just mention something that I think everybody 
should 
know 
about 
today 
in 
case 
it 
has 
not 
been 
communicated.  My expectation for today is that we should 
be able to finish with Ms Brown’s evidence before lunch but 
10 
at the latest by lunchtime.  I thought I must just mention 
that so that everybody is aware at least of what my 
estimation is.  Mr Seleka, what is your own estimation? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have the same idea in mind, 
Chairperson, that we should be finished before lunchtime. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Okay, let us continue 
then. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Thank you, Chair.  Ms 
Brown, I did indicate I want to deal with something slightly 
different.  Please then turn to Eskom bundle 7, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 512. 
MS BROWN:   Is that on mine as well? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is it, that must be A?  You said 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 42 of 108 
 
there is A and B? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   For us it is (A), Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This one can go away or you will still 
come back to it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It can be put away. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Good day, Ms Brown. 
MS BROWN:   Good day, Advocate Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Are you there? 
MS BROWN:   I am. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
10 
MS BROWN:   I am trying to sit so that I can be – my 
family is telling me I am not sitting in the middle and so on 
and my hair is not good and so on, but so be it.  Okay, am I 
right now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well, I do not see anything wrong 
with your hair. 
MS BROWN:   But you do not have, Chair, so you do not 
know the problems we have with hair.  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I would like us to look at the individual 
20 
positions of the executives prior to them – or at the time 
that they are suspended.  You will see from paragraph 15 
on page 512, this is the affidavit of Mr Dan Marokane.  He 
writes about himself, he explains that he became appointed 
in the position of DG Group Capital and the build 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 43 of 108 
 
programme with effect from 1 November 2014.  I will start 
with that first. 
MS BROWN:   And the build programme? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And he goes on to talk about 
what he was able to achieve after being appointed 
permanently on this position.  I see you are smiling, Ms 
Brown.  He writes in paragraph 16, he says: 
“Within a period of a month...” 
Well, let me read his paragraph 15. 
“I would remind you that I was appointed to the role 
10 
of Group Executive Group Capital from 1 November 
2014 after holding the Acting position for the period 
of a year.  I was asked to act in that position after 
the departure of the then responsible executive, 
Paul O’Flaherty in August 2013 which followed the 
announcement that the target date of December 
2013 for bringing the first unit of Medupi power 
station online was not going to be met due to slow 
project execution.  Within a period of a month I 
reverted to the board committee that oversees mega 
20 
projects and clearly articulated three areas that 
needed to be resolved.” 
Please go the next page, page 513.  He will talk about the 
solutions that he has introduced and put in place certain 
measures in paragraph 18, 19, 20 and 21 and then in 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 44 of 108 
 
paragraph 22 he says: 
“All of the above elements were identified as crucial 
by a number of independent reviews conducted by 
external parties which reviews were done on behalf 
of the board.  During my tenure as Group Capital 
executive 
I 
created 
meaningful 
and 
tangible 
progress in the execution of various projects which 
saw in particular the delivery of the first unit of 
Medupi, achieved one week prior my suspension.” 
And that …[intervenes] 
10 
MS BROWN:   Can I ask you, Advocate, are you saying 
that Medupi – I am just trying to find it, that Medupi unit 1 
came on line in his period or you are saying that it came 
on line after his period? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In his period, he said he brought it – 
he brought it on line. 
MS BROWN:   Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One week prior to his suspension. 
MS BROWN:   Okay, so that – he brought it online on the 
7 t h. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, one week, he does not give a 
date, prior to his suspension but this, this was reported or 
recorded in the minutes of 11 March 2015 just before you 
arrived and the board says the minister would like to be 
invited to such events such as this because it was an 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 45 of 108 
 
important event and on that day a decision was made to 
have him suspended and he had been there permanently 
appointed for about four months.  Did you know that, Ms 
Brown? 
MS BROWN:   Well, the only thing I do know, Sir, is that I 
went to what is called the synchronisation of the Medupi 
Unit 1 about – I think it was in 2016 and synchronisation 
does not mean that you get megawatts out of it yet, 
synchronisation only means that you are starting to pump it 
up so that in about six months time it will become a fully 
10 
functioning unit and I am doing something that seems quite 
academic because in essence I did not make the decision 
to suspend four executives.   
I attended what I call an informal meeting and I told 
him what my problems were and let me tell you, Sir, that 
Medupi and Kusile, they were – the start of their build 
programme was 2007 with cost overruns that now is now 
creeping up to R100 billion, nothing to do with Mr Dan 
Marokane but we were running behind time, we were – 
Eskom was spending fortunes on it.  So they had both cost 
20 
overruns as well as build overruns.  So nothing was coming 
on line. 
 
So we did not have 4 800 megawatts to add to – I 
cannot remember the words anymore, but to add to 
Eskom’s disposable electricity.   I do not know, that was my 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 46 of 108 
 
problem.  My problem was in fact that the build programme 
was way too late, it was costing way too much.  It was over 
R100 billion already and since 2009 it is still not where it 
is supposed to be.  It is not even being synchronised yet. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Right, yes. 
MS BROWN:   And I am saying that it is an issue - 
comment that I making to you but that area was an area 
that – it did not matter who the person was, the area was 
an area that I felt could have curtailed our load sheddings 
if only we had that plant online already. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the statement you have made is 
the very point of my question to you because he makes 
that statement in the next paragraph that the problems that 
you are highlighting and referring to had nothing to do with 
him.  Paragraph 23 he says: 
“It is for inter alia the above reasons that I had of 
the opinion that I will valuable insight in assisting 
the inquiry to establish and identify where Eskom is 
with regard to various project delays and cost 
overruns.  After all, I was specifically engaged to 
20 
resolve these problems which were pre-existing and 
pre-dated my appointment and were obviously not 
of my making.” 
And that is exactly the point you are making, that the 
problems had nothing to do with him, he has been there for 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 47 of 108 
 
about four months and the question is, why is he targeted 
for suspension? 
MS BROWN:   But I told you before, Advocate Seleka, I 
wanted the inquiry because that is exactly the question 
that I wanted answered, I mean, the build programme 
question.  That is why I supported the inquiry.  Whether the 
executives remained for three months or not, remember it 
was a three month step aside, it was not – and a step 
aside, it was not a firing of them, it was a three months 
stepping aside.  So, ja, I will leave it there.  I am very 
10 
longwinded, I also want to go at lunchtime. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I think you get the point that 
whether it is three months or two months or in this case 
ultimately they got rid of them, a man who has been in the 
position for about four months and he says these problems 
predate me, I did not cause them, I am trying to resolve 
them. 
MS BROWN:   Yes, but Advocate Seleka – and I do not 
want to be argumentative now …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Ms Brown …[intervenes] 
20 
MS BROWN:   You said they got rid of him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on, hang on. 
MS BROWN:   Oh, sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, let him finish what he is putting 
to you first. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 48 of 108 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, I am not saying you are trying to 
get rid of him, I am saying whether he is suspended for 
three months or two months or one month and we know in 
this case they ultimately got rid of him.  The point he is 
making was, that I have nothing to do with the problems 
you have highlighted, you have in fact appointed me just 
for the past four months and I have been able to bring the 
Medupi unit on line, why are you targeting me for 
suspension?  That is the point I was raising with you, but 
you have answered it.  If you want – can I get through to 
10 
Mr Matona? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let her answer now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I did not – I stopped her.  Ja, 
answer now, Mr Brown. 
MS BROWN:   Very shortly, Chair.  I think your use of the 
words ultimately, and you are not saying I did, you are 
saying ultimately they got rid of him.  Now I am not sure 
what the process is between – was between the board and 
the suspended executives.  Remember I wrote that letter to 
20 
them because I did not know what the process was.  So in 
a way you are asking me a question that I think – ja, I think 
it is a bit of an unfair question, but I am answering your 
questions, Advocate Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay  Mr Matona, he is appointed on 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 49 of 108 
 
the 1 October 2014.  He comes from your department, he 
goes to Eskom.  He is there about five months.  The same 
fate befalls him as Mr Marokane.  The question is, why? 
MS BROWN:   The answer to your question is it was a 
three month suspension.  It was not firing him.  I think Mr 
Matona went to the Labour Court and then the Labour 
Court sent him to the CCMA and I do not  - I cannot 
remember the detail but eventually he took the option of 
getting out. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But you know …[intervenes]  
10 
MS BROWN:   My issue remains, my issue, whether you 
raise any of the other people’s names, my issue remains.  
By December 2015 I actually read this morning in the early 
hours that we did not even have diesel to keep the lights 
on.  There was chaos in government.  So you are saying 
that all of them were doing their jobs and actually they 
were all putting in place the processes that were going to 
give us less load shedding.  If you look at the speech that I 
made in the house, I made the same speech that the now 
Acting CE – or I think he is the CE Eskom made that we 
20 
will have load shedding for five years, people were suing 
me because I said they were going to have load shedding 
for five years.  We did not see light at the end of the tunnel 
and for some reason I think the Commission is not 
understanding that. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 50 of 108 
 
 
The Commission is not understanding that - you 
know, people and they rightly so, I did not go out because 
people were saying we bought generators because you 
said we are going to have load shedding for the next five 
years.  Where did I get that information from?  From Eskom 
executives.  So I did not see a way clear, I did not see a 
way clear, I did not want them to go, I just wanted an 
unadulterated inquiry and at the end of that enquiry we will 
know what we should do because even though Mr Matona 
makes the point to all of you, to the Commission, he makes 
10 
the point to the Labour Court, he makes the point 
everywhere that he had a plan.  The only thing I know is 
that the answer to his plan that we should be the R23 
billion from National Treasury and that was going to take a 
long time still. 
 
There was opposition in government to giving 
Eskom or bailing Eskom out.  There was opposition in the 
public sphere to giving Eskom or bailing Eskom out.  And 
who was the face of that Eskom?  Me.  So I had to find a 
solution and I found that nobody had a plan.  The war room 
20 
was going to do a technical investigation.  Nobody is going 
to fix load shedding, nobody is going to fix the fact that 
Eskom cannot pay its workers.  That is what I wanted to 
have fixed. 
 
So, I mean, I hear what you are saying about Mr 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 51 of 108 
 
Dan Marokane and when I have a bit more time or when I 
have – when all of this is done, I will read through all of it 
but there could have been a plan.  I only went to launch 
the synchronisation – and it takes six months after Medupi 
is – unit 1 is synchronised before it actually comes on line 
and then it does not come on line with a large amount of 
megawatts, it comes online slowly, these are huge plants.  
I have never seen such huge plants in my life, but they 
come on line slowly, so it is still not going to help us with 
load shedding and all of those executives were there for all 
10 
the period of load shedding.  I did not mind either way 
whether the board, the executives remained or whether 
they went.  I said this yesterday as well.  I wanted to know 
what we were going to do, what must happen for us to get 
out of this position. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  Ms Molefe, as you say, the 
same thing will apply to her and you have read her 
supplementary affidavit where she also deals with historic 
financial issues and what caused these financial issues but 
over and above that, the board, as the Chairperson had 
20 
indicated to you, was in fact – or some of the board 
members, were in fact not in favour of having her 
suspended.  Do you have any comment on that before I 
move on?  
MS BROWN:   No, I have said everything I wanted to say 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 52 of 108 
 
about the executives.  The removal of Mr Tsotsi – but 
before I do that, let me tell you what Ms Molefe believes.  
She was appointed in January 2014 as the FD, the CFO of 
Eskom.  She was 14 months into the job when she got 
suspended.  In that year 2014, around April, she was told 
that the corporate plan, funding plan she was presenting to 
the board was no robust enough and Mr Colin Matjila said I 
will get somebody to help Eskom and lo and behold, that 
person was Mr Salim Essa and Mr Salim Essa said I will 
give you Regiments to do the job for you.  Regiments 
10 
teams up with McKinsey when they were asked whether 
they – when Regiments was asked whether they have the 
capacity to provide the job.   
They were asked to provide a proposal within five 
days as per their undertaking, they did not do so, they 
gave a proposed agreement after 14 days.  She refused to 
sign that agreement and she went into loggerheads with Mr 
Matjila, to some extent the board defended her but 
Regiments was still appointed but only to do a high level 
desktop exercise. 
20 
 
She thinks because of her refusal to sign that 
agreement for Regiments she must have been targeted by 
Mr Salim Essa and ultimately removed from her position.  
You …[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:    I was not there in April 2014 so I do not 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 53 of 108 
 
know and, I mean, you know, I feel lots of things, it does 
not mean it is true.  I think it must all be tested.  I really 
think all of this must be tested because I was not there in 
April 2014, I actually only came in May 2014, in fact at the 
end of May, the 26 May 2014. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I appreciate that. 
MS BROWN:   So I do not know about it.  You know, I also 
feel people are attacking me and dong things to me and so 
on but I have to test it, I have got to report it somewhere, I 
have got to tell people this is happening, I have to have it 
10 
investigated.  If I have money, I must take it to court.  We 
all have to test this.  I do not know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I am very sorry, I cannot answer – because 
Regiments is the frontrunner to Trillian and I got very badly 
burnt 
by 
that 
one 
when 
I 
was 
supposed 
to 
have 
inadvertently lied to parliament.  So I do not know, I was 
not there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no I appreciate in April 2014 you 
were not there but have reprisal – apparent reprisal is 
20 
experienced in March 2011 and thereafter and what we see 
– can I take it further?  She gets ultimately replaced by Mr 
Anoj Singh and on his watch Regiments get a contract at 
Eskom and ultimately Trillian, they get to be engaged at 
Eskom and paid huge amounts of money but under the 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 54 of 108 
 
watch of Mr Anoj Singh. 
MS BROWN:   I do not have a view on that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No comment on that. 
MS BROWN:   I think it something that must be tested. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then I can – but  what we see again is 
that one person, that one person who seems permeate 
whatever is happening there, Mr Salim Essa, because you 
will recall also about the meeting on the 10 March 2015 
that he said the executives will be suspended in the 
manner that it turned out to be.  But we have done that, I 
10 
am just painting this picture to you so that you can see 
what apparently it is an external influence bringing its 
muscles to bear on Eskom. 
 
Then Mr Tsotsi’s removal, if I may move there.  Now 
Mr Tsotsi talks about a meeting he had with you or you 
called him to a meeting just before the SONA in 2014.  
Remember where you tell him about him interfering with 
management? 
MS BROWN:   Yes, I do remember. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes and that if he does not stop you 
20 
will get somebody else to do his job.  I see you are 
smiling. 
MS BROWN:   I smile because I think it is absolute 
nonsense.  Chair, I am smiling at – I am trying to get it on 
my – because I have been writing on my page because I 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 55 of 108 
 
am absolutely astounded that Mr Tsotsi over such a long 
period of time actually without a recorder, without taking a 
recording of my words and he puts it in inverted commas 
as exact words that I used.  I have told you that we did not 
have an easy relationship.  I do not think I had easy 
relationships with a lot of people.  I am very forthright and 
so – and it is not always very easy to accept. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But may I ask you this, are you 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to let her see if she gets 
10 
the page she is looking for. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think she is looking for a page where 
she made comments that are relevant to her answer to your 
question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, thank you Chair. 
MS BROWN:   I have the page Chair, and I see that Mr 
Tsotsi says that I tell him that we’re going to part ways and 
that he must do his job otherwise “I’ll replace him with 
somebody else”, absolute direct words that he says I said, 
20 
I absolutely deny that I don’t think anyone should be 
threatened verbally with their job, I think that is a process 
that has to happen.  If there’s any relationship breakdown 
between the person in charge and some – the person that 
accounts to them, there should be – so, I absolutely deny 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 56 of 108 
 
that.  The issue about that weekend, it was the day before 
SONA, the issue is that I ticked him off for interfering in an 
operational matter.  Now, I don’t care who wrote the letter 
the letter does not belong in the non-Executive Committees 
Division and the Chair for that matter and I make a mistake 
in my – because it was a very vague issue for me but it 
was Mr Matona, and that’s  why I took it up with him, 
because – I took it up with him because the CE came to me 
and told me, look at this letter, this is the letter Mr Tsotsi 
has written and many of these things happen all the time. 
10 
 
I think the South African public should be grateful 
that I don’t want the non-Executive Directors to be 
interfering in an operational matter especially procurement 
and of course there’s lot of explanations as to why he did 
it, but the point is, that must not happen.  You don’t 
procure as – in your personal capacity in that way. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Brown…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   So that was the argument I had with him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Brown…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Seleka, so is the position 
20 
that you admit that on that day, a meeting did take place 
between – which involved you and Mr Tsotsi. What you do 
not accept is what he says you said to him in terms of, 
effectively, threatening to get rid of him immediately if he 
was not doing his job, you say, the discussion was about 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 57 of 108 
 
something else, namely, you were saying to him, he should 
stop interfering in operational matters, is that correct? 
MS BROWN:   I called him to that meeting, Chair, because 
just before he was in – before I called him, I knew they 
were all up in Cape Town because it was SONA.  So, I 
called him after Mr Matona brought me the letter – and I 
know one thing for sure, that it was a Japanese company, 
102, it’s not buying oil or fuel, it was parts, I mean, that’s 
an incorrect issue there and then Mr Matona said that was 
the specific issue that he raised with me and I – but I think 
10 
this thing with Mr Tsotsi and I came a little bit earlier 
already 
because 
the 
Directors 
of 
the 
State 
owned 
companies are – and the Chairs are not Executive Chairs, 
so 
they’re 
not 
allowed 
excess 
or 
excessive 
use 
of 
resources.  So, you might have a….[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but my question is, whether I’m 
correct in understanding, that you say, a meeting did take 
place involving you and him…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   It did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it took place on the day that he says 
20 
it did, the difference is that you say, the meeting was to 
discuss his alleged interference in operational matters, he 
says, you said to him you would find somebody else if he 
didn’t do his job or something to that effect.  That’s the 
only difference between the two of you about what 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 58 of 108 
 
happened in that meeting, is that correct? 
MS BROWN:   Only the first – the other difference is that 
you can’t put mine in inverted commas because mine is not 
verbatim, his is verbatim. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Ms Brown isn’t it, with 
respect to you, ironic that the Minister at the time, also 
engaged in operational matters at Eskom? 
MS BROWN:   In which operational matters? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The one of the 11 t h of March with the 
10 
Board 
discussions 
about 
the 
stepping 
aside 
of 
the 
Executives and an inquiry to be conducted. 
MS BROWN:   Yes, but I said to the Board, the Board – 
nobody has given you a verbatim report from all the Board 
members that says that I did not – I said I’m not allowed to 
instruct you to do anything, but I would like the inquiry to 
happen, they could have said no I don’t want to do it.  I did 
not get involved in procurement matters, it’s very different. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, now, if we forget…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   I served – it is a very, very different matter.  
20 
If I said, go and give the building of Madupi Unit 6 to the 
Jackson 
Fives, 
that 
would 
be 
a 
direct 
operational 
interference in – I was assigned to get the company out of 
its mess. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Yes,[intervenes]. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 59 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well of course, Ms Brown it may well be 
that the situation was – lots of people were interfering in 
matters in which they should not be interfering.  They 
might not have been procurement matters if the evidence 
of the Board members who gave evidence is true, you 
didn’t want, on the 11 t h of March to say, I’m instructing  
you to suspend the Executives but they say it was quite 
clear that that’s what you wanted and of course if the 
evidence by Mr Tsotsi and the acting DG at the time is 
correct, the former President was interfering in when the 
10 
Eskom Board should have a meeting and when it should 
not have a meeting and then it may well be that Mr Tsotsi 
was also getting involved in procurement matters.  So, I’m 
just mentioning that I’m not saying that to the extent that 
he may have got involved in procurement matters when he 
shouldn’t have, I’m not saying that you should not have 
raised the issues, I’m just saying, it may well be that 
that’s, ultimately the position that may be emerging and 
you might be able to say something, or you might not be 
able to say anything about that? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I think Chair, I’ve already clarified 
my position on the issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair, because Mr Tsotsi 
has also sought to – well let me not use the word, sought, 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 60 of 108 
 
but has also explained to the Chairperson how the letter 
came about.  Let’s go back, you see for Mr Tsotsi what he’s 
striking about – what he says was your conversation with 
him is that, he says, on the same day, a few hours later, Mr 
Tony Gupta has a meeting with him and he calls him to – 
he calls Mr Tsotsi to his residence in Constantia and there 
he tells the Chairperson, Mr Tsotsi, the Chairmen, we are 
the ones who put you in this position and we are the ones 
who can take you out and he says, it was striking to him 
because it was a few hours after my encounter with the 
10 
Minister who, for all intents and purposes, said the same 
thing to me, referring to himself. 
MS BROWN:   I couldn’t be saying the same things to him, 
because remember he – what he says I said was actually 
verbatim, in fact, he has it in inverted commas, quotation 
marks because he says, that’s what I said to him which is 
very different to what he says the Gupta’s told him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I suppose that’s why he uses the 
phrase, for all intents and purposes. 
MS BROWN:   Well, and I use the phrase for, if you are 
20 
using my verbatim comments, then somebody else had to 
use my verbatim comments for it to be, for all intents and 
purposes, the same.  That’s my only comment to you, I 
also don’t know – how do I know we went there, I don’t 
know Chair, I can’t help you with that, I would like to help 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 61 of 108 
 
the Commission where I can but I can’t help on something 
that – it’s so vague and so – I mean, I think I’m a little 
younger than Mr Tsotsi but maybe we’re the same age but I 
don’t think I would ever remember anything anyone said 
verbatim seven years ago, so – ja…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it depends, I mean it depends, Ms 
Brown…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   Maybe you can Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, it depends, Ms Brown I’m sure, 1) if 
it’s not a long story, it it’s a few words that somebody said 
10 
to somebody or to you, on a certain occasion, they could 
remain embedded in your mind to say, he said something, 
she said or he said you never set your foot in my house 
again, that could remain in your mind for many years, you 
know, it just depends, you know.  So – and of course if you 
are directly involved and maybe you are being threatened 
you might be more likely to remember all of that because of 
what may have been at stake for you than somebody else 
who may have listened to the same conversation but wasn’t 
directly involved or the person who  uttered the words, you 
20 
know, because there might not have been much as stake 
there might not have been anything at stake for them it just 
depends, you know, so all of those things will need to be 
taken into account.  Okay, alright, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, Mr Tsotsi seems to have had 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 62 of 108 
 
fallen out of favour with the Gupta’s Ms Brown.  He goes 
on to talk about incidents, I mean,  it doesn’t pertain to you 
but just to give you a picture that the Gupta’s – or Tony 
Gupta wanted them – wanted him to secure a contract for 
them at Eskom in respect of the open cycle gas turbine 
plant an when it transpired that there was a different 
company, already negotiating with Eskom in respect of a 
MOU, a memorandum of understanding, he says Mr Tony 
Gupta was very upset and he said to him that you are 
working with baba’s enemies, referring to Mr Jacob Zuma, 
10 
you wouldn’t know about that? 
MS BROWN:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you – Mr Seleka, you might need 
to, in terms of time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Focus more on the matters where Ms 
Brown is directly involved. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because as far as Mr Tsotsi’s removal is 
concerned, it’s the Board that, by its own admission, was 
20 
pushing for that and ultimately, he resigned.  There is no 
suggestion, as far as I’m aware, that Ms Brown had any 
particular hand in the Board pushing for Mr Tsotsi’s 
removal.  If, in the end, you want to draw to her attention, 
various features of the evidence relating to Eskom from 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 63 of 108 
 
different witnesses which maybe seem to involve the 
Gupta’s in one way or the other, that could be done later 
but also, it’s the kind of thing where she could be told to 
go and consider A, B, C, D, those features. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then give us her comment by way of 
supplementary affidavit because those are the features 
that are there or may be there but certainly with regard to 
Mr Tsotsi, she doesn’t appear to have been part of the 
push for Mr Tsotsi’s removal. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I’m just mentioning that you might 
consider that ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I think I can paint the picture in 
the end. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Brown, then, I would like to move 
on to the removal of Mr Baloyi.  Mr Baloyi seems to have 
been, 
as 
I’ve 
mentioned 
to 
the 
Board 
members, 
a 
problematic child for them but they came to you with a 
20 
matter for his removal and he – you called him and Dr 
Ngubane to a meeting you said they could come with the 
company secretary and that meeting took place in Cape 
Town.  His impression of the meeting was that he couldn’t 
present everything to you but he testified here that he 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 64 of 108 
 
walked away from the meeting on the understanding that, 
what he had been accused of, which was to have contact 
with one of the suspended Executives was not, at that 
stage, a rule that prohibited Board members to do so and 
you expressed regret that you had not laid down a rule, to 
say Board members should not contact the suspended 
Executives and he walked away understanding that, it was 
your intention to do so, so that in the future, contact 
doesn’t happen but he was surprised to receive a letter 
from 
 
you 
that 
you 
have 
accepted 
the 
Board’s 
10 
recommendation to have him removed as a Director, are 
you able …[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   I was very excited to have Mr Baloyi 
onboard because my officials told me that – because I was 
always lobbied by the union members to have the union 
representative but there are so many unions but – and 
there’s been an experience of having unions on the Board 
and for some – I’m not going to say it didn’t work but my 
officials were saying it’s not something that we could do.  
So, I was always very excited to have Mr Baloyi onboard, 
20 
even though he was representing a union, any specific 
union, he was a union member which means, in the same 
way that I have businesspeople I also have union members 
– union people in.  So, I can’t – I didn’t listen to Mr 
Baloyi’s testimony at all, but I remember writing to him that 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 65 of 108 
 
I was removing him in terms of Section 78(2) and that was 
of the Companies Act.  That he may not use his position to 
obtain 
information 
to 
knowingly 
cause 
harm 
to 
the 
company, that’s what I remember.  I also remember – 
because I think it’s the people in governance committee, 
they – and I might be – well let me just stick to what I know 
absolutely.  I wrote him a letter where – and I don’t – and I 
only have this letter on my own documents because he 
didn’t write directly to me, he wrote to the staff and 
threatened them and all sorts of stuff, but I wrote to him, I 
10 
said, following my decision I have – I’ll send this to the 
Commission as well,  
“I have been receiving electronic emails from you 
on a daily basis demanding that I reconsider my 
decision. I am concerned that the content of the 
electronic mail also appears to be a threatening 
action by yourself.  Emphatically I wish to state that 
my decision to remove you from Eskom Board of 
Directors was exercised within the ambit of my 
powers in terms of the MOI read together with the 
20 
Companies Act of 2008 and it is final”, 
 
And then I skip, and I say, 
“You are at liberty to pursue whatever legal avenues 
open to you.  More importantly I must remind you 
that 
you 
remain 
bound 
by 
the 
confidentiality 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 66 of 108 
 
required in terms of Section 76(2) of the Companies 
Act”. 
 
I had to reiterate, I actually gave Mr Baloyi an 
opportunity to come and speak to me and I had my officials 
present, I had the legal department present, I had Dr Ben 
and I said he’s supposed to bring some committee, I can’t 
remember, I think there were two or three Board members 
present as well.  Mr Baloyi made us wait three hours, I 
cancelled meetings for other people’s appointments so that 
I could see Mr Baloyi because I thought I should give him 
10 
an opportunity to redeem himself and after three hours of 
waiting he arrives, no apology, and when the officials put 
the issues to him and he argues about it and they argue 
and so on and eventually he says he’s taking us all to 
court, he was very threatening and I thought, maybe it is – 
it’s not the side issue but I have so much – we had, as a 
company and as officials and as – we have so much on our 
plates, I just thought, you know, I used my Executive 
authority to get rid of Mr Baloyi to just agree with the 
Board and say, yes, it’s fine we’ll not have Mr Baloyi on the 
20 
Board.  Now, I might not have done – it might not have 
been the right thing to do, and I mean, the Chair will 
adjudicate that, but I did give – I feel I gave Mr Baloyi – I 
spoke with him on the telephone because my officials 
refused to write letters to Mr Baloyi because Mr Baloyi was 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 67 of 108 
 
just so – it was so difficult, he wrote every day.  So, I – 
that’s what I did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, well…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
remember 
to 
pace 
yourself 
appropriately. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You still have quite a few matters to deal 
with. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m looking at the time. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Ms Brown, thank you Chair.  I 
hope you gave me the powers to – Ms Brown just two 
things, Mr Baloyi in his revised submission to you, I was 
going through his file yesterday, his Bundle rather, in his 
revised submission to you after you met – after the meeting 
he does say, first and foremost he wanted to apologise for 
arriving late,  
“yesterday, 14 April 2015 at your Cape Town offices, 
the problem was that I did not receive the change of 
time from 13h00 to 12h00”, 
20 
So, if you say he didn’t apologise, that’s really 
unlike him. 
MS BROWN:   I’m sure. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But number two, I wanted you to 
comment on, before your decision, on his version that he 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 68 of 108 
 
understood you to be going to lay down a rule that there 
should not be contact as opposed to you accepting the 
decision to have his membership of the Board terminated, 
that’s really what I wanted…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   There is a MOI and there’s a Companies Act 
and both of it says, that you are not to distribute 
confidential matters that will bring the company into 
disrepute and maybe, I wanted to add, another harsher 
word in it, but that’s – I don’t think it’s true and whether he 
arrived an hour late, I mean, he still – he arrived three 
10 
hours late, I cancelled three meetings.  I don’t have a 
meeting an hour – I don’t have three meetings in one hour. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, but…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   And so, it’s his view it’s my view, I have a 
different view on it, but I don’t know – ja I’m – I don’t 
understand why he says I have to have a new – anything 
new that I add in.  I already have a Companies Act, I have 
the MOI it talks to matters of confidentiality it says that 
even after you are, as Board member, you have to retain 
that confidentiality.  You can’t speak out of a Board 
20 
decision there’s a majority decision that get’s taken in the 
Board, that doesn’t mean you can go and negotiate other 
matters with other people outside unless we all – I mean it 
will just be chaos. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no I understand what you’re 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 69 of 108 
 
saying Ms Brown, what I’m only putting to you is, his 
impression after having met with you, that a rule was going 
to be laid, that’s his impression, are you saying that 
impression was incorrect? 
MS BROWN:   I don’t know, I mean I don’t think I need 
another impression other than the Companies Act and the 
MOI and I think everybody needs to behave in a congenial 
way so that the Board can function. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I would – okay – well I would like to deal 
with something else which and I want to – I want to trim it to 
10 
your particular relevance.  This has to do with Dentons 
investigation.   
Now Dentons which is the inquiry you have said that 
the board should have and that inquiry was as it was decided 
– decided to be for three months.  Dentons was appointed on 
20 April 2015 to do an investigation.   
We have seen from the evidence that Dentons 
Investigation which was intended to be a deep dive as you 
have used those words was cut short somewhere in June 
2015.  So they did not do an investigation for three months 
20 
and a presentation was made to you on the 9 t h of July 2015 
which was  draft interim report of Dentons.   
Dentons says on that very day they received a call 
from a board member saying the Minister wants the draft to 
be made final.   
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 70 of 108 
 
So it would seem that on that evidence you would 
have played a role in bringing to an end an investigation 
which you had wanted it to be deep dive.  According to 
Dentons Report they say: 
“The 
investigation 
lasted 
only 
for 
about 
seven weeks.”   
On my calculation it is actually about six weeks 
because the first week they spent time having meetings in 
order to understand the scope of what they were required to 
do.  Now firstly did you tell the board to ask Dentons to 
10 
finalise what was a draft report on 9 July 2015? 
MS BROWN:  I – why would I even say they must finalise the 
report? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Now remember I do not know.  I am only 
telling you the version.   
MS BROWN:  Yes I do not know that – I do not know that 
version either.  They had three months in which to do the 
report.  They presented to me on the 9t h of July and other 
than – no I do not know.  I actually do not know Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Okay.  Because Dr Ngubane 
20 
writes you a letter but that is only in August where he says: 
“The board has decided to terminate the 
investigation 
because 
there 
is 
nothing 
unfamiliar from its investigation.” 
And so they question the investigation going forward 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 71 of 108 
 
because of the finances.  This investigation – okay comment 
on that? 
MS BROWN:  Yes but Dr Ngubane in his statement also says 
that by the time he left 16 of the 18 areas were covered.  I 
mean I do not think – you know Chair I do not think the 
investigation would have – and I am really talking off the top 
of my head now.   
I do not think the investigation would have been any 
different.  I think what the investigation did was to narrow 
down what – what was supposed to be happening in Eskom 
10 
which was not happening for the past couple of years.   
And I think that is what the investigation did.  It 
actually narrowed it down – it – I means because out of that 
9t h of July meeting the board had a responsibility to have 
oversight over all – I think it was 18 or 20 indicators I am not 
sure but all those indicators that they set out the board to 
have monthly indicators that they could check against and a 
committee – I am not sure if it is the build committee or what 
who check it on a weekly basis.   
So they had like a dashboard to check what the 
20 
outcome is.  The point is lots of people say the Minister 
made me do it.  I have had lots of people saying you have 
got to do this because the Minister said so.  And where I 
know who it is I can take action; where I do not know who it 
is I cannot take action.  
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 72 of 108 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well let me also just say two things about 
this investigation or I might add the third one and the third 
one is Dentons itself saying: 
“Their 
report 
was 
a 
snapshot 
of 
the 
investigation 
at 
the 
midpoint 
of 
the 
investigation period.” 
And they say about 18 June 2015.   
“And it is provided to Eskom on the specific 
request of Eskom.  The findings, views, 
conclusions and recommendations set out in 
10 
this 
report 
are 
accordingly 
subject 
to 
verification and testing provided to Eskom as 
a record of the investigation as at the 
midpoint of the investigation period and 
largely they say do not constitute definitive 
findings, 
views, 
conclusions 
and 
recommendations.” 
Because they were not able to complete their 
investigation.  But I want you – let me give you two more 
aspects. 
20 
1.  This investigation it seems it was not budgeted for. 
2. It appears to have been used as a disguise to have the 
executives step out – step aside and the board pushes 
for them to have settlement agreements of the board.  
When the board had said you will come back after three 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 73 of 108 
 
months but what you see in the interim period is the 
board saying you are not coming back.  Your coming 
back is off the table.  Some of these executives are 
told.   
And then there are these settlement agreements and 
they are paid hush money to go away and it seems to 
coincide with this time of the investigation being brought to 
an end.  So once you have from the board’s side the 
executives settled and went away, paid huge amount of 
money the investigation is brought to an end.  That is the 
10 
picture emerging I do not know whether you have a comment 
on that? 
MS BROWN:  No I do not have a comment on that.  I think it 
is a picture emerging in a head – someone’s head but I do 
not have a – I mean you telling me that I approved a – a 
report an inquiry wanted an inquiry even, approved an 
inquiry.   
I knew there was no money I can say that up – I knew 
there was no money and I said please find ways to 
reprioritise.  I also know that Eskom like all the other state 
20 
owned companies for a bottle of 500 ml water where we pay 
R6.00 or R4.00 they would pay R30.00 or R35.00.  So I said 
go and find ways to – to get the money.   
But what you are saying is a view that you hold or 
you coming to a conclusion that that is what it is.  I do not 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 74 of 108 
 
think that that is so.  I think we actually – I mean the board 
is actually holding the Dentons indicators accountable the 
KPI’s accountable to – to themselves and to the executives.  
So it – I do not hold that view but I – I am not – maybe you 
have read something somewhere else and you have pieced 
together this whole story but it is not a very – it is not a 
dissimilar story to the one I hear in the public domain.  I 
must be very frank with you about that.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  It is not a dissimilar story. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  No I or the commission can only go 
according to the affidavits that are provided to it.  So that is 
what you see from the affidavits?   
But here is another aspect relevant to you Ms Brown 
even before Dentons is appointed on 28 April 2015 you made 
an announcement on the 17 April 2015 for the secondment of 
Mr Molefe to Eskom with immediate effect.   
And you conveyed in your press conference that even 
though he is seconded for three months you would actually 
like him to be there for twelve months.  Mr Matona is telling 
20 
us. 
MS BROWN:  Did I say that – did I say that publicly or did I 
say that in the press statement? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is in the media – in your press 
conference. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 75 of 108 
 
MS BROWN:  Release 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja, no it is… 
MS BROWN:  Is it in the media release? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No it is a press conference.  It is – there 
is a video – there is YouTube … 
MS BROWN:  So I say that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Oh I must just be my run of mouth.  But yes I – 
what are you asking me Advocate? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes what I am asking you is this when Mr 
10 
Matona was still on suspension and you were already 
entertaining a thought that Mr Molefe would be there for 
twelve months what would have been your reason for it when 
Mr Matona was intended to come back in three months? 
MS BROWN:  I – it might have been – you know there was a 
lot of excitement around Mr – firstly let me say why I 
appointed Mr Molefe on the 17 t h – I made the press 
statement on the 17t h because by that time the executives 
already told me that there has been a negotiation with Mr 
Matona and that it – it looks like he is hovering on staying or 
20 
going.  I – so there was nothing clarified.   
After three months and in the meantime we had Mr 
Khoza standing in and that was not going so well.  I mean Mr 
Khoza cannot be expected to do the job of a CE but he was 
standing in and he was doing an excellent job standing in.  
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 76 of 108 
 
So I also heard someone say that they did not know what the 
meeting was about that they had to go to but I had a meeting 
between the two Chairs of Transnet and Eskom.   
And I would never – I will take legal opinion to see 
whether it is possible to move for three – to second for three 
months somebody from one state owned company to another.  
It has happened before and it has happened afterwards.  
Having said that after three months appointment the board 
wanted me to appoint Mr Molefe for twelve months.  I said 
no.   
10 
When they wanted a permanency already I said no.  
Because he has only been there for three months, he is only 
supposed to be there for three months.  There has got to be 
a much better re – and the point is the markets applauded, 
the public applauded, the media applauded it was the one 
good thing that I did in many, many years.   
So – and I think it is in that space that I probably 
said oh I mean I do not know where – I do not know if I said 
it in a press statement I did not see it in the press statement 
but I could have said oh maybe he stays for twelve months.   
20 
But when I was in the formal setting where the board 
writes to me and asks me to appoint Mr Molefe for – I cannot 
remember if they wanted to appoint him permanently or not I 
think it might be something you should ask the investigators 
to look at.   
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 77 of 108 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It was permanent. 
MS BROWN:  But I do –  
ADV SELEKA SC:  It was permanent. 
MS BROWN:  I do remember. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Permanently. 
MS BROWN:  That I said – sorry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It was permanently. 
MS BROWN:  Yes I said now he must wait – like every other 
person they – it should not happen yet.  They should give Mr 
Molefe six months and I – and six months was just off the 
10 
top of my head because I was just thinking that look give him 
six months then give him another three months and then let 
us see how it will – works out.  Within the six months of Mr 
Molefe coming in I cannot remember by which month but by 
August the company already turned around in terms of load 
shedding – in terms of staff morale.   
I mean I visited a couple of festival of maintenance 
gatherings that Mr Molefe had it was just everyone at Eskom 
helping with maintenance on weekends, overnight, during – 
you know it was just – there was just an incredible energy 
20 
within the company.   
So no I did not want to appoint him for twelve months 
I said it in a – I said it – it was an off the cuff comment that I 
made. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Were you the one… 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 78 of 108 
 
MS BROWN:  And … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay carry on. 
MS BROWN:  And I am only – I am only saying it is an off 
the cuff comment that I made because you telling me that I 
have made that comment.  Because it is not a comment that I 
would naturally – I mean … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I will... 
MS BROWN:  I do naturally – I do make comments.  I do 
make side comments all the time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  I will get the video – video clip for 
10 
you.  But tell me was it – was it you who came up with Mr 
Molefe’s name?  Was it at your initiative that he was 
seconded? 
MS BROWN:    When he was seconded to Eskom? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  No I did not actually know Mr Molefe.  I think it 
was in – there was – there was an occasion where I went to 
the Presidency and there was real issue with the fact – and I 
mean with the fact that we were still having load shedding 
and that the possibility of us going into darkness – no 
20 
blackouts which would kill the economy and will take too 
long a period for the economy to be – to be rebuilt.   
And there seemed to be a very serious exercise that 
has been done that I had – I could – I had access to.  Now I 
am not sure if it is an intelligence exercise that was done but 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 79 of 108 
 
Gauteng was going to go into blackout and that I should act 
on it.   
And the one thing I could not act on that was with the 
– a non-executive director being in charge.  And I think in my 
conversation with the President and I could have said it the 
President could have said it, I do not know but Mr Molefe’s 
name came up. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
MS BROWN:  Now I have heard you say to other people that 
some man called Mr Herb said that Salim Essa said that Mr 
10 
… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes they have decided who will be the 
next boss of Eskom. 
MS BROWN:  Yes I heard that so why would I then go and 
appoint Mr Matona.  I am a new Minister I thought about this 
a lot.  I am a new Minister, I was going to lose my DG, I have 
never been a Minister – a National Minister before, I was 
going to lose my DG, why would I appoint him if I was only 
listening to some instructions that some strange people 
concoct things outside of Eskom?  Why do I not just appoint 
20 
him, Mr Molefe in the first instance and not appoint Mr 
Matona? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well… 
MS BROWN:  And keep with my Matona in as a DG. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Ms Brown you could have done that if 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 80 of 108 
 
you did not listen in the first place and that is why Mr Matona 
had to be removed and then Mr Molefe put in.  Maybe you 
did not listen. 
MS BROWN:  Because I did not – because I did not listen in 
the first place? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN: Well nobody told me in the first place.  So 
anyway but that – that is how it happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But your – your… 
MS BROWN:  And then of course I spoke with the Deputy 
10 
President at the time the President today on the telephone 
and I remember the conversation because we were throwing 
a lot of names – lots of other people as well.   
And then the one person that was the same as the 
Deputy President and the President was Mr Molefe and I 
then went to a function of Transnet and I am – Mr Molefe 
says it and it jogged my memory.  I remember that I used to 
go to all Transnet’s functions and it jogged my memory and 
Mr Molefe said it and I – and I thought oh that is actually a 
viable option – a viable position and I then said – I asked 
20 
him if he would be willing to be seconded to Eskom.   
Chair if there was anything that I did right in that 
period of my life in the public space I mean even my family 
hated me for load shedding.  Nobody believed – everybody 
believed that I was the person who was shedding the load. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 81 of 108 
 
So that was actually – for all intents and purposes it 
was a very positive stance that I took that day and people 
were very – the markets were rejoicing.  There was an 
upsurge in the markets on that day with Mr Molefe.  So that 
is the only thing I can say. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm.  But remember there was a 
downgrade of Eskom as a result of the suspension of the 
executives. 
MS BROWN:  Yes and there was a downgrade of Eskom just 
a few months before that as well. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm. 
MS BROWN:  So there – Eskom had many downgrades and 
many downgrades after that.  In fact I am not sure – maybe I 
should not express myself on it but I think they still have 
downgrades. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But this specific one was particularly 
linked to the decision in regard to the suspensions and I 
wonder whether it concerned you. 
MS BROWN:  It did.  A downgrade always concerns me 
because every downgrade means that the bonds that Eskom 
20 
sells are much, much – it is a – it becomes of less and less 
value and the company itself become of less and less value. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  But you know what – what I … 
MS BROWN:  And I do not want to start a conspiracy theory.  
I do not want to you know and then this one did that and that 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 82 of 108 
 
but I also a conspiracy theory around it.  I may be write you 
down and then the Chair his last moments I – he – of writing 
the report he will see my conspiracy theory. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Brown the secondment of Mr Singh. 
Mr Singh says you approached him in June 2015 to be 
seconded to Eskom, is that correct? 
MS BROWN:  You know I – no I do not think Mr Singh’s right 
with that.  I think I got a board meeting – a board memo 
because I knew of Mr Molefe I did not know Mr Singh really.  
But the board sent me – and I am almost absolutely certain 
10 
of this the board sent me a letter requesting the – Mr Singh 
to be seconded and giving it to my DDG of Energy and the 
DDG of Transport and they were coming back with a memo 
saying that it is – would be a right kind of decision to make. 
But I – I approved that decision but I did not make 
the – I really did not make – I did not say Mr Singh please 
come and help us.  I said – I said – I went to speak to Mr 
Molefe and said he must come and help.   
So I am not sure if Mr Singh or who said that but that 
is not – I did not.  I might have spoken with him and said you 
20 
know something about finances and so but I do not think I – I 
do not – I did not actually ask him to come over.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm.  Well let me then just conclude by 
showing you this and I am sure to some extent you will have 
been watching the evidence before the commission.   
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 83 of 108 
 
And once Mr Molefe and Mr Anoj Singh come to 
Eskom we see as I – I think I said this on the first day the 
way they deal with the transactions pertaining to the Gupta’s 
and that is specifically Tegeta on the one hand and on the 
other hand the way they deal with transactions pertaining to 
Regiments and later Trillian which is owned by Mr Salim 
Essa and Dr Eric Wood.   
So it would appear from the evidence that ultimately 
the execu – those two executives who are moved to Eskom – 
seconded to Eskom ultimately appointed at Eskom would 
10 
have went there with a particular purpose looking at what 
they do immediately after they are at Eskom.   
The transactions in regard to Tegeta, the terminating 
the cooperation agreement with Optimum Coal Mine which 
was owned by Glencore and there is a 30 – over R30.6 
million payment to Trillian when services were rendered by a 
different entity Regiments.   
This would have happened during your time as a 
Minister and I wonder whether did you observe these things 
taking place?  Did they come to your attention and what your 
20 
view was? 
MS BROWN:  No it did not come to my attention because it 
was not a section – a PFMA Section 54 Application to me.  A 
lot of it came out in the media, a couple of months after the 
process.  But let me – let me put something to you. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 84 of 108 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Advocate Seleka – Chair you see I understood 
that Glencore sold Optimum Mine to the Gupta’s and that 
was a direct sale of the company.  In my mind, Glencore 
was pushing for a higher amount.  Now I do not care of the 
amount of coal anywhere.  I care that when you increase 
Glencore’s coal price, who pay for that increase?  Even 
though Eskom pays for it through NERSA the general 
public pays the higher cost of coal.  That is my lay 
person’s understanding of it.   
10 
 
So Tegeta charges at the beginning R150 per 
coal – per ton of coal or R100.  I cannot remember what 
they charged but they were under R 200 per ton of coal.  
So I do not... 
 
I see it in the newspaper and I...  Look, in this 
country of factions and connecting dots and all of that.  
Other people connect dots differently.  Some people 
connect dots one way.  Other people connect dots in 
another way. 
 
So I was very happy that the price that will be 
20 
passed through to our people – to people in our – the 
citizens of South Africa will be lower than what it would 
have been if it was increasing to R 540 per ton.  So that is 
on the one hand. 
 
On the other hand I also hold a view that if there 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 85 of 108 
 
is any wrongdoing and I - after almost negotiating with the 
SIU for six to seven months because the issue of 
procurement in Eskom is a very complex matter and so is 
the issue of procurement in Transnet and Denel and it 
was... 
 
I will always be struck by the fact that I 
negotiated with the SIU for almost seven months because 
they did not want to include any of the cost loss mines.  
They only wanted to deal where there are issues that were 
in the present environment.   
10 
 
And I do not know why but it is – it must be 
interesting and maybe it becomes some students’ doctoral 
dissertation one day because not everyone wants to look at 
the total picture of coal.  I mean, nobody looks at the total 
picture of coal and the price that eventually is in our 
people’s pockets.   
 
And when I say our people, I mean the whole 
South Africa, all of us who live here who makes South 
Africa our home.  So I do feel that on the balance of 
fairness it might be a little but more useful and I am doing 
20 
the – I am not saying what the – I am, actually – and it 
might be useful to look at the way business gets done in 
the country. 
 
I mean, you know, there are companies that you 
cannot – if you go to an airport, it does not matter if you 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 86 of 108 
 
eat at that place or if you go to the bathroom or you wash 
your hands or you use the café in the area, it all belongs to 
one company. 
 
So it might be interesting – 
I think it is 
interesting and I think we are a young democracy and 
these – this – these – this phenomena is going to show its 
head often and many people will get hurt in the process but 
it will show its head.  I am not making it as a thread.  I am 
just saying that that is what happened – that is what I felt 
about it.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   But it is not as simple as you think it is. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Which phenomena are you 
referring to Ms Brown? 
MS BROWN:   I think the phenomena is new entrance to 
any of the big four or five’s, whether it is in the financial 
sector. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   Whether it is in the coal sector, whether it is 
in the tourism sector.  We have only four or five big 
20 
companies. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MS BROWN:   They are all white owned and they all have 
all of our, you know, the well-kneaded(?) who serve in that 
directorship and I think has happened for a long time.   
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 87 of 108 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, okay.  Thank you very much.  
Chairperson, 
thank 
you. 
 
I 
have 
reached 
the 
end, 
Chairperson, of my questioning. 
MS BROWN:   No... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughs] 
MS BROWN:   [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   There are, obviously, aspects that the 
board says about the Minister which accrued, as the 
Chairperson had suggested, raised them(?) of the Minister 
10 
to obtain her affidavit on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you still have about 28-minutes 
before it is one.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One o’clock.  If you want to deal with 
that now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, let me do that. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me ask you something Ms Brown. 
MS BROWN:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have understood from other evidence in 
relation to Transnet that your predecessor in the Ministry 
of Public Enterprises, Mr Gigaba, had approved certain 
guidelines which SOE’s under Public Enterprises, I guess, 
were suppose to follow in the appointment of CEO’s.  I take 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 88 of 108 
 
it that when you arrived at the ministry, you became aware 
of those guidelines? 
MS BROWN:   I do not know who drew up those guidelines. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   But I use...  When I came to the ministry, I 
was quite new. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   So I used what was present in the ministry 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MS BROWN:   Until I...  So it might be those guidelines. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  So I guess what you mean is.  
There are certain guidelines that you were – you became 
aware of when you came to the ministry but as to who had 
...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...who had established them or had, you 
know, approved them, you might not know about that. 
MS BROWN:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, if I recall correctly and – ja, if I 
20 
recall correctly.  They contemplated that the board of an 
SOE should follow a process when they want to appoint a 
CEO.   
 
A process which would involve having other 
candidates or not having more than one candidate.  I 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 89 of 108 
 
cannot remember whether they contemplated that there 
should be an advertisement as such but I seem to recall 
that, in the end, the board was, in terms of those 
guidelines, required to give to the Minister three names.  
Maybe it is that.  At least three names  I am not sure but 
three names.   
 
And they were supposed to then give – to 
identify their preferred candidates.  Does that accord with 
your 
recollection 
of 
what 
the 
guidelines 
you 
used, 
provided? 
10 
MS BROWN:   That does.  That does. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS BROWN:   I do recall that now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now were those guidelines followed in 
the case of the permanent appointment of Mr Molefe as 
Group CEO of Eskom? 
MS BROWN:   I do not – I must be very honest.  I have not 
looked specifically to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   But if my memory serves me, that did not 
20 
happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   But...  Yes, that did not happen because I 
cannot remember who – how that...  I cannot remember 
Chair.  Let me say that. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 90 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MS BROWN:   Because I only...  You see, I come in at the 
part where they write the three names in their first 
preference, their second preference and their preference.  
So the board will write the three names.  Now I do not 
remember seeing it like that, to me. 
 
I do remember the board writing to say that they 
would like to appoint Mr Molefe and Mr Singh and I 
approved that.  I took it to the ANC Deployment Committee 
and they approved it and I took it to the Cabinet Committee 
10 
and they approved it.  I mean, sorry.  Not Cabinet 
Committee.  I took it to Cabinet and they approved it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS BROWN:   But I am saying to you, I do not remember 
having three names.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I have – I remember having only one name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   But, I mean, I could be wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine.  And after today, if 
20 
you get a chance to refresh your memory and wish to 
supplement your answer, arrangements can be made for 
you to do that. 
 
But let me tell you that Mr or Dr Ngubane, I think 
was asked about this if I am not mistaken.  And his answer 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 91 of 108 
 
was to confirm that no process was followed that involved 
other candidates.  And when he was asked ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   H’m? 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when he was asked why and I think 
there might have been no references to those guidelines in 
– when he was questioned but he may have been asked in 
general terms.  When he was asked why, his answer was:  
We have got our countries.  And I think he may have gone 
on to praise Mr Molefe, how good he was and so on and so 
on. 
10 
 
And said the board’s attitude was:  We have got 
our candidate and so to speak, why should we be looking 
for other people?  We have got the right person that we are 
looking for in terms of somebody who we believe can do 
the job.   
 
Those are not necessarily his verbatim word as 
he was saying about Mr Tsotsi but that was the effect or 
the gist of what he told the Commission as I recall it.   
 
Would you remember why that – the guidelines 
would not have been followed if in fact they were not 
20 
followed? 
MS BROWN:   I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   I do not remember Chair.  If – I am trying to 
think about it while I am sitting here while you are asking 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 92 of 108 
 
me the questions because I am trying to think of a 
plausible response to you.   
 
Look, the guidelines for both executives and 
even boards and committees and all of that, then there are 
only 
a 
few 
departments 
that 
actually 
abide 
by 
any 
conventional way of dealing with this matter and I think 
DPE is one such department. 
 
So you cannot take people out of your back 
pocket to be on the board and you cannot take people just 
one – get one person because there are – even though the 
10 
law, the Companies Act and the MOI and all of that, they 
all give you the right to do so. 
 
There are conventions that have been developed 
within DPE how those processes will happen.  So maybe in 
another department this is how it happens but in Eskom, 
generally, it happens...   
 
I will look – I will try to check the recesses of my 
brain again but I have a sense that it is – you are right, 
there was only one candidate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not know whether you – what 
20 
you think of the reason that Mr or Dr Ngubane gave, 
whether you would have regarded it as a good reason not 
to follow the guidelines.  Are you able to say anything on 
that or...? 
MS BROWN:   Look, Chair, we were all in – you must 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 93 of 108 
 
remember, we came – we come thought a very dark period 
of – well, literally and figuratively, a dark period.  So 
Mr Molefe overwhelmed all of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   I mean, I still feel that in terms of what he 
did in the company in those first few months was actually 
remarkable.  There are 42 000 people who work for Eskom.  
And for the first time they have seen their CEO.  It was 
within a few weeks.  And then he got them all to, you know, 
like rugby scrummed up to be part of this festival of 
10 
maintenance. 
 
And then he got them all...  So I think we were 
probably all swept up by Mr Molefe’s ability by August to 
have load-shedding under control.  I mean...   
 
So I was just fascinated.  In the control room, 
there was this thing called, I do not know, it is Thesaurus 
or ...  Tetris.  Tetris.  And he said to me:  I am using Tetris 
to solve our crisis. 
 
And Tetris is a computer game and he had these 
young engineers dealing with this and we would know in 
20 
the control room by when a – or when – immediately when 
something happens with a transformer or a power station 
or whatever. 
 
So I – we were all very swept up by Mr Molefe.  
Molefe really got things going and things working in the 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 94 of 108 
 
company.  So I can almost understand why the board did 
not have another process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, you see, I have some difficulty with 
the reason given by the board and I do have difficulty with 
what you say too because I would think that the fact that 
there is a particular candidate that fascinates those who 
have to recommend or appoint, it cannot be a good reason 
not to follow process and it cannot be a good reason to 
exclude other possible candidates.  What do you say to 
that? 
10 
MS BROWN:   I agree with you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   Because, I mean, I even think, how come my 
Legal and Governance Unit did not stop us? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   I mean, I take the blame.  I am the head 
of...  I am the Executive Authority.  I am not saying 
somebody else has to stop us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS BROWN:   But how come the process people did not 
20 
stop?  Not...  The board is not – they are not politicians.  I 
am a politician.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS BROWN:   Or I was.  But the board does not stop – but 
at least why – you know, they did not stop us.  But I think it 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 95 of 108 
 
is because it is not illegal or unlawful.  And I am using it 
very, very widely.  I think it is not illegal or unlawful.  But 
Chair, I think it is something that I must think about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   I must think about.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MS BROWN:   And if I think more about it, I will... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   Because it is a fascinating question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  You see, I may have said this to 
10 
Dr Ngubane but I might not have said it.  If you think you 
have got a good candidate.  The fact that there might be – 
you might go through a process where there are other 
candidates should not make you feel at risk that you might 
lose this candidate. 
 
Particularly, in the context of what we are talking 
about because Mr Molefe was there at Eskom.  His acting 
term could be extended while the process was being 
followed.  There would be nothing wrong with that, I would 
imagine. 
20 
 
And then he would complete with whoever else 
and if he was so – if he was that good, he would still come 
tops, you know.  So there is no – there should be no – 
have been no ground to fear that:  Oh, we might lose this 
wonderful candidate if we follow the process.  You know. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 96 of 108 
 
 
But the beauty of following the process is that, 
one, you would have followed the department’s own 
guidelines.  Two, from the point of your perceptions, you 
know, he would have been appointed after a competitive 
process. 
 
And when he is not appointed after a competitive 
process, 
when 
he 
is 
appointed 
in 
breach 
of 
the 
department’s 
own 
guidelines 
and 
you 
then 
have 
Mr Henk Bester saying he was told by Mr Salim Essa, the 
previous year, that they had decided, whoever they were, 
10 
that the next boss of Eskom would be Mr Molefe. 
 
And then he is approached, he is seconded and 
then he is appointed in breach of the department’s own 
guidelines.  It does, certainly, in the public – in terms of 
public perception raise some question, to say how... 
 
The department has got its own guidelines which 
it must have had a good reason to say they must be used.  
Here they were not used.   
 
And of course, the board says we have such a 
good candidate and maybe some people say:  Well, a good 
20 
candidate is a good reason to not to follow processes.  But 
others would say:  No, no.  Do follow processes because 
process is very important.  You understand? 
MS BROWN:   Chair, what if I suspend?  What if I say I 
suspended all informal protocols? 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 97 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS BROWN:   I do not know if I did say – I do not think I 
have said that.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MS BROWN:   I am just saying.  What if I said, I suspend – 
in my – the memo, I suspend informal protocols that 
governance the processes of appointments and only stick 
with what is – what...  I mean, I do not want o use the word 
lawfully or legally ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MS BROWN:   ...with so many lawyers around and 
attorneys around but I mean...  You know what I am 
saying?  What if I had suspended the informal convention 
or the convention? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think what you want to say is.  Maybe 
the point you want o make is:  Well, guidelines are 
guidelines.  The Companies Act is law and whatever else. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you are thinking:  Well, what if I 
follow the Companies Act and the MOI but I did not follow 
20 
the guidelines.  Is it a big deal?  Is that what you want to 
say? 
MS BROWN:   I think you are right Chair...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
MS BROWN:   That is what I – but that is not what I have 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 98 of 108 
 
done.  I hope I have not done...  No, I do not think...  
[laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, I think you need to have a look. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To refresh your memory 
of what 
happened because it is an important issue.  Certainly from 
my point of view but also, and this might not have anything 
to do with you, maybe, because maybe it is the board 
which made the decision as opposed to you making the 
decision in regard to the Group CEO, namely, with 
10 
Mr Singh.  My understanding is that he was also appointed 
without following any competitive process.  Are you able to 
say anything on that? 
MS BROWN:   H’m.  I hear what you saying Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  You ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   No, I think you are right.  You are right in 
asking the questions that you are asking because we could 
– the argument is not going to be – the argument that 
anyone will oppose you with is not an argument that if it is 
true that it has happened that way.  I cannot be an 
20 
argument that is outside of the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS BROWN:   And that is the only argument I have.  And 
the argument I have is outside of the process.  It is not 
inside the process that you have just outlines. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 99 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Ja, ja.  Mr Seleka, am I – is my 
recollection 
correct 
about 
Mr 
Singh’s 
appointment 
to 
Eskom? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, Mr Singh ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   There was no competitive process either 
with him? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Singh says the Minister approached 
him. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And asked him, whether he will be 
seconded.  Or...  But you are talking, Chairperson, about 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, there was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No process thereto ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   There was no process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But I wanted to say, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The MOI over and above the 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 100 of 108 
 
guidelines, actually requires a shortlist to be made to the 
Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes.  Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Do you want to just mention that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that the Minister can hear. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that is clause – under Clause 13.3 
of the MOI.  13.3.1 says: 
“The 
board 
shall 
identify, 
nominate 
and 
10 
evaluate potential candidates for appointment 
as the CE in accordance with the guidelines...” 
 
And 13.3.2 says: 
“The shareholder shall appoint the CE from the 
shortlist of candidates provided by the board 
in accordance with the guidelines...” 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  I guess to the extent that 
Mr Seleka may have got the right clause of the MOI, I 
guess that if the appointment was in breach of the MOI, 
that would be unlawful.  Ms Brown, would it not? 
20 
MS BROWN:   But then the part – that is why I need to 
read the MOI. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MS BROWN:   And not commit myself at this stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine.  That is fine. 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 101 of 108 
 
MS BROWN:   But the issue...  There is a part that is 
missing there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   And that is the part that says that – and I 
listened just briefly.  And that is the part that says that the 
only employers of DG’s or HOD’s are not – they are 
actually employing – they are – their employment is 
approved or rejected by Cabinet.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   So there is also that part that is missing. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  No, that is fine.  So I think that the 
arrangements, therefore, is that you will refresh your 
memory on the issue of processes that may or may not 
have been followed or the process that may or may not 
have been followed in regard to the permanent appointment 
of Mr Molefe to Eskom.   
 
And what reasons there existed, if any, why no 
process was followed and saying no process in the context 
of either the guidelines or, if Mr Seleka is right, whatever 
the MOI contemplates as well.  And maybe we could then 
20 
have a supplementary affidavit which deals with that from 
you.  Maybe we could – if there is a chance that we could 
have that affidavit before the Easter weekend that would 
be appreciated.  If there are challenges then maybe you 
would in the first week – within the week of Easter Monday 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 102 of 108 
 
so that we could have a look and take it from there.  Mr 
Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, ja, shall I...? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If I have anything to add I can add to 
your list. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Okay, you want to do that? 
MS BROWN:   No, Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, he is not threatening to ask you 
questions, he is threatening to give you more homework. 
10 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Yes 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well – or you could send something to 
her lawyers. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which highlights various features. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, just two points. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think maybe I could say this, Ms 
Brown, part of what I have to look at is if some of the 
things that I have been told happened which connected or 
20 
involved the Guptas or their associates, if indeed they did 
happen, what do I make of what was happening at Eskom 
during your term, your tenure, you know?  And in this 
regard there are a number of things.  You do not have to 
note them down now but I just mention you have Mr Henk 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 103 of 108 
 
Bester ’s evidence that in 2014 he was told by Mr Salim 
Essa that Mr Molefe was going to be the next boss of 
Eskom.  He was meeting with Mr Salim Essa about 
something else at Transnet and Mr Salim Essa, according 
to Mr Henk Bester, was trying to push Mr Henk Bester to 
include his company into a certain business that they had 
got a Eskom and Mr Henk Bester was resisting this and Mr 
Essa sought to show Mr Bester that, you know, they are 
very powerful, they had already made a decision that the 
next boss of Eskom would be Mr Brian Molefe.  At that time 
10 
Mr Brian Molefe was Group CEO of Transnet and so there 
is that. 
And then Mr Matona gets appointed in October as 
Group CEO but within a few months of him he gets 
suspended, he gets out, Mr Brian Molefe happens to be the 
person who is brought in, who is seconded and then later 
he gets appointed permanently and maybe depending on 
what you will come back with in your supplementary 
affidavit, maybe he gets appointed even in breach of the 
department’s own guidelines as to how CEOs should be 
20 
appointed. 
 
Then Mr Singh follows him from Transnet, follows 
him to Eskom, maybe he too gets appointed permanently 
as CFO without the following of any competitive process 
and then if Ms Daniels’ evidence is true and if Mr Abram 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 104 of 108 
 
Masango’s evidence is true – or no, let me first say then on 
the 8 March 2015 a meeting takes place in Durban at 
which, according to Mr Tsotsi and Mr Linnell, the President 
takes part where the idea of the suspension of three 
executives of Eskom is discussed. 
And then if Mr Abram Masango’s evidence is true 
and if Ms Daniels’ is true, on the 10 March before board 
members other than Mr Tsotsi had to know that there is a 
suggestion that certain executives be suspended, then on 
that day Mr Salim Essa meets with Ms Daniels and with Mr 
10 
Koko and meets with Mr Masango and they get told in 
separate 
meetings 
that 
four 
executives 
would 
be 
suspended.  Now at the Durban meeting it was three 
executives, not four, and now there are four and then – and 
one of them is told, either Masango or Daniels, I cannot 
remember, gets told that these four would be suspended, 
they include Mr Koko but Mr Koko will come back after the 
suspension, the others will not come back, I think. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And ultimately that is what happens but 
20 
on the 11 t h the meeting takes place, you come to address 
the meeting, you have four areas that you are concerned 
with and on the evidence that has been given, you speak 
on the basis that though the executives who had those four 
areas should be suspended, but you say I cannot instruct 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 105 of 108 
 
you, the board, what to do.  And then they get suspended 
and then, of course, in due course they get paid out.  The 
board says well, we had not problems with them coming 
back but they paid out to leave.  All of these things. 
And then you have, on the evidence that has been 
given, 
if 
it 
is 
true, 
you 
have 
the 
President 
giving 
instructions 
that 
a 
board 
meeting, 
which 
was 
quite 
important, to deal with I think the corporate plan or 
whatever, gets cancelled and nobody is told what the 
reasons were, the minister responsible seems to have also 
10 
not been told about that. 
 
So you have a lot of things that happened and part 
of my job will be to try and make sense of all of this but, as 
I say, it all depends on what is found to have actually 
happened, what is true, what are the facts.  But some of 
these, if they are found to have happened, would require 
me to try and make sense exactly what was going on and, 
of course, Mr Tsotsi gets – the board says they have 
confidence in him, he says he had not cooperated with the 
Guptas and now he was being pushed out.  He resigns. 
20 
 
So I am just mentioning these things for what it is 
worth but you can obviously only say what you know. 
MS BROWN:   Chair, can I ask a question? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS BROWN:   And it is not to go against what you are 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 106 of 108 
 
saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I just have – you know, there are some 
difficulties I have with so and so and so and so saying that 
and – so, I mean, when Mr Henk Bester says so Salim Essa 
says that he will be the CEO, so he will never be a CEO for 
the rest of his life because Mr Essa says he will be a CEO.  
I just do not understand what – I deal with the issue of 
Brian Molefe and his appointment.  We will look – I think 
we will look into that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   I have not spoken to my legal people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MS BROWN:   We will look into that because that is 
something we – that is something concrete that we can 
deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That you can deal with, ja, ja. 
MS BROWN:   And I wanted to – I do not know if I am ever 
coming back here again, but I want to say just one thing, if 
you do not mind, Chair.  It has got nothing to do with 
20 
implicating anybody. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I, a couple of months ago, it was a Saturday 
morning, a lady on SA Express said that she was supposed 
to give me R10 million and I do not think you probably 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 107 of 108 
 
remember it, she [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I remember it because – okay, no, I 
just want to say I remember it because I think I saw it in 
your 
affidavit 
recently, 
in 
one 
of 
your 
affidavits 
…[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   Can I just …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I do recall that some witness had 
said something along those lines about you in regard to a 
different work stream. 
MS BROWN:   Oh.  So might that still come up?  Or can I 
10 
say it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you – well let me say first it is not 
last time that you have to give evidence because certainly 
in regard to Denel we still would like you to deal with 
Denel issues.  With regard to that particular work stream, I 
think if you would like to say something, do say it because 
it may be that there might not be another chance.  But if 
you say look, apart from what you will say now you would 
like 
to 
deal 
with 
it 
more 
comprehensively, 
let 
the 
Commission know. 
20 
MS BROWN:   Okay.  I just want to say that that is an 
absolute untruth.  It has never happened, I have never 
asked any R10 million and never ever received R10 million 
from anybody for anything including the lady in question 
and I do not think she is to blame for it, I think somebody 
22 MARCH 2021 – DAY 365 
 
Page 108 of 108 
 
else told her that he was supposed to give me R10 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   This might just stop the people from trying 
to borrow money from me, I do not have R10 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, I think she said it was Mr van 
Wyk who had said that, if I am not mistaken. 
MS BROWN:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MS BROWN:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that is alright.  We are going to 
10 
adjourn.  Thank you very much, Ms Brown, I think 
arrangements for further assistance from you have been 
made but you will come back to deal with matters relating 
to Denel.  Arrangements will be made for that but thank 
you very much for availing yourself and for availing 
yourself on a public holiday once again and thank you to 
everybody.  We will now adjourn.  I can just mention for the 
benefit of the public that tomorrow I will be hearing 
evidence relating to SARS, so that will be tomorrow, 
Wednesday and Thursday.  We adjourn. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
MS BROWN:   Thank you, Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 23 MARCH 2021 
