 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
11 DECEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 323 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 232 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
11 DECEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 3 of 232 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 11 DECEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Chaskalson, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Our witness this morning is Dr 
Weiss.  He is joining us from Germany remotely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  His statement is BB8 but before 
we admit it maybe we should swear him in and ask him to 
10 
confirm the correctness of it? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes we will continue to use Bundle 7 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  7 and 8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And 8 okay alright.  Good morning Dr 
Weiss can you hear me? 
DR WEISS:  Good morning Chairperson yes I can hear you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Please administer the 
oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
DR WEISS:  My name is Alexander Weiss. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
DR WEISS:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 4 of 232 
 
DR WEISS:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear the evidence you will give will 
be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the truth; 
if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me God. 
DR WEISS:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV VAN ZYL SC:  Chair good morning before we start it 
is Francois Van Zyl. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAN ZYL SC: I am representing Dr Weiss.  I placed 
10 
myself on record yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV VAN ZYL SC:   But perhaps I should do it again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ja please do it again. 
ADV VAN ZYL SC:  My name is Francois Van Zyl I am an 
SC Cape Bar.  I am acting for Dr Weiss with Mr Jason 
Mitchell of the Johannesburg Bar as my junior.  We are 
instructed by Nortons in Johannesburg and we act for Mr 
Weiss in his deliberations with the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr Van Zyl. 
20 
ADV VAN ZYL SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Mr Chaskalson I 
wanted to say either this lamp is not positioned the way it 
is normally positioned or the screen has been moved.  The 
– so I am trying to manage that so I can see him.  I am 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 5 of 232 
 
looking at the technical people I think they know what they 
need to do.  Is it fine like this?  Oh okay alright.  Okay 
thank you Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair.  Dr Weiss good 
morning.  Can we first confirm the correctness. 
DR WEISS:  Good morning. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
Can 
we 
first 
confirm 
the 
correctness of your statement and can I ask you to go to 
page 762 of Bundle 7 or File 7 and just confirm that that is 
the start of a statement that you have made and that the 
10 
statement runs to 781 and the signature on 781 is your 
signature? 
DR WEISS:  Wait a second because I was on my bundle.  
So which page did you say 700? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  762.  There should be black 
numbering on the top left. 
DR WEISS:  62.  This is – I am sorry I may have the wrong 
file.  I have a file Flow of Funds that is Exhibit VV8 and 
therein my statement is included. 
ADV VAN ZYL SC:  Dr Weiss if I may come in here the 
20 
page number is on the left hand top of the pages. 
DR WEISS:  Okay.  Ah okay, okay.  Now I get you.  Thank 
you.  Thank you Mr Van Zyl.  Ja this reads as my statement 
absolutely correct. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 And 
can 
you 
confirm 
the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 6 of 232 
 
correctness of the contents of that statement? 
DR WEISS:  As far as I see it here this statement is correct 
and also my signature dated 25 November is correct 
Chairperson.  By the way I cannot see you.  I only see a 
black screen I do not know whether that is a [00:05:21].   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you cannot see us? 
DR WEISS:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Okay.  Shall we – shall we adjourn 
for five minutes?   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Okay Dr Weiss apparently if 
10 
there is a delay in the commencement of the live stream 
are you happy to continue without seeing us but just 
hearing us? 
DR WEISS:  I am absolutely happy to continue without 
seeing you.  I guess it would be you know very attractive 
seeing you but… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Far from it Dr Weiss. 
DR WEISS:  I can also do with the black one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we can see you so – and we do see 
your counsel. 
20 
DR WEISS:  Excellent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When he stands up as well.  Okay alright. 
DR WEISS:  It is excellent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Chaskalson. 
DR WEISS:  Thank you. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 7 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know whether whatever the delay 
is may – we might see – he might see us while we – he is 
giving evidence or is it going to – to take too long? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I am told it – five minutes I am 
told. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay no that is alright, that is alright.  
Let us continue.  If it is going to – if it is able to come in 
as we continue let us do that.  And if there is going to be a 
need to adjourn for whatever that might need to be 
adjusted we will do that.  So Dr Weiss at least I – we are 
10 
told that after five minutes or so you should be able to see 
us.  Okay alright. 
DR WEISS:  That is excellent I am looking forward to that 
moment. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Dr Weiss before… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see Mr Chaskalson wants to retort. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No I do not want to retort at all.  
Maybe if we can get going by – could you briefly describe 
to the Chair who you are and what your role at McKinsey 
was in relation to projects in South Africa?  And I am 
20 
thinking here of what you set out. 
DR WEISS:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  In paragraphs 1 and 8 of your 
statement. 
DR WEISS:  Okay perfect I am very happy to provide this 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 8 of 232 
 
information.  So Chair my name is Alexander Weiss I am a 
senior partner with McKinsey and Company.  I am working 
here it was my 21 s t year now with McKinsey.  Some 
education I have a combined diploma of civil engineering 
and business administration and after that I first did a PHD 
in Civil Engineering and after that I did another PHD in 
Business Administration and [00:08:35] two stations I 
actually came to join McKinsey as a consultant first and 
then developed within this company.  I am actually here 
responsible mainly for southern clients and infrastructure 
10 
and electricity space and in that context had also the 
honour to get to know South Africa and also SARS, Eskom 
in various projects starting from 2005 until mid-2017 where 
we unfortunately then had to disrupts or interrupt our 
support given you know the events later. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Dr Weiss if I can just take you 
out of the – the train of your statement briefly and to ask 
you to answer a question which I also asked Dr Fine 
yesterday just to get out of the way.  Did you in any of your 
dealings relating to Eskom have any contact with Salim 
20 
Essa? 
DR WEISS:  Chair no I can confirm that I did not have 
contact to Mr Essa at least not that I am aware of.  I did 
not have contact with Mr Essa. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Dr Weiss and with that 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 9 of 232 
 
out of the way can we address the first topic that we would 
like you to speak to today which was the process of on-
boarding of Mr Anoj Singh when he moved from Transnet to 
Eskom and it is a topic that you address at pages 13 to – 
sorry paragraphs 13 to 15 of your statement.  Could you 
tell the Chair. 
DR WEISS:  Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  What happened in that regard. 
DR WEISS:  Ja absolutely.  And Chair please allow me to 
also provide some additional background information and 
10 
context information here?  So to end off here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry Dr Weiss. 
DR WEISS:  To end off here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry to interrupt Dr Weiss if at 
any stage you want to add anything beyond that which I am 
inviting you to say at this point please feel free.  This – 
this process to begin with is really getting you to put your 
statement on record and I do not want to determine what 
you do and do not say in that regard.  So do not feel 
constrained by a focus on my questions that you may 
20 
regard as too narrow. 
DR WEISS:  Thank you Chairperson I – that it is an 
absolute pleasure that you provide me this freedom.  So in 
2014 we had the situation that Eskom was in a very 
difficult situation.  There are multiple years before cost 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 10 of 232 
 
escalations they are actually way above the inflation rate 
which then resulted into electricity tariffs hiking way 
beyond inflation giving some strain to the country. 
 
And to make things worse they also had a situation 
where especially by the end of 2014 we experienced quite 
significant load sheddings. 
 
Both of these things are obviously challenges to the 
people of South Africa.  Then there was a period that you 
are referring to that where Mr Singh and Mr Molefe actually 
got announced as the new CFO and respectively CEO of 
10 
Eskom at this time.  And that was unfortunately not an 
unusual situation so in the time I would say in the decade 
before that I served you know Eskom as a consultant you 
know with interruptions I had experienced quite a number 
more than a dozen of new CEO’s and CFO’s at Eskom. 
 
And if you have that frequent leadership changes at 
such an important and proud organisation you could 
imagine that everybody who comes in has only a very, very 
short time for getting up to speed and please apologise for 
this words ja basically you know getting into the business. 
20 
 
So since we as McKinsey as an institution have 
done significant work over this time we felt it was our duty 
to you know collect the information and the experience that 
we had and presented that to the incoming leadership 
team. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 11 of 232 
 
 
We also provided that to the predecessors of Mr 
Singh and Mr Molefe.  So we had a standing if you want 
and you know it sounds [00:13:40] but we had a standing 
pack as they basically spoke about the current situation 
and also where are the challenges for our potential leavers 
prepared because the previous CEO Mr Tshediso Matona 
even came in that you know long before.  We upgraded the 
collection of information there and also put an emphasis 
that the effects that we experienced that can even became 
more severe ja so that the power outages came back that 
10 
actually in the timeframe at around 2008 experience they 
were experienced before that was really disturbing and you 
know required for some action.  And so when it was clear 
that Mr Singh and Mr Molefe move over and they were first 
seconded to Eskom we approached them you know asked 
humbly for the possibility to present this information and 
you know and then discuss with them.  This is you know 
how we got to know them and also how we provided them 
with information while they were incoming. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And can I ask who – who made 
20 
the approach to Mr Singh in particular?  Did it come from 
McKinsey or did it come from Regiments? 
DR WEISS:  The – the approach itself you know perhaps a 
little bit more context.  We had a client service team and 
Mr David Fine my colleague that testified yesterday among 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 12 of 232 
 
others were part of this client service team.  There was 
[00:15:41] Mr Vikas Sagar there was Mr Nobadua [?] who 
were part of that client service team and he has a day to 
day job with them typical in that case that this team 
actually approached Mr Singh offered our help to provide a 
perspective on how we saw the situation and also you know 
how we actually would go about it.  And this is to my 
knowledge how this meeting originated. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry to dwell on this point but 
you have mentioned Dr Fine and Mr Durr would Mr Sagar 
10 
have been part of that client services team as well? 
DR WEISS:  I thought I mentioned him as well.  If I did not 
then please take it to me being old ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That may well have been my 
mistake not yours.  If it was I apologise.  Please continue.  
Is that what – is that essentially all you would say by way 
of introduction to the topic of the role that you played in 
on-boarding Mr Singh? 
DR WEISS:  That is correct.  So that was the first on-
boarding.  I am sorry Chair. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No problem.  Then the second 
topic we asked you to address was the top engineers 
program or the turnaround program.  Can you tell the Chair 
first of all about the original top engineers program and 
then we will deal separately with the attempts to extend 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 13 of 232 
 
that program in 2015 and 16.hair first of all about the 
original top engineers program and then we will deal 
separately with the attempts to extend that program in 
2015 and 16.  Sorry can you speak to the Chairperson. 
DR WEISS:  Thank you Chair for that opportunity yes.  Yes.  
Chair the tope engineers program started indeed at around 
2013.  The intention of this top engineers program was 
really empowerment. So the – we had discussions with the 
leadership team back then and we were thinking how can 
we support the development of young black talent not only 
10 
in the form of you know giving away a share of our fees but 
beyond and on top of that doing a 
contribution of 
developing 
engineering 
talent 
within 
Eskom 
to 
gain 
capabilities that we as management consultants had. 
 
So there was a selection process and you know kind 
of the leadership team of Eskom back at that time really 
appreciated this idea.  I personally must say I also truly 
bought into this idea still.   
 
We had then selected these engineers and you 
know for the program it was a very professional selection 
20 
process.  I think in the first year we advertised across 
Eskom for talent to apply.  We got if I am not mistaken 
something you know 400 to 600 applications then ran a 
full-fledged McKinsey interview process on them and we 
find new talented people.  So we took the first cohort we 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 14 of 232 
 
call them into the – into the program and then they ran 
alongside us as additional resources at McKinsey projects. 
 
This had benefit for everybody.  It said – it has – 
had benefits for Eskom because we had to offer only 
smaller teams because you know Eskom then you know 
filled additional resources by these top engineers.  
 
It had a super, super kind of impact – a very 
positive impact on these top engineers get them later on 
some stage at Eskom some went outside and got really 
good positions.  And it also you know had an advantage for 
10 
McKinsey because you know we were not only able to 
provide textual advice by via these top engineers that you 
know had natural relationships within Eskom they also 
made implementation happen and much better happen than 
we could have done this on ourselves. 
 
So we trained the first cohort.  This has proven 
successful.  Then we trained a second cohort and we hired 
and trained the second cohort.  Again the same thing you 
know we did then you know a festive function where we 
basically graduated them and you know this was – this was 
20 
like deeply, deeply they got access to McKinsey IP, they 
were trained at McKinsey training events. They had access 
to our knowledge data base so it was a real cooperation 
and real talent building beyond this black economic 
empowerment contribution that we had. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 15 of 232 
 
 
Then 
at 
around 
end 
of 
2014 
when 
we 
were 
discussing about the third cohort the discussion came up 
and here funding for such a program given the dire 
financial situation and also the dire performance situation 
that I just was talking about did not allow Eskom to fund 
for this so in the discussion with Eskom we came about to 
be kind of you know have find another funding mechanism 
and we offered to go for a procurement program to actually 
realise procurement savings and then from that share of 
procurement savings we would pay the costs for the 
10 
programme 
and 
you 
know 
in 
parallel 
also 
had 
the 
opportunity to train the third cohort on this program. 
 
So that was the origination of the top engineers 
program and if I look at this from today I can also see with 
quite some pride how the – some of the participants in the 
sub-engineers program are now you know now really made 
a career inside and outside Eskom. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And Dr Weiss can you – I 
understand that in the course of 2015 there were formal 
negotiations 
between 
Eskom 
and 
McKinsey 
about 
an 
20 
appointment for a new top engineer ’s contract between 
McKinsey and Eskom.  Can you tell the Chair about those 
negotiations 
and 
when 
they 
started 
and 
how 
they 
progressed? 
DR WEISS:  Chair you are correct.  So where I just 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 16 of 232 
 
stopped you know on this offering on the third cohort that 
was – it only included procurement ja.  It was never sight 
nor exercised at this point in time.  Because you know then 
there was this leadership [00:23:33] as you know we heard 
also a few days ago with some executives leaving, a new 
CEO coming in, a new CFO coming in so basically that was 
on hold. 
 
Now the on boarded the new CFO and COO with our 
abilities the information that we had you know that we 
provided to them and it became clear that there was a 
10 
turnaround required in – in a number of dimensions.  And 
this basically was the result of the on boarding activities 
that we had with Mr Singh and Mr Molefe. 
 
So and that was at around May/June 2015 when 
that transpired.  At the same time there was still our 
proposal on the table to do a program that just entailed 
procurement that we have done way before this new 
management team in and the request came up can’t we 
leverage this top engineers program but expand the scope 
from only procurement to additional work streams such as 
20 
power generation, such as primary energy, such as clay 
management, such as financials and so on and so on. 
 
And you know then a negotiator or a – so you know 
boss approval was obtained to start such a negotiation on 
such a program and bought to my knowledge gave approval 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 17 of 232 
 
under the condition that this program does not cost Eskom 
a single penny.  Because remember Eskom was still in this 
dire financial situation. 
 
And I also have to admit why we were happy to 
expand scope we were also frightened to death about parts 
of the scope ja.  And you know especially the generation 
part.   
 
Remember you kind of the intention was to increase 
the energy availability that is a measure for you know how 
often can you operate a power station and you actually 
10 
want to operate it?  And this was over the past five years 
on a sliding scope with Eskom.  That means that the 
energy availability factor basically the availability of the 
power station feed declined the past five years you know 
from I do not know 75 to 68% or something like that due to 
maintenance challenges and you know all the context that 
you are also well aware of. 
 
And now you know we were asked to expand the 
scope into parts of the program where we knew we had a 
deteriorating performance.  It was not so easy to stop you 
20 
know this availability thing so hence we entered this 
negotiation and had really long negotiations with Eskom. 
 
The negotiations lasted from July 2015 to at and 
around November 2015 and – so this was a process Chair 
that I do not know the exact number of days but you know 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 18 of 232 
 
plus minus we have negotiated thirty day 30 days and this 
was not like you know half an hour here, half an hour there 
this was full day negotiation on these matters in order to 
come to a scope and an approach that could actually 
deliver against the aspirations that were formulated. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And as I understand those 
negotiations commenced around July 2015, is that correct? 
DR WEISS:  They started at July 2015 and ended at around 
November 2015 that is correct. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
But 
the 
signed 
letter 
of 
10 
instruction that gave McKinsey comfort in relation to this 
appointment was only furnished or at any rate it is dated 
17 December 2015.  Is that correct? 
DR WEISS:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So in November 2015 even if the 
negotiations had been completed you did not sit with the 
signed document in your hands confirming that you had the 
appointment? 
DR WEISS:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Was there any talk within 
20 
McKinsey about going to Eskom leadership or to setting up 
a meeting with Eskom leadership to push through the 
signed appointment letter that McKinsey was looking for at 
that stage? 
DR WEISS:  Chair we – I am not pushing anybody or you 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 19 of 232 
 
know trying to put pressure on anybody.  The reason for 
the delay or [00:29:10] was a technical reason.  And this 
technical reason that later on also was cited in the media 
and in various investigation was whether there was a 
question whether this impact based contract is actually 
allowable under the National Treasury guideline.  Back 
then National Treasury I do not know whether it is still the 
case published instructions on how to – how to contract 
consultant work.  And the measure that was there was an 
hourly fee.  Now this would have contradicted the board 
10 
decision that this is not allowed to cost ...[indistinct] 
[00:00:01] to Eskom, ja.  But it must be paid out of the fees.  
So hence, there was a discussion and there was also legal 
engagements in between, both on McKinsey’s side and on 
the Eskom’s side.   
 
What - you know, whether it is permissible to have this 
type of contractual arrangement actually making work.  And 
then later on, you know, as you follow and you said it 
correctly Mr Chairperson.   
 
Yesterday, is that an Eskom was producing this letter, 
20 
saying that it is going to after approval from National 
Treasury and actually went out after approval to National 
Treasury 
and 
then 
informed 
us 
in 
the 
first 
Steering 
Committee that they actually have obtained it, approval from 
National Treasury. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 20 of 232 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   When you got your letter of 
instruction in December 2015, did you understand, at that 
point, that the issue of National Treasury approval was still 
pending?  That Eskom was still seeking National Treasury 
approval or that they had already been given National 
Treasury approval? 
DR WEISS:   You are exactly correct Chairperson.  We were 
under the impression that we would still – that they are still 
underway, obtaining National Treasury approval.  And you 
know, if we go to this – if we go to this Letter of Acceptance.  
10 
It is somehow here in the annexure.  It is Annexure AW-6 
Bundle, page 898.  Let me pull that up.  It also specified – 
also specifies exactly – it is specified that same way.   
 
Ja.  It is a condition of the – second paragraph.  It is a 
condition of the acceptance that in Eskom considered 
opinion of the National Treasury’s instruction were all 
through the life of the contract.   
 
In an unlikely eventuality that the said opinion is 
conclusively altered, parties should agree to review the 
contract 
payment 
basis 
to 
an 
electoral(?) 
revised(?) 
20 
[00:02:40] opinion.   
 
So that then we knew that they still had to be 
approached because it was over the years, that they still had 
to approach National Treasury.   
 
It was our understanding that in case National Treasury 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 21 of 232 
 
confirmation would not be obtained, then there would be a 
different form of contract again with the – under which then 
the works could continue. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then you start at work in 
January on essentially this basis that with Treasury approval 
the ...[intervenes]  
DR WEISS:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I just ...[intervenes]  
DR WEISS:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you talk briefly about the 
10 
work that you did and the impact that that work had? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Dr Weiss and Mr Chaskalson 
...[intervenes]  
DR WEISS:   Absolutely Chair.  I can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, mister...  Dr Weiss.  I think the two 
of you knew what Mr Chaskalson’s question was but he did 
not finish it and Dr Weiss responded.  [laughs]  You were 
asking Mr Chaskalson whether – when they started the work 
at the beginning of the year, they started it on a certain 
basis but you did not finish saying what the basis was. 
20 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Yes. 
 
Dr 
Weiss, 
I 
did 
...[intervenes]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I am sorry ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The two of you forgot about me.  [laughs]   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 22 of 232 
 
DR WEISS:   [laughs]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   [laughs]  Sorry Chair.  I was 
asking Dr Weiss when they started in January, it was still on 
the basis the Treasury approval was pending and hopefully 
Treasury approval would be obtained, in which case, the risk 
based arrangement would be implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But if Treasury approval was not 
obtained, then the fee structure would have to be revisited 
within the parameters ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...of what Treasury allowed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  That is what you were confirming 
Dr Weiss.  Is that correct? 
DR WEISS:   Yes, that was exactly what I was confirming.  
And this is also how I stand – understand Annexure AW-6, 
the Letter of Acceptance.  That was my full understanding 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, that is fine.  I have also 
looked at that letter at page 898.  So.  Okay you may 
20 
continue Mr Chaskalson. 
DR WEISS:   Exactly. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Dr Weiss, can you tell the Chair a 
little about the nature of the work that you did and what 
impacts you were able to achieve within the time that the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 23 of 232 
 
project ran? 
DR WEISS:   Absolutely.  Chair, we ran through this entire 
period..  You know, and it was not only me.  Ja.  I would like 
to give credit also for the wonderful staff here at Eskom.  
They really have qualified guys there.  The top engineers.   
 
But also the team that was not on the fleet and it were 
really guys and...  But one thing that I also wanted to say.  
Remember, this was all a hundred percent at risk.   
 
So we sent our entire team there not knowing whether 
we are getting paid in the end and whether we are able to 
10 
achieve the impact.   
 
We had a number of work streams.  One was actually in 
power generation.  We were given as a project basis, 
basically, the Majuba Power Station, where we very well 
cooperated with the Majuba Power Station Team back in 
these days.  And you know, the loss was remarkable. 
 
You know, I think we got – we took the power station at a 
viability of 63% in the beginning of 2016.  When we left the 
power station we had the viability of 84%.   
 
And you know just to – this is basically – the fixed unit 
20 
power station, it is basically as you are adding an additional 
unit, right?  And you need this increased viability to prevent 
load shedding.   
 
And so, I am also personally very sad that we could not 
continue the work and supported Eskom in significantly 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 24 of 232 
 
increasing the viability factor for the entire fleet thereafter 
again.  The measures are still there, you know, but we were 
interrupted there.  So that was one thing.   
 
Then the second work stream was the coal work stream.  
On the coal work stream, we had historic costs escalations 
up until 2016 at 16% per year.   
 
You know, for that year that we were there and worked 
with the primary Energy Team, we managed to get the costs 
escalation down to 3.5% only.  Ja, from 16% to 3.5% only.   
 
And this is – you know, we – you know, also new 
10 
contracts that we were striking then..  You know that Eskom 
was striking then.  We reduced the new price on, you know, 
from between 5% and 15%.  And at the cost, plus mines by 
the end of the year, we managed to get one million additional 
tons of coal out of there.   
 
And we worked on claims.  I think we reduced the claim 
volume that was at ...[indistinct] [00:08:34] back then, you 
know, by around 15 – 20 billion.  And on procurement, we 
identified during the time that we were there, around 3 billion 
savings out of which when we left the programme.   
20 
 
So when our contract was cancelled by mid-year, already 
R 1 billion was realised.  So, besides that, we trained the 
next coal ...[indistinct] [00:09:05] and the top engineers has 
been provided PFO services.   
 
And please ensure me.  I know this is work ...[indistinct] 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 25 of 232 
 
[00:09:14] in this process but the team and the people on 
ground did real work.  Everybody.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Dr Weiss, certainly from my side.  
I wholeheartedly accept that.  I cannot see many evidence to 
suggest that you did not do real work on the ground.  Can...  
and 
those 
results 
that 
you 
have 
cited, 
speaks 
for 
themselves.   
 
Can 
I 
take 
you 
to 
the 
next 
topic 
which 
is 
the 
engagements between McKinsey – or that McKinsey had with 
Regiments and Trillian.  It is a topic that you address from 
10 
paragraph 37 of your statement.  Can you ...[intervenes]  
DR WEISS:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you tell the Chair about that? 
DR WEISS:   Absolutely, I can do that.  Wait a second.  I am 
just trying to get the statement.  Ja.  So on – let us see that.  
So as I alluded to before.  We had – you know, we were in 
the process of on boarding Mr Singh and Mr Molefe.   
 
And in this context, you know, we came with the 
business leaders but it was also clear that there was a 
financial restructuring required at Eskom.  And from the work 
20 
that my colleagues, the Client Service Team at Transnet did.  
So Mr ...[indistinct] [00:11:01], Mr David Fines and all that – 
and others, right.   
 
I knew that – they knew that Regiments actually was 
quite capable internationally.  That ...[indistinct] [00:11:15] 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 26 of 232 
 
during the ranked up work...  So when we ranked up 
Mr Singh and Mr Molefe for this new job and we provided 
them with the Intel that we collected before.   
 
We worked together.  All of that pro-bono, by the way.  
We worked together with Regiments.  They also worked pro-
bono.  And they were the financial model of the business 
leaders that we identified, that had to change.  This is how I 
got involved with Regiments.  So they basically – effectively, 
we came over with the team that was Southern Transnet and 
now I was serving here of the Eskom.   
10 
 
So in this context, they knew the financial – so they 
knew the initiatives that we thought were required to 
turnaround Eskom.  And they also knew the financial 
evaluations behind that.   
 
And then – you know, from my perspective and also the 
impression that I had from them, you know, from a content 
perspective, I found that you know they did good work, ja.  
And 
you 
know, 
...[indistinct] 
[00:12:36] 
as 
a 
Supply 
Development partner.  I think the ...[indistinct] [00:12:38] 
programme. 
20 
 
Remember, then I was in parallel, negotiating on behalf 
of McKinsey with legal counsel, with foreigners, with foreign) 
communication and so on and so on.  This contract end...   
 
And Chair, I have to confirm that we intended Regiments 
to be our SDNL partner based on their capabilities back in 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 27 of 232 
 
that time.  Then, you know, a little bit later the...  Oh, sorry.  
One more thing.   
 
You know, I also – at this point in time, did not have any 
doubt because, you know, they were our longstanding – they 
were 
our longstanding 
Supply 
Development 
partner 
at 
Transnet.   
 
And Mr David Fine yesterday lined out that we also 
reviewed – we did the reviewing.  He was talking about this - 
they basically ...[indistinct] [00:13:40] due diligence on 
Regiments.   
10 
 
So for me, all of this were facts where I said, you know, I 
need a Supply Development partner on this contract here.  
They are content-wise capable on the financial side.  They 
are partner colleagues of me, mine.   
 
We have worked with them before and even done the 
due diligence on them before and this, you know, how – or 
we considered them also as potential Supply Development 
partner for the Eskom Turnaround Programme or Top 
Engineers Programme.  Now ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I just ...[intervenes]  
20 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear.] 
DR WEISS:   [Indistinct] [00:14:18] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Dr Weiss.  Can I interrupt 
at this point? 
DR WEISS:   Ja. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 28 of 232 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Am I correct in understanding that 
the first work that you did with Regiments at Eskom was not 
on the Top Engineers or Turnaround Programme.  It was 
actually on the, I think, the Corporate Plan or Business Plan 
as it is sometimes called.  Is that correct? 
DR WEISS:   Chair, you are correct.  And that started at 
around September 2015, where we also intended to have 
them there as our Supply Development partner.  I would 
have gotten there in a second but we will – it is fine.  
Because what happened then.   
10 
 
We were informed by Regiments in the form of Dr Wood 
that he is going to or he intends to buy out the management 
consulting activities of Regiments and put them into the – 
into a separate entity into – that he called Trillian.   
 
And also that made in terms of the way how it was 
explained to us and also confirmed by colleagues as 
Regiments had like – I mean, we also heard from earlier 
evidence, several activities.   
 
There was financial wing.  There was like a real estate 
wing and there was also management consulting wing.  And 
20 
he felt that the management consulting wing then did not get 
appropriate attention.  So they wanted to have like one 
management consulting company.  At least this is what, you 
know, was explained to me at that time.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And when did the work on the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 29 of 232 
 
corporate plan finish? 
DR WEISS:   The work on the Corporate Plan finished as 
planned in March.  I think we - that was in March 2016 to be 
precise but I think there were some, you know, additional 
work where we then kept a team I think for three, four weeks 
on top of this without payment. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And am I correct that the Supply 
Development work that was done on that Corporate Plan was 
work that was done by Regiments, not Trillian? 
DR WEISS:   Chair, I would love to give you a razor sharp 
10 
answer onto this question.  I am afraid I cannot.  The – I can 
just tell you what I experienced back in that time.  Back in 
that time, it was very opaque.  You know, it was planned that 
Regiments Management Consulting talent would go from 
Regiments to Trillian.   
 
We also saw the list of people that went over because 
we also supported them later on with training and hiring of 
people.   
 
I received during this time period until we terminated the 
conversation between Regiments and Trillian, multiple emails 
20 
at times from Regiments’ email addresses, at times from 
Trillian’s email addresses and who was what and where.  It 
was almost impossible to determine at that time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Dr Weiss, can you then talk about 
the process that led to McKinsey terminating its relationship 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 30 of 232 
 
with Trillian? 
DR WEISS:   I can very well do that.  And it may come 
across that I am a little bit naïve here but I am, you know, I 
am a German national that you know that did fly in and fly 
out to South Africa, you know, during that time.   
 
And I – you know in my capacity, you know, I...  Ja, I 
hear things and I understand things and also what was kind 
of going on in South Africa.  Yet my focus for assigning our 
contract with both Eskom and the ...[indistinct] [00:19:11] 
was to make sure that the Black Economic Empowerment 
10 
partner is really black owned.   
 
For that – and you know this is – I am a German.  For 
that I needed a piece of paper where there is written this is 
the owner of the entity so that I can prove you know yes this 
majority black ownership and I need a BEE certificate.   
 
And for being a German, I asked for this in a very 
painful highly frequent way.  So this started at the very 
beginning because you know we – and you know, then we 
intended to have them as our Supply Development partner. 
 
In order to get to this partnership, I needed a BEE 
20 
certificate and I needed the sheet(?) [00:20:04] of ownership 
to make sure that I understand that they are really majority 
black owned because that was the whole idea of Supply 
Development.   
 
So I asked this question.  I first asked this orally over 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 31 of 232 
 
the course of October, November, December  And we had the 
sub-contracting 
agreement 
already 
worked 
out 
and 
negotiated, ja.  I did not sign the sub-contracting agreement 
because I did not have any evidence about the ownership 
and their BEE status.   
 
Now time comes and we are having, you know, we are 
starting to work based on the Letter of Acceptance that we 
discussed before.   
 
And then, you know, and normally, like you first start, 
just to you know the oral conversation to ask.  And then I 
10 
started to interrogate that letter in writing, ja.  It was emails.  
That is also in the evidence and then later on then letters 
when we really kind of in a very precise way asked for the 
ownership 
information. 
 
That 
information 
was 
not 
forthcoming.   
 
In parallel, as Dr Fine yesterday talked about, they were 
also looking into Regiments.  Then there were news coming 
up about potential improper, you know, activity of Regiments 
and Trillian.  And you know, a risk assessment was done.  
We also did risk assessment you know on Trillian.   
20 
 
We had several service providers trying to find out who 
are the owners of this entity and then in this telephone 
conference with the Audit and Risk Committee at – on the 
14t h of March 2016, it was an evening call.... 
 
We from the CST as well...  You know, as the committee 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 32 of 232 
 
members, we were all aligned that we cannot go on because 
our potential partner is not forthcoming with the situation.  
This then led to a series of letters where we wanted to be 
crystal clear that, you know, this cannot be our partner.   
 
Although indeed we had worked alongside with them in 
the anticipation that they are just in this process and may 
work out something.   
 
So we first, with the letter of 15t h of March, you know, 
forwarded this termination information to Trillian.  And then 
with the letter of the 30 t h of March 2016, I sent a letter that 
10 
you know representatives’ termination citing exactly that 
reason to Eskom.  And I know that because I co-signed that 
letter and this is where it ended. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Dr Weiss, you focussed on the 
BEE issue in relation to the termination and I accept that it 
was a very important issue along with the issue relating to 
ownership but it seems to me that there were other issues as 
well.  And can I take you to a series of letters that were 
written by McKinsey and in some places you? 
DR WEISS:   Yes.  Yes. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is starting with AW-11 at 927 
because I would like you to explain to the Chair what those 
issues were because they seem to be quite important.  Page 
927.   
DR WEISS:   Jip, I am going there.  Ja, this is the Doha 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 33 of 232 
 
boiler issue.  And this was something again, you know, super 
unacceptable to us.  You know, while running the boiler work 
stream Chair, there was procurement.  So there was a boiler 
work stream.   
 
We procured negotiation on a contract in order or 
achieve procurement savings and we found out or at least 
we got an indication that Trillian is both involved in Supply 
Development for – the supplier in question of – one potential 
supplier in question for the Duvha boiler as well as starting 
the procurement work stream.  In our standards, that is not 
10 
acceptable. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Dr Weiss.  If I can just 
come in, to clarify what you are saying?  So they are 
assisting you or they were planning to assist you to oversee 
that procurement in the interest of Eskom.   
 
At the same, as they were in a relationship with the 
Supply Development partner of one of the bidders in that 
relationship.  Is that a fair assessment of what you are 
describing? 
DR WEISS:   Yes, that is a fair assessment.  I am not saying 
20 
that they intended to negotiate that but they were close 
enough because remember Trillian worked with us at the 
procurement work stream and so – at least my affects do not 
allow, you know, to be on both sides of the negotiations.   
 
I decided to be either on the side or I am going to be the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 34 of 232 
 
other side of the negotiation.  And hence, we waived that 
instance with Eskom and with Trillian. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can I identify this sub-
contractor that was the, potentially the problematic sub-
contractor in relation to the procurement?  Was that E 
Gateway Global Consultants FZC or FCD, E Gateway? 
DR WEISS:   Ja.  E Gateway were – was sub-contracted by 
Trillian, as I understand it, for supporting on the procurement 
work stream and they cut down the work, whether – you 
know on the procurement work stream, right.   
10 
 
Whether they then also were involved in that specific 
negotiation, to me it does not matter.   
 
Alone the fact that I am supporting a procurement work 
stream while I am at the same time supporting a supplier, 
that does not help too much from my perspective and that 
is...  It means it goes against our ethics and hence we 
reported it immediately.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And did you ever establish who E 
Gateway were or who the controlling party or who held the 
controlling interest in E Gateway? 
20 
DR WEISS:   I did – I do not have this knowledge.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We will deal with that separately 
in the Commission then.  Can I ask you also then to go to 
932, AW-14? 
DR WEISS:   Ja.  Ja, I am there. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 35 of 232 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Is this the letter that you were 
referring to where you placed on record your concerns about 
this conflict with Eskom? 
DR WEISS:   That is certainly the letter with which we 
explained our concerns with Eskom.  Again, you know, we do 
not know whether there was improper dealings, right.  You 
know, perhaps both of these teams had agreement on the 
Chinese Wall and you know two separate servers and we 
are...  ja.  We may as well be.  But the fact that they did not 
talk to us about it, that raised our concerns and so we felt it 
10 
is our obligation to raise the issue to them to be clarified. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And they never came back to with 
any clarification in this regard? 
DR WEISS:   In this regard, I do not recall clarification. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you know if ...[indistinct], 
who were the primary contractor on involved in that Duvha 
procurement issue, if they did work for Eskom – continue to 
do work with E Gateway for Eskom? 
DR WEISS:   I have no information around this.  I am afraid, 
you know, Eskom needs to be asked who then in the end was 
20 
selected for the Duvha boiler replacement.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then you talk...  Well, let me take 
you to a statement of Mr Sneader who was I think the CEO 
of McKinsey or held the most senior position of McKinsey, 
is at page 40 of this bundle, it is an annexure to Mr 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 36 of 232 
 
Mieszala’s statement.  Do you have a complete file number 
7? 
DR WEISS:   I have… 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is bundle 8, hey?  Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Bundle 7, bundle 7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, bundle 7 and what is the page? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   40. 
DR WEISS:   Four zero? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes or 41.  41 in fact is the 
passage that I am interested in. 
10 
DR WEISS:   No, unfortunately I have  - sorry, I have – I 
am not so sure whether I have that.  Let me go onto the 
other one that I have, four zero… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Dr Weiss, it is not necessary, it 
is literally a sentence that I want to refer you to and I can 
read it out to you. 
DR WEISS:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So it is from the speech that Mr 
Sneader(?) made at Gordon Institute of Business Science, 
I think it was in 2018 and he is talking about mistakes that 
20 
McKinsey has acknowledged and he says in that regard: 
“As we wound down…” 
And Chair, I am reading the second paragraph on page 41. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 37 of 232 
 
“…as we wound down at Eskom in mid 2016 our 
client team continued to interact with Trillian at 
Eskom even after they had failed our due diligence 
and no contract existed between McKinsey and 
Trillian.  They should not have.” 
So what I want to ask you is why did McKinsey continue to 
interact with Trillian after Trillian had failed is due 
diligence and after Trillian had sent this March letter. 
DR WEISS:   Yes.  No, we had sent this March letter, so I 
am absolute happy to speak to this.  So first of all, it is a 
10 
very fair question, I think in hindsight I am asking me as 
well, and what meaning - you know, what does cooperation 
mean, right, you know?  And that is the work package, the 
work package, so I think, [indistinct] 02.52 Gateway and the 
procurement consultants of Trillian had a very separate 
work package.  We – you know, they did on data cleanup, 
we worked on category work.  Ja?   
You know, to continue working on category work, as 
we did after this letter, did not require any interaction with 
the Trillian folks on the ground.  In the event of the Medupi 
20 
Power Station they had several engineers.  We indeed 
continued our work of the McKinsey work even though the 
contract was cancelled until August 2016 and they were 
there and then over time disappeared.  Ja?  We did not 
actively reengage with them to teamwork there but making 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 38 of 232 
 
with the benefit of hindsight, I agree, Chair, that was a 
mistake. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Was there any discussion about 
this at the time after the due diligence had failed and after 
the letter had been sent terminating the relationship?  Was 
there a discussion of how you were to proceed at Eskom? 
DR WEISS:   Ja and, you know, we are forced by the 
steering committee who had the discussion.  Remember 
there was - you know, we sent this letter to both parties 
meaning Trillian, you know, on the 15 March 2016 and 
10 
Eskom on the 30 March 2016.  So it was super clear these 
are not going to be our supply development partners.   
We had to make Steercom, a steering committee 
and the steering committee where the members are asking 
[indistinct] 04.52, it is all minuted so, you know, it is all on 
record, were asking in terms of the [indistinct] 04.57 how 
do you now fulfil your supply development partner, you 
know, obligation and are you continuing to work with 
Trillian?   
On that steering committee, I made the presentation 
20 
and said no, Chair, we cannot continue, we are going for 
an alternative, you know, SD & L contract, that then I also 
presented.  And why I said no, we are not going to work 
with Trillian going forward, it cannot be our supply 
development partner and I have a completely different 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 39 of 232 
 
concept that does not include Trillian for SD & L.   Trillian 
representatives were in the room. 
So Eskom was clear, Trillian was clear, we were 
clear, we have declared this.  After this Eskom decided 
obviously that they still wanted to have Trillian around and 
continued to work with them because it is not so easy to 
get into a power station side, there are access cards that 
you need in order to  get in and so on and so on, right?  So 
this was not revoked, we worked further there and, you 
know, we meanwhile then, you know, we were busy on 
10 
trying to fill our new SD & L concept [indistinct]06.23. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I take you to two documents 
in relation to that new SD & L concept that you prepared 
and these are in file 8.  In fact, Chair, it is file 8B.  The 
first one is at 1185. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, bundle 8B, the page is 185? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   1185, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1185. We are at quarter past eleven, Mr 
Chaskalson.  One thing, we could take a tea break now but 
if you are close to finish we could take the break after you 
20 
are done. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, I am close to finishing.  I 
know also that Mr van Zyl has a commitment that he needs 
to get to at twelve. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 40 of 232 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But I do not propose to be much 
longer, would it possible to simply proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, let us continue.  Okay. 
DR WEISS:   I am afraid I cannot find the document that 
you are referring to at any of my files here.  So my file 
goes to …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ZYL:   If I may come in here to assist my client? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ZYL:   It is in the McKinsey reference bundle, it is 
VV9. 
10 
DR WEISS:   Okay.  VV9, I have that. 
MR VAN ZYL:   1185 in that, on the left top of the page is 
the numbering. 
DR WEISS:   Appendix to negotiation of key financial 
parameters, is it that?  No?  1125, SD & L proposal. 
MR VAN ZYL:   1185. 
DR WEISS:   1185? 
MR VAN ZYL:   Yes, top left corner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it is writing [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
20 
DR WEISS:   Sorry, I am scrolling. 
CHAIRPERSON:   08/1185 but we just say 1185, we do not 
call FOF08. 
DR WEISS:   Ja, okay, okay, I have that, ja. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
And 
do 
you 
recognise 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 41 of 232 
 
…[intervenes] 
DR WEISS:   Ja, I have that, it is an email, right? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, that is correct and it is an 
email you address to Prish Govender at Eskom on 4 May 
2016. 
DR WEISS:   Ja.  Ja, accept, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Do you recall – if you read that 
email, do you remember sending it to Prish Govender? 
DR WEISS:   No, I do not know the day, but, you know, it 
seems to be correct that I sent that to Mr Prish Govender, 
10 
yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And, as I understand it, this was 
your attempt to – I mean, at this stage there were two 
separate processes going on.  The one is that you had – 
you wanted to give expression to this new SDL idea that 
you had come up with to be incorporated in the contract. 
DR WEISS:   Correct, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the other, of course, was 
the contract …[intervenes] 
DR WEISS:   Correct, ja. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The contract had not yet been 
signed and until you could reach agreement on this new 
SDL annexure it would not be possible to sign the contract 
because this was a necessary part of the contract.  Is that 
correct too? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 42 of 232 
 
DR WEISS:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I take you to – and this is a 
draft you are presenting to Eskom as a proposal for 
inclusion as appendix 4 of the contract. 
DR WEISS:   Correct so. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you go down to 1189 and 
there you set out context for the need for a new model and 
you write: 
“BBBEE 
partnership 
model 
and 
implementation 
plan.  McKinsey executed on its BBBEE obligations 
10 
from the start of work in January 2016.  During the 
first quarter a number of particularities occurred 
that caused both Eskom and McKinsey…” 
Sorry, 
unfortunately 
is 
overwritten 
there, 
but 
to 
do 
something. 
“…in 
relation 
to 
implementation 
of 
BBBEE 
partnership model.” 
Let me read from a hard copy. 
“Eskom 
raised 
questions 
with 
respect 
to 
the 
partner…” 
20 
And it had said “allocated to” and now you have you 
changed that to: 
“…indentified for the programme as per written 
communication of February 19, 2016.  McKinsey 
was able to reply to Eskom’s request as per written 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 43 of 232 
 
communication of February 24, 2016.  McKinsey 
was not able to receive from the identified partner 
information 
about 
its 
ownership 
structure, 
its 
shareholding nor the composition of its leadership 
team.  Consequently, McKinsey was not able to 
prove to Eskom the validity of the BBBEE partner 
and 
thus 
informed 
Eskom 
as 
per 
written 
communication on March 30, 2016, that its risk 
committee did not allow McKinsey to cooperate with 
this partner in the context of the above cited BBBEE 
10 
partnership.” 
And then you go on to the new model: 
“After consultation between Eskom McKinsey both 
parties agreed to maintain the envisaged BBBEE 
partnership 
aspiration 
but 
applies 
somewhat 
modified implementation strategy.  Both parts have 
aligned on the following implementation strategy.” 
And then you set it out and if I understand it correctly, it is 
that McKinsey is not going to have its own formal supply 
development partner but it is going to allocate a fixed 
20 
portion of its fees to a fund which Eskom will then disburse 
to a range of different BBBEE companies who will be 
engaged on the project.  Is that a fair summary of what the 
model was. 
DR WEISS:   Chair, that was a fair summary of what that 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 44 of 232 
 
document says. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So in this draft you set out the 
context which, to put it crudely, is that Trillian failed your 
due diligence, you have come up with a new model which is 
your fund supply development and Eskom will disburse 
from that fund to a range of BEE companies who will be 
brought into work alongside McKinsey. 
 
Can I take you then to page 1192 which is another 
email you sent to Prish Govender but this time it is about – 
it is just over ten days later, it is twelve days later on the 
10 
16 May, 1192. 
DR WEISS:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   “Dear Prish, dear Edwin..”  
It is also sent to Edwin Mabulane: 
“Hope this email finds you well.  As discussed last 
Friday we have adapted both the ST & L memo and 
the related board submission document.” 
So you have now revised them again. 
DR WEISS:   H’m. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can I take you to material 
20 
revision which is at 1196. 
DR WEISS:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And there you say: 
“McKinsey executed on its BBBEE model from the 
start of work in January 2016.  During the first 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 45 of 232 
 
months of the execution phase, practical insights 
were 
gathered 
and 
discussed 
with 
Eskom’s 
management 
team. 
 
Upon 
these 
insights 
and 
discussions a range of modification to the execution 
of the BBBEE partnership are suggested.  While 
these changes will fully maintain the aspiration of 
the BBBEE partnership model, SDL contribution, 
they will ease the practical implementation and 
leave Eskom with significant flexibility to achieve its 
own SD & L targets.  The following modification are 
10 
suggested.” 
DR WEISS:   H’m. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then you broadly repeat 
what followed the original draft.  That is to be read also 
with your memorandum to the board at page 1200 or your 
draft memorandum to be submitted to the board which 
essentially repeats the extract that I have just read.  If you 
go to 1200, 3.1.4 you say: 
“McKinsey intends to select small black owned 
consultancies 
wherever 
possible 
for 
the 
20 
subcontracting, the BBBEE credentials and the 
subcontractors …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is 1200? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   1200.  1200, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, only 1200.  Okay. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 46 of 232 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   1200. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And 3 point? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, 3.1.6 is where it is 
repeated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  
“McKinsey executed on its BBBEE obligation from 
the start of work in January 2016.  Early in the 
execution phase practical insights were gathered 
and discussed with Eskom’s management team.  For 
10 
instance, the ramp-up of the envisaged BBBEE 
partners were much longer than anticipated.  The 
key insight was that a multi-partner approach may 
potentially better fit the complex requirements of 
the programme.  These insights and discussions led 
to the suggestion of a range of modifications with 
regard to the execution of the BBBEE partnership 
model.  These changes will fully maintain the 
aspirations to the original BBBEE partnership model 
as the old contribution was significant easing the 
20 
practical 
implementation. 
 
Critically 
these 
modifications will enable Eskom to have far great 
flexibility to achieve its own SDL targets.” 
When I read these documents, what I see is that in your 
first draft you say fairly frankly, Trillian failed our due 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 47 of 232 
 
diligence  - you do not mention them by name – so we need 
to come up with a different model, here is our model. 
  
But in the second and third  - the second draft 
together with the board memo that goes with it, you do not 
– you back off from that, do not mention it at all and 
instead talk about practical insights and a multi-partner 
approach and problems with ramping up.  Why? 
DR WEISS:   Let me first of all say, Chair, we have not 
been able to be more brutal and crisp and say we are not 
working with Trillian as a supply development partner and 
10 
we did not do that in 2017 or 2018, we did that in March 
2016 and we did not do in, you know, just like a side 
conversation or something like that, we did it in writing to 
every party.  Eskom was clear, Eskom knew why we have 
terminated any talks of Trillian.  Trillian knew why, you 
know, we have terminated these – there any talks about 
them being a potential supply development partner.   
 
Why the facts that, you know, that we had in the 
beginning did not trickle down to what eventually was 
presented to the board, I cannot tell.  And, by the way, I 
20 
am also not sure whether, you know, these documents, you 
know, are the final version where we gave input to or 
whether the input letter was kind of modified.   
 
I think yes, it lacks a level of detail, I am 
completely clear with what you are saying or I heard what 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 48 of 232 
 
you are saying.  Yet, the decision has not been softened or 
anything, none of that happened. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I do accept that, Dr Weiss, but, I 
mean we can give you the original files.  What you will see 
on the original files is that these sections that I am reading 
to you, these which are fact change sections were inserted 
by you yourself, they have A Weiss or AW, I forget which, 
they are identifiable as having been inserted by you. 
DR WEISS:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And what concerns me or what I 
10 
want to understand is what was going on at Eskom, what 
was going on at McKinsey that would have persuaded you 
to produce a first draft that says frankly Trillian failed our 
due diligence so we need a new model. 
 
And then a second draft that, in my respectful view, 
touches that issue.  So are you able to answer that? 
DR WEISS:   But it says – it comes to the same result.  It 
comes to the – what, you know – I am sorry, this is indeed 
some years ago so I am surprised that I was [indistinct] 
20.22 Chair, but it says exactly the same thing and it did 
20 
not change anything in our behaviour and the – for sure, 
you know, people, you know, were wondering, you know, 
what is going on there?  Ja?  You know, this was – I do not 
know – I know I am now in front of the Commission but this 
was also for us a pretty kind of material step to take to go 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 49 of 232 
 
there and say this is not our supply development partner 
because we cannot contract with them for these material 
reasons.   
 
And, if I look at this, it, you know, says nothing 
different.  It does not say that all of sudden we have now 
decided, you know, to list all our reservations and, you 
know, go ahead as planned.  No, it does not say that.  I 
does not say exactly, you know, what was there.  It says it  
disregards, that is correct, I cannot give you the reason for 
that because I do not recall them right now but it gives 
10 
exactly the same position that I am also standing with 
today. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Ja, I fully accept that there was 
no prospect of McKinsey taking Trillian on as a supply 
development partner whatever this draft memo said or draft 
appendix said.  But can I take you back to the covering 
email on the second draft?  So that is 1192, the covering 
email on the May 16 draft and the parties to whom you 
address are Prish Govender, Edwin Mabulane, Vikas Sagar 
and Ageson Rajagopal and Claud Gell(?) at McKinsey and 
20 
you say: 
“Dear Prish, dear Edwin, hope this email finds you 
well.  As discussed last Friday…” 
So there was clearly a meeting between the first memo and 
the revised memo. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 50 of 232 
 
“…we have adapted both the SDL memo and related 
board submission document.” 
So refer to a meeting and then you say we have now 
adapted the documents.  Does that help you to remember 
what was going on at the time and why the more frank first 
draft was replaced with the less frank – well, slightly toned 
down second draft? 
DR WEISS:   [indistinct] 23.00 decided that he did not want 
to destroy the prospects of Trillian going forward.  I do not 
know, quite honestly.  And it would be speculation, I simply 
10 
to not know.  Obviously we have discussed then as 
indicated also by the earlier email that I sent, but as a 
matter of fact, Chair, we did not deviate in any way from 
our decision, neither in this letter or in the formulation 
there, nor in the actions that we took later. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then I – if I can take you back – 
well, let me raise a slightly different issue before we go 
back to Mr Sneader ’s statement.  You candidly indicate in 
your statement that the MSA contract that you ultimately 
signed with the date of 11 January 2016 was in fact only 
20 
signed in September or October and you explain in your 
statement …[intervenes] 
DR WEISS:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You explained that Eskom had 
actually – that you understood that Eskom’s preference 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 51 of 232 
 
was that the SLA be signed as of the effective date, not of 
the actual date on which it was being signed and it was for 
that reason …[intervenes] 
DR WEISS:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   …that you dated your signature 
January 11 when in fact it was appended to the document 
sometime in September and October.  Can I just clarify, as 
of September and October – sorry, as of January, of 
course, there was still not agreement on some material 
terms to that contract including for instance the supply 
10 
development partner annexure that you were exchanging 
drafts on in May. 
DR WEISS:   Chair, what January do you mean?  January 
2016? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   2016, yes.  So let us just get 
…[intervenes] 
DR WEISS:   Chair, you are correct.  In January 2016 we 
did not have a supply development partner confirmed.  As 
you know there was a draft supplier – a subcontract for a 
potential supply development partner negotiated yet not 
20 
signed because we were lacking ownership and BEE 
information. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And on the main contract after 
Trillian 
failed 
your 
due 
diligence 
you 
at 
that 
point 
materially changed what was the then draft of the supply 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 52 of 232 
 
development 
partner 
annexure 
on 
the 
main 
contract.  
Those are the documents we have been looking at a few 
minutes ago from May 2016. 
DR WEISS:   That was the only modification that was done 
later on, you are perfectly correct, Mr Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   My concern with your signing 
with the date of 11 January when the actual date was 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson, I know you may be left 
with a few questions but there is a reason for us to adjourn 
10 
for a short time, only ten minutes.  Let us adjourn for ten 
minutes and then we come back and try and finish. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I just want to put to you a 
problem with signing the document January 2016 when it is 
actually signed in September or October 2016, it is that 
Eskom’s own procurement policies precluded from issuing 
20 
orders or paying for work before a contract is signed, but I 
presume you were not aware of that at the time? 
DR WEISS:   No sir. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But what that meant is that if the 
contract had been signed with its true date, not backdated, 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 53 of 232 
 
that would have flagged something that would have come 
out as an irregularity that may have triggered greater 
scrutiny of the contract by internal or external auditors, 
because 
payments 
had 
already 
been 
made 
on 
that 
contract, is that not correct? 
DR WEISS:   I cannot talk about these consequences; it is 
not our world so I don’t know. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Earlier on in your evidence when 
you were talking about the due diligence of Trillian and 
what you expect from Trillian you said – not your exact 
10 
words – but essentially you were saying I am a German if 
you say you are a BEE company I want to see a certificate.  
Can I ask you if you were signing a contract with a German 
counterparty would you contemplate putting a date on it 
that was seven months before the date on which you 
signed? 
DR WEISS:   So let me allow a little bit of context, by the 
context and I am going to answer your question.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sure. 
DR WEISS:   The context as it presents myself is that we 
20 
had a pretty long negotiation and that accumulated with us 
basically aligning on the final contracts and then I signed 
on 17 t h of September, sorry December 2015 the letter of 
acceptance.  This letter of acceptance is giving effect to 
the contract because it directly refers to what has been 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 54 of 232 
 
negotiated there, the result of our negotiation.  In Germany 
indeed 
I 
wouldn’t 
even 
need 
a 
signature 
on 
that 
...[indistinct] ja, but indeed it will be binding, so I found 
myself bound to this contract.  
 
Then thereafter I think that was minuted several 
times, and basically on a weekly occasion asked to get the 
signed contracts from Eskom and ...[indistinct] to this, this 
is not the first time that I get a task order or anything that 
is informal way beyond the start of work, ja, unfortunately 
that is the truth that we don’t, you know that the task 
10 
orders are not issued on time, so I keep on asking, I keep 
on asking. We eventually then on 6 t h of June 2016 or I 
don’t know what day – let me say beginning of June 2016 I 
informed by Eskom that our contract gets terminated.  Then 
at around August 2016 we settled on an amount to be paid, 
we wrote an invoice only for the McKinsey ...[indistinct] not 
for the ...[indistinct] and you know got paid and only 
thereafter in September 2016 I received you know a  
printed version of a copy that was signed 7 t h of January, so 
what I intended there – or not intended – what I understood 
20 
there was that you know since the contract wasn’t there 
any more it was already cancelled and paid and so on and 
so on, that you know I was required to sign the contract on 
that date when it actually started.   My very first day in 
South Africa in the year 2016 was 11 t h of January hence I 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 55 of 232 
 
put 11 t h of January on that contract because I was anyhow 
bound by the 17 t h December 2015 letter of acceptance and 
I really apologise in front of the Commission if that has 
confused anybody in here but to come back to your 
question that originally was you know would that be 
sufficient 
in 
Germany, 
yes 
it would 
be 
sufficient 
in 
Germany. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I come back to something 
else that Mr Sneader said on page 41, again I – you may 
not 
have 
the 
document 
but 
it 
is 
literally 
only 
one 
10 
paragraph, short paragraph. 
DR WEISS:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   He said on page 41: 
“Finally our client team relied too much on their 
relationships at Eskom.  They took Eskom’s board 
approval, Eskom’s appointment letter and Eskom’s 
management word at face value.  They should not 
have done so.” 
I presume you accept that comment from Mr Sneader as a 
fair comment? 
20 
DR WEISS:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you say why you did, what 
was it about the situation that made you put the sort of 
reliance on Eskom’s representations at a higher level than 
you 
would 
ordinarily 
do, 
or 
would 
ordinarily 
be 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 56 of 232 
 
appropriate? 
DR WEISS:  I don’t know where this question is heading 
but I am you know indeed quite a lot of these colleagues at 
Eskom that I worked for a long time ago and perhaps that 
led me to that behaviour.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I tell you where it is 
heading, I mean my – if I look back at those six months, 
McKinsey 
had 
devoted 
very 
substantial 
resources 
to 
Eskom, had done so without a written contract and 
certainly without payment and was there not a real concern 
10 
that was driving McKinsey at that stage that you needed to 
do what had to be done to get paid for this work.  
DR WEISS:   But I had already been paid for this stuff 
Chair, I don’t understand the reason that you are putting 
here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    No, no that’s in – sorry that is 
obviously by the time you had – I am not talking backdating 
now, I am talking other issues, like the supply/development 
annexure, like continuing to work alongside Trillian and so 
on.   
20 
DR WEISS:    But Chair with all due respect you know we 
started this process, we actually did a due diligence, I 
think what is fair to say is that you know we shouldn’t have 
worked or started work before this due diligence was 
closed.  They will be working slow most likely ja and you 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 57 of 232 
 
know as also Mr Mieszala and Mr Fine referred to 
yesterday this is a process that we have changed, but we 
came to the conclusion that it is not appropriate to go with 
Trillian as a supply development partner and despite that 
you know causing a risk for us not getting paid or not ever 
work at Eskom again, we were vocal not only saying but 
wrote 
on 
paper 
that 
this 
couldn’t 
be 
our 
supply/development 
partner, 
so 
I 
understand 
your 
frustration that we could have done this earlier and I agree 
to you this is a mistake that we have done but without 
10 
external pressure we ourselves did that and you know they 
are crystal clear in the way you know how we have 
communicated it.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    Thank you Dr Weiss, I don’t 
have any further questions from my side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Dr Weiss, let me 
ask whether Mr van Zyl intends to re-examine on anything. 
ADV VAN ZYL:   Thank you Chair, we don’t have any 
questions for Dr Weiss either. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  No thank you very much, 
20 
then it remains for me to thank Dr Weiss for availing 
himself and thank everybody, I will now excuse him and I 
will excuse you Mr van Zyl as well. 
DR WEISS:   Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Dr Weiss? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 58 of 232 
 
DR WEISS:   Chair is there still a minute to say some kind 
of words from me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR WEISS:   Because first of all as you know it was 
...[indistinct] I first of all I would like to thank you for the 
opportunity that you have given me and also my colleagues 
to present ourselves and the fact as we see them and also 
to answer your question ...[indistinct] this is really helpful 
to also get kind of these perspectives out and what I also 
would say we really intended to help the people of South 
10 
Africa and especially considering in what dire situation 
Eskom was at this time.   It was a heartfelt you know need 
for us to engage and also to engage together with 
developing black talent in this country. 
 
What I you know I think we discussed about we did 
real work on this and it was not always easy because it 
was 100% of this contract, ja, because we achieved impact 
...[indistinct] what I learnt through this process is that you 
know our support to Eskom may have laid grounds for 
corruption and you know I think therefore it is really 
20 
important the work that you are doing at the Commission 
and that you are also asking the questions that you are 
asking, that at sometimes you know feel uncomfortable.  I 
think you are doing the right thing and thanks again for 
actually given me the opportunity to speak in front of this 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 59 of 232 
 
Commission here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Dr Weiss, you are 
now excused, thank you.  Mr Chaskalson that is the only 
witness you had for today? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we are going to adjourn for now, 
just for the benefit of the public I will return at two o’clock 
to listen to the evidence Mr Zwane at two o’clock, who did 
not finish his evidence previously and he will come back to 
finish it and then later in the afternoon, or early evening I 
10 
will listen to the evidence of Mr Koko from Eskom who did 
not finish his evidence at least we will deal with the 
evidence relating to the suspensions.  We might not get 
beyond that and he might have to come back some other 
time, so we will resume at two o’clock. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Pretorius, good 
20 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Afternoon Chair.   
MR ZWANE:   Afternoon Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, good afternoon Mr Zwane. 
MR ZWANE:   Good afternoon Chair. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 60 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you for coming back to complete 
the part of your evidence that we must deal with today, I 
think you will still come back for other parts of evidence on 
other matters, okay.  I think registrar let us just administer 
the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR ZWANE:   Mosebenzi Joseph Zwane. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed affirmation? 
MR ZWANE:   No. 
10 
REGISTAR:   Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence you 
will give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else 
but the truth, if so please raise your right hand and say I 
truly affirm. 
MR ZWANE:   I truly affirm. 
MOSEBENZI JOSEPH ZWANE:   [Affirmation] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   Is Mr Zwane legally 
represented today? 
MR ZENGA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay his counsel/attorney can place 
20 
himself on record just from where you are will be fine. 
MR ZENGA:   Thank you Chair, my name is Alpheus Zenga, 
the representative for Mr Zwane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Okay, alright.  Mr 
Zwane we will try and use the time we have optimally and 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 61 of 232 
 
that might mean me being a little stricter than I was last 
time on answers so obviously important things feel free to 
articulate what you need to articulate but because of time 
we must just try and make sure that answers as far as 
possible are straight to the point but nothing I say now 
means you must not make points that you feel are 
important to make.    
MR ZWANE:   Thanks Chair, I am here to try and assist you 
as much as I can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, no that is alright.  Mr 
10 
Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Thank you Chair.  For the record 
Mr Zwane there are two affidavits that we may refer to later 
this afternoon.  The first is a second affidavit filed by 
yourself…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Pretorius maybe for the 
benefit of the public you could start by just saying where 
we are with his evidence and what it relates to just so that 
they can follow.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes, the evidence that Mr Zwane 
20 
has given on two previous days and it is to complete 
hopefully today deals with his participation in or knowledge 
of a housing - a series of housing matters that occurred 
during the years 2010 and 2011 in the Free State Province. 
We have dealt to a large extent with Mr Zwane’s knowledge 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 62 of 232 
 
of a participation in certain events during the course of the 
year.   
The first involved the abandonment of an open 
tender system and what occurred during the first half of 
that financial year and the second involved the devising of 
a prepayment scheme an advanced payment system and it 
is in relation to the advanced payment system that we will 
ask questions today principally.       
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    There are two affidavits Mr Zwane 
10 
that may become relevant later and certainly is relevant 
overall in relation to your, are relevant overall in relation to 
your evidence.  The first is the second affidavit filed by 
yourself that appears just for the record in Bundle FS12 at 
page 623.   
The second is a second affidavit filed by Mr 
Mokoena and that appears at Bundle FS12, 372.1 to 
372.47 it is not a long affidavit but there are a number of 
annexures to the affidavit.  You have been provided with a 
copy of that affidavit and you may wish to comment later 
20 
on and I will ask a few questions later on.  Mr Mokoena 
was the head of department during 2010/2011 Free State 
Human Settlements.   
The first task for today Mr Zwane is to put to you 
certain versions in relation to the origins of the advanced 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 63 of 232 
 
payment system during October 2010.  We dealt with it 
briefly certainly your evidence in regard there to during the 
last hearing when you gave evidence here and you will 
recall that you said at a meeting with officials in the war 
room after the Welkom meeting you raised a question as to 
what could be done.   
Mr Mokoena’s version is different he says that you 
called him and other officials to a meeting in what 
colloquially became known as the war room in October 
2010 and you proposed the advance payment system.  Do 
10 
you have any comment?     
MR ZWANE:   Yes, Chair my comment is simple I did not 
propose, I asked a question why can we not help the 
contractors in terms of materials as that issue was raised 
in a Welkom meeting that is my story and I deny that I 
proposed.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Right that evidence Mr Mokoena’s 
evidence is confirmed by Mr Matchatwa and Mr Tsometsi 
who also attended that meeting they both say that you 
proposed the advanced payment system.  
20 
MR ZWANE:   Well I have gone through both statements 
and I agree with you Chair and Mr Matchatwa is agreeing 
with Mr Mokoena but the version of Mr Tsometsi is the 
version that I put here that there were discussions after I 
had asked a question and after those discussions a 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 64 of 232 
 
decision was taken that there should be a broad research 
in terms of this.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    To an extent that there is common 
cause between you and the other witnesses we will get 
there.  I just want to put to you what Mr Tsometsi said on 
the 28 t h of September before the Commission.  He says 
and his version is that at that meeting you said: 
“I think we have a solution that we must buy 
material.”  
What is your response to that?    
10 
MR ZWANE:   I said when I was here I asked a question 
that why can we not help the contractors with the materials 
as that will actually enable us to do what we are supposed 
to do to deal with the problem that had been raised earlier 
on by the Minister.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is your issue simply that you asked a 
question and you did not propose even though your 
question may have suggested that that is what you had in 
mind should be done?     
MR ZWANE:   Chair I asked the question that is why there 
20 
were debates around this matter.  My understanding of a 
proposal is that if you put a proposal on the table that 
proposal will be accepted or rejected. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I understand what you mean I just 
want to make sure.     
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 65 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It seems to me that your issue might just 
be that you did not put it as a proposal.  
MR ZWANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in substance you may have put a 
question that conveyed to them that you were thinking that 
that is the way to go.  Would you accept that as fair, as a 
fair interpretation of what may have happened? 
MR ZWANE:   I would accept it Chair as we together in the 
very committee when that issue was proposed.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MR ZWANE:   It is not an issue that I came with from 
somewhere it is an issue of the very committee and when 
we called a meeting we had to try and address that issue 
out and see whether it is workable or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well at least I think that clarifies my 
own mind because I was thinking if I say to Mr Pretorius 
why do we not adjourn now obviously he will think I am 
thinking that we should adjourn.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    I will take it a little bit more 
20 
seriously.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I leave it at that, Mr Pretorius.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    So in summary then when you 
distinguished between a question and a proposal you are 
saying that you may well have raised an issue for 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 66 of 232 
 
discussion and further debate but in doing so you would 
have conveyed what your thoughts were.    
MR ZWANE:   Well it may have been taken so by other 
attendees of the meeting but the fact of the matter in all 
the affidavits they agree with the fact that that matter was 
debated in that meeting.    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So it does not seem that we are 
too far apart on that issue.  What you stressing however 
that it was not a formal proposal for acceptance or 
rejection.    
10 
MR ZWANE:   That is correct Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Then there was it is common 
cause a discussion about the idea let us settle on that for 
the moment the idea for further discussion and one of the 
issues 
arising 
was 
the 
legality 
of 
what 
was 
to 
be 
considered, correct?  
MR ZWANE:   That is correct Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Mr Mokoena you will have seen in 
his affidavit goes further, Mr Mokoena raised his concerns 
about the idea and I use that word advisedly for the 
20 
moment and indicated that he did not support it.  Do you 
recall that?   
MR ZWANE:   I do not recall him saying he does not 
support.  I recall one of the concerns raised in the meeting 
was the legality of that process.    
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 67 of 232 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Right, he says that the issue 
between yourself and himself in a discussion between the 
two of you, I think it was after the meeting.  He says that 
you said to him that if you do not want to implement this 
plan you should, you Mr Mokoena should tender your 
resignation.  Do you recall that?   
MR ZWANE:   There was no meeting between me and Mr 
Mokoena outside the formal meeting which everybody was 
there, Chair.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Did that happen in a formal 
10 
meeting? 
MR ZWANE:   No, there was no such a comment from me 
because if I remember well the end discussion of the 
meeting was actually in Mr Mokoena’s favour.  There was 
no conclusion that the question which has been interpreted 
as an idea is what we must actually implement.   
The resolution was that the DG Mr Tsometsi should 
go and research broadly about all the issues which were 
raised in the meeting and report to the HOD which was Mr 
Mokoena and in that process it is my belief that Mr 
20 
Mokoena would have then addressed whatever matter that 
was a concern to him.     
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Did Mr Mokoena at any stage 
during the meeting, shortly after the meeting or at any 
stage thereafter say to you that he objected to the idea or 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 68 of 232 
 
the plan?  
MR ZWANE:   No, Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    He goes further to say quite 
expressly that you used an expression in Sotho saying that 
he will walk next to his shoes meaning he would remain 
poor.  Do you recall that?  
MR ZWANE:   No, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to put some context in regard to 
that last question from Mr Pretorius he said you said this 
namely that he would walk next to his shoes.  He said you 
10 
said this in the context of saying if he did not, if he was 
not prepared to implement the plan or to go along with the 
plan he would need to resign and obviously he would be 
without a job and he would then find himself walking next 
to his shoes.  You understand the context?  Mr Pretorius is 
my recollection is it correct?   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you never said anything along 
those lines?  
MR ZWANE:   Chair I never said anything of that sort in 
20 
fact if we refer back to the investigations you would 
actually realise that the issue of advanced payment was 
actually implemented even before this document you 
talking about was finalised.  In the meeting of the 18 t h on 
November as per the investigations.  Mr Mokoena in a 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 69 of 232 
 
report to the investigators actually exceeded to the point 
that a meeting, when the meeting was discussed on that 
point advance payment had already been done it is here on 
black and white.   
So we continue to have a good relationship that is 
why I could understand even when I had said everybody 
should be working during December Mr Mokoena did not 
avail himself and I did not have an issue I understood. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Pretorius.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    When you refer Mr Zwane to 
10 
advance payments having already been done are you 
referring to a period before October 2010?  
MR ZWANE:   In fact if you look at the investigations they 
will indicate that the issue of advance payment in the 
Department of Human Settlements started in the year 
2007/2008 there about but on this matter of 2010 Mr 
Mokoena as he was asked he indicated in the report to the 
investigators that by the 18 t h of November when the 
MINTEK meeting was organised advance payment had 
already been done.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    By the 18 t h of November 2010? 
MR ZWANE:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    The period that you referred to 
earlier 2007/2008 that would have been before you came to 
the Department of Human Settlements?   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 70 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:   That is correct Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Is that what you referred to earlier 
as the Nercha scheme? 
MR ZWANE:   The Nercha scheme was reported in the 
meeting in Welkom when I raised this matter.  I did not 
know about this matter Chair at that point I must clarify 
that matter as I was going through this documents by the 
investigators.  
They 
actually 
indicated 
that 
the 
problem 
of 
advanced payment in the Free State started around 
10 
2007/2008 and they further discovered that when it was put 
to Mr Mokoena that why would he not have listened to the 
MINTEK meeting of the 18 t h of November 2010.  He 
actually acceded to the point that advanced payment had 
already been done before that meeting.     
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Well we will come to that meeting 
of the 18 t h of November the MINTEK meeting and the 
meeting that followed the MINMAC meeting.  But for the 
moment we have done some investigation and research 
into the period prior to 2011 and we have found no 
20 
evidence of any prepayment system that mirrors the 
prepayment system that was implemented in 2010/2011.    
MR ZWANE:   I can actually try and help Chair with a page 
if I be allowed.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 71 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:   It is paragraph 7 Chair 1.6 departmental 
presentation dated the 17 t h of October 2011 slide number 
six of the presentation and that is found in FS20 page 370.  
If I may read it in short, it says: 
“Mokoena admitted that as a result of his strategy 
to expedite housing delivery in December 2010 that 
the department had exposed itself to risk due to 
advanced 
payment 
made 
to 
building 
materials 
suppliers 
amounting 
to 
R497million 
although 
MINMAC had rejected this strategy on the 18 t h of 
10 
November 
2010. 
 
The 
HOD 
admitted 
in 
his 
presentation that the suppliers had already been 
paid in advance.”      
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Where are you referring to now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he is reading from his notes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    F20 age 370?  Are you referring to 
black number or red numbers? 
MR ZWANE:   The black numbers.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    FS20 page 370 you say it is at 
slide six? 
20 
MR ZWANE:   It is paragraph 7.1.6.  In his presentation it 
is slide six but FS20 page 370 is paragraph 7.1.6.     
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes, well I do not think that there 
is anything here firstly that deals with 2007 and 2008, 
correct? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 72 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:   That is correct Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Nor does it deal with anything 
before October 2010.  
MR ZWANE:   According to my understanding Chair it deals 
with the 18 t h.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes so let us…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The 18 t h of November.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    …read the last paragraph on that 
page.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay he says it deals with the 18 t h of 
10 
November Mr Pretorius.  
MR ZWANE:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes, exactly so that is what I want 
to put to Mr Zwane.  Firstly, if you look at paragraph 7.1.6 
that is a departmental presentation made on the 17 t h of 
October 2011 not 2010.  So this was a year later 17 
October 2011.  Do you see that?   
MR ZWANE:   Yes, Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And this presentation dealt with 
the 
Free 
State 
Department 
of 
Human 
Settlement 
20 
expenditure and the delivery for 2011/2012 financial year.  
Do you see that?   
MR ZWANE:   Well can we read that paragraph Chair so 
that…[intervene]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes, I will come there we are just 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 73 of 232 
 
going through the whole of the presentation that you have 
just put before the Chair.  
MR ZWANE:   Because to me it says delivery in December 
2010.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    No we will get there.  
MR ZWANE:   Okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Let us take it step by step.  
MR ZWANE:   Okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    So slide – before we get to the 
slides the introductory part it says: 
10 
“The HOD Mokoena made a presentation in respect 
of the Free State Department of Human Settlements 
expenditure delivery 2011/2012 financial year.”   
So this is dealing with a presentation that took place in the 
following financial year to the 2010/2011 year.  Can I put 
that document before you so you can follow I think it would 
be easier.    
MR ZWANE:   FS20? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes, FS20 page 371. Ms Rangarta 
will help you.  Do you have it before you?   
20 
MR ZWANE:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    You will see then at the top of the 
page paragraph 7.1.6 of this document deals with the 
departmental presentation dated 17 October 2011.   
MR ZWANE:   Yes, Chair.  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 74 of 232 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    I have dealt with the next two 
lines, slide three of the presentation” 
“Introduction 
and 
background 
reflected 
that 
December 2010.” 
It is now referring to the previous financial year.   
“As a result of strategy to expedite housing delivery 
department 
exposed 
to 
risk 
due 
to 
advanced 
payments made to material suppliers amounting to 
R481million.” 
That is a matter of record there, correct?  
10 
MR ZWANE:   Yes, Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    The next insert says that slide five 
of the presentation: 
“Current certified progress and expenditure, and 
that is current for that financial year, reflected that 
it should be reiterated that the department does not 
make any payments in advance.” 
And the words does not make any payments in advance are 
underlined. 
“And all funds are dispersed based on certified 
20 
progress and or proof of delivery of material to 
site.” 
That appears to be the position in 2011, correct?  
MR ZWANE:   Yes, Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Then slide six of the presentation: 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 75 of 232 
 
“Current 
certified 
progress 
and 
expenditure 
reflected that the table below reflects the total 
amount committed on all the contracts entered into 
with contractors and service providers during the 
previous and current financial years for the delivery 
of housing units across the various programs.” 
And the table that appears below that comment then deals 
with expenditure committed for the 2010/2011 financial 
year and the 2011/2012 financial year that we can assume.  
We do not have to go into that table.          
10 
MR ZWANE:   Yes, Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And then there is an asterisk 
beneath the table which reads: 
“It should be noted that the amount dispersed 
represents the total disbursement on projects to 
date and includes the R481million paid in advance 
to material suppliers during December 2010,” 
That is the comment there and I think the paragraph which 
you have referred to that we now have in its context reads 
as follows: 
20 
“Mokoena therefore admitted that as a result of a 
strategy to expedite housing delivery in December 
2010 the department had exposed itself to risk due 
to advanced payments made to building material 
suppliers amounting to R497million.” 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 76 of 232 
 
And then the next paragraph is important: 
“Although MINMAC, it says here MINIMAC, had 
rejected the strategy on 18 November 2010 the 
HOD admitted in his presentation that suppliers had 
already been paid in advance.”          
So what is clear from that is that there is an admission that 
suppliers were paid in advance after October 2010 and in 
fact in December 2010.  That this involved risk to the 
department and there is no admission as to the lawfulness 
of such a process.   
10 
In fact, what this appear to say is that MINMAC 
rejected the strategy at the meeting of 18 November and 
we will come to that meeting in due course.  Is that a fair 
summary of what contained here?     
MR ZWANE:   That is what I was – that is the picture that I 
was painting Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Okay so I do not think we differ 
very much on this point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but I am not sure that I understand 
what point you wanted to make.    
20 
MR 
ZWANE: 
 
 
The 
point 
I 
am 
making 
Chair 
is 
that…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just want to make sure that I know if 
there is a particular point you are trying to make.   
MR ZWANE:   The point I am making in terms of this 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 77 of 232 
 
information, when it was asked that why was the advanced 
payments made and that was put to the actual the Mr 
Mokoena.  My reading is here is that he admitted that 
when, when he was told that he should not continue with 
the advance payment, that advance payment had already 
been paid.  And I want to say to this Commission the issue 
of the advanced payment, if it was raised in a meeting of 
MinTech, subsequently MinMech which was the 18 t h and 
the 19 t h of November 2010.  If he admits that that 
particular time when that decision was made, the advanced 
10 
payment had already been made.  The, the document that 
we are talking about here which was as a result of the 
question I put in the meeting, the war room meeting was 
only signed on the 25 t h of November.  Not the 18 t h or the 
19 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We know that Mr Mokoena signed 
that document, prepared by Mr Tsometsi on the 25 t h of 
November 2010.  You are perfectly correct and you raised 
the issue why wouldn’t he sign it.  His evidence was that 
20 
he signed it because he feared that he might lose his job if 
he didn’t cooperate.   
MR ZWANE:  I deny that is the truth and the sole truth 
Chair, because if he was so scared of me, he would have 
listened to me even when I said he should not go on 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 78 of 232 
 
holiday.  It’s on record that he did, did go on holiday and I 
left in that department as an HOD when I left the 
department, I never dealt with him or did anything that was 
indicative of the fact that I was a monster in that 
department.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But he said when we told you that he had 
already made arrangements I think for a holiday I think 
from last time, you, you – I thought you said you 
understood.  So you had no issue with the fact that he was 
not going to be around because the arrangements for his 
10 
holiday had already been made. 
MR ZWANE:  If I understood that Chair, which is true, why 
would I fail to understand and give him an opportunity on a 
document that I have given him and Muso Tsometsi?  An 
opportunity to go and work on? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thanks.  Well perhaps we can wrap 
this up just concerning that you have no problem with the 
facts set out in the document we’ve just referred to at 
FS2370, correct? 
20 
MR ZWANE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  Like to move to a new 
topic and that is what you were told Mr Zwane of the 
legality or otherwise of the advanced payment scheme.  Mr 
Mokoena says and we’ve touched on this that he actually 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 79 of 232 
 
objected to the plan at war room meeting in October.  And 
he says that your response was that you had been advised 
that the plan was in fact lawful.  You recall anything like 
that happening at the October meeting? 
MR ZWANE:  I deny that Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Mr Chainee, do you recall 
who he was C-H-A-I-N-E-E or is?   
MR ZWANE:  Chain? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chainee?  A member of national 
treasury, do you recall that? 
10 
MR ZWANE:  When made to time lapse and the fact that Mr 
Mokoena was the one would deal with officials at the level 
of MinTech. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In fairness I must just put 
something to you.  For your comment if you know anything 
about it.  Mr Chainee gave evidence before a disciplinary 
inquiry which took place in the following years and as a 
result 
of 
which 
five 
officials 
were 
dismissed 
for 
participation and the advanced payment scheme.  You 
know that there was a disciplinary inquiry and officials 
20 
were dismissed.  Correct? 
MR ZWANE:  I, I read that in the media and as I followed 
up I got to learn that that was a fact Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In fact Mr Chainee said in the 
evidence and that’s part of the bundles, that you have 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 80 of 232 
 
before you, that at a Tech MinMech meeting of the 29 t h of 
October 
2010, 
the 
Free 
State 
representatives 
were 
informed that the advanced payment system for materials 
was now allowed.  And Chainee said that although it does 
not appear in the minutes, he said this at the inquiry.  That 
he raised the wrongfulness of the advanced payment 
system at that meeting and also that it was non compliant.  
Now you weren’t at that meeting.  You’ve said so already in 
your evidence.  But one would have imagined that had 
such strong sentiments been expressed by an official of 
10 
treasury in regard to an issue that was already on the table 
as it were at war room meetings or whatever, at least one 
war room meeting.  That would have been reported to you.  
Was that reported to you?   
MR ZWANE:  No it was not Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did Mr Makatshwa report to you on 
the content of Tech MinMech meetings and MinMech 
meetings?   
MR ZWANE:  No Chair, Mr Makatshwa reported to the 
HOD.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And did the HOD then report in turn 
to you. 
MR ZWANE:  There is a report I call, I recall and I think I 
had said that in my earlier affidavit, that at some point the 
HOD approached me to say National had said there were 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 81 of 232 
 
issues that needed to be corrected in the recovery. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I think you said reviewed or 
revised. 
MR ZWANE:  Ja.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Because … 
MR ZWANE:  And that, I accepted that whatever needed to 
be revised or reviewed or … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That was the expenditure recovery? 
MR ZWANE:  Yes.  That is the only thing I remember and 
for the purpose of the Commission Mr Mokoena indicated 
10 
that we were supposed to report on weekly basis to 
national in terms of the progress we are making in terms of 
these recovery plan.  And I was even shown the reports 
that were going to national.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  The evidence of Mr 
Makatshwa continues. He says that when he heard about 
what had happened at the Tech MinMech meeting, and 
where advice had been given that advanced payments as 
contemplated, it says by the MEC would be unlawful.  He 
phoned Mr Mokoena and he asked Mr Mokoena to discuss 
20 
it with Mr Tsometsi and with yourself.  Now you would not 
have been party to that call, but I just want to put it to you 
that in all the circumstances, it is probable that this report 
would have been made to you.   
MR ZWANE:  Chair, the report was not made to me.  If the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 82 of 232 
 
report was made to me I would have endeavoured as I did 
earlier on when I got an indication from the office of the 
Minister that we are lagging behind.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There was another meeting on the 
18 t h of November, you have mentioned that.  Also of Tech 
MinMech.   
MR ZWANE:  Correct ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And – you nod your head.  You must 
say yes, please. 
MR ZWANE:  I said, correct yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Don’t have to say please, just have 
to say yes. 
MR ZWANE:  I have said correct Chair.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At that meeting it was mentioned 
that the Free State Department of Human Settlements were 
looking to use the advanced payment system, in particular 
the tripartite agreements, tripartite agreements and the 
session in order to make advanced payments.  And the 
response from the meeting was a warning not to implement 
the plan.   
20 
MR ZWANE:  I did not get that indication Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  I must say that that 
evidence goes further than what the minutes show.  But the 
minutes of the meeting held on the 18 t h November, show 
that there was concern expressed by the meeting in regard 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 83 of 232 
 
to the expenditure recovery plan.  Were you aware of that? 
MR ZWANE:  I would, I would say on the hindsight that 
could fall within what I have already alluded to that HOD 
Mokoena reported that there were issues that needed to be 
corrected. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Also FS12 page 300, you can go 
there if you like. But I will read it to you, it’s not a long 
extract.  The minutes of that meeting read: 
“The province was advised not to enter into a 
tripartite 
agreement 
with 
beneficiaries 
and 
10 
suppliers, since suppliers would have to supply 
materials in bulk without the necessary support to 
ensure quality and proper procurement proceedings.  
Also there are lot of risks involved with this 
arrangement.” 
 
The minutes of that meeting reflect that there was a 
concern about proper procurement proceedings as well as 
the risk involved.  Did you ever come to learn of the 
discussions?  Or of the contents of the minutes of the 
meeting? 
20 
MR ZWANE:  Before this Commission summoned me not, I 
only learned when I was here in this Commission.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you recall being at a meeting at 
the National Council of Provinces in Qwakwa during 2010 
with your head of department Mr Mokoena?  Because it 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 84 of 232 
 
said a report was made to Mr Mokoena at that meeting at 
which you both attended, saying that the, both the ERP and 
the advanced payment system were questioned and in fact 
not accepted at the TechMin Mech meeting.   
MR ZWANE:  In Qwakwa? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well the report was made to Mr 
Mokoena in Qwakwa and the inference, the probable 
inference that we would seek to draw is that he would have 
spoken to you about it.   
MR ZWANE:  No Chair. 
10 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 As 
far 
as 
the 
officials 
are 
concerned, their attendance at meetings particularly of 
MinMech or Tech MinMech, where the advanced payments 
system amongst other things was discussed.  The evidence 
is that there was a continued objection to firstly whether 
the plan should be entered into and secondly its legality.  
Now we know that the legality of the plan was discussed at 
a war room meeting at which you presided and was a 
matter of concern.  And they must have known it was a 
matter of concern to you as well, because that’s why the 
20 
document had to be prepared, the document signed on the 
25 t h of November. Surely in those circumstances probable 
that they would have reported to you the concerns about 
the legality and the opinion that it was illegal.  And I have 
given you the incidents where these discussions took 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 85 of 232 
 
place.  And I just want to put it to you, it is more probable 
than not that this would have been reported to you.   
MR ZWANE:  In the discussions Chair of that war room 
meeting, there is, the resolution or the end product of the 
meeting was that the officials must go back and research 
broadly on all the matters that were raised in the meeting.  
And come back with a document which I called a legal 
opinion at that time as a layman. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We had agreed it wasn’t an opinion.   
MR ZWANE:  After the explanation by you Chair and 
10 
explaining the details of what happened behind the scenes 
which I would have not known, we agreed that a legal 
opinion was not sought.  But at the time where I was I had 
given the HOD, the head of the department and the people 
who knows law to go and research about their concerns 
that were raised there.  And I thought as an oversight 
person, I had done my work.  When they came back with 
the document which is signed by the HOD, I took it for 
granted that all the issues that were of concerns in the 
meeting were addressed.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  There remains the issue of 
accountability.  I was going to raise that at the end of the 
day that we have done some research into the Public 
Finance Management Act and into certain instruments 
introduced by cabinet in 2013 and 2011, after these events 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 86 of 232 
 
that talks to the power of MECs and ministers to delegate.  
That 
also 
deals 
with 
their 
residual 
accountability.  
Notwithstanding that delegation and their duties in that 
regard.  It seems to us and we’ll do further research on 
that, that there was a gap in the question of what 
accountability MECs have when they delegate tasks to 
heads of department.  And you will know that that is 
particularly relevant in terms of the Housing Act which you 
have now studied and we’ll deal with in a moment.  So 
Chair that is a matter that may have to be addressed 
10 
further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It may be a lacuna that requires 
attention. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, that’s fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Because it seems that approach 
adopted here is that once there is a delegation from a MEC 
to a HOD, a line can be drawn in relation to accountability.  
That’s your approach, isn’t it? 
MR ZWANE:  Well Chair I want to agree with the – your 
20 
statement you have just earlier put.  I think because of the 
challenges in terms of the clear line of delegation, that is 
why some steps to try and close the gaps that were 
existing were then taken around 2013.   
CHAIRPERSON:  In? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 87 of 232 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  2018.  And earlier … 
MR ZWANE:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In 2013? 
MR ZWANE:  Yes.  So I, I do understand Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But quite apart from the formal 
steps taken it would seem a matter of common sense in 
responsibility that when a MEC delegates a task to an 
executive official, or to an official, that there should be a 
10 
degree of supervision compelled and an accountability 
which remains.  Makes common sense and it seems to me 
that that has now been recognised.   
MR ZWANE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let’s go on to deal with the warning 
about the legality of the advanced payment system that 
came to the fore in February 2011 from National, that is the 
National Department of Human Settlements.  The evidence 
is that during February 2011, this was Mr Mokoena’s 
evidence the then minister of Human Settlements Mr 
20 
Sexwale and the DG of Human Settlements Mr Zulu called 
the Free State Department of Human Settlements to a 
meeting to explain why these advanced payments had been 
made.  And that meeting was attended by yourself, Mr 
Mokoena, Mr Tsometsi, and Ms Debbie Hattingh, the new 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 88 of 232 
 
CFO of the department.  You recall that meeting? 
MR ZWANE:  No Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Who attended?   
MR ZWANE:  I don’t recall attending a meeting in February 
of that nature and I have said in this Commission that I 
was reshuffled from that department the second week of 
February.  So I do not recall that meeting. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well Mr Mokoena goes on to say at 
this meeting the minister instructed the department to stop 
making advanced payments.  And that you at the meeting 
10 
then referred to Mr Tsometsi’s document and you showed 
that to the minister to say that the payments were legal.  
But the minister then insisted that the payments be 
stopped.   
MR ZWANE:  I don’t … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, Mr Pretorius, I then note there 
against that paragraph which says the witness, which 
would be Mr Mokoena, says reference to document is a 
mistake.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am saying … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I didn’t follow your question, your 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I think you are, you were, you were 
basing your question to the second paragraph under 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 89 of 232 
 
paragraph 27, at page 348.  Is that right? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I am saying that I then note, a 
marginal note that I made when Mr Mokoena was giving 
evidence which says in relation to that paragraph, that 
witness says reference to document in that part of the 
paragraph is a mistake.  Did you recall anything along 
those lines? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I don’t recall that Chair.  And in fact 
this, this proposition is based on the contents of the 
10 
statement.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Might be evidence.  So stand to be 
corrected there.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe your team could just check.  I, I 
certainly have a note.  Initially I think before the witness 
said anything, I put a question mark and then I have a note 
that says, witness says reference to document is a 
mistake.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, so I just mentioned that in case that 
is what the witness may have said.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, I’ll check that because it may 
have been and I seem now to recollect that the distinction 
may have been whether the document was put before the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 90 of 232 
 
minister as a document, or whether it was referred to in the 
abstract as having contained issues as to its legality.  But 
before I put anything on the table Chair let me just … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let me check.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Of course, even afterwards once 
the position has been established a question could be put 
to Mr Zwane but put a supplementary affidavit and deal 
with a question on that paragraph if necessary.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I – it may be a matter of detail 
because as I recall the position Mr Zwane, his version is 
that he did not attend such a meeting at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So would not recall the contents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Whether to that extent of detail or 
not, am I correct Mr Zwane? 
MR ZWANE:  You are correct Chair. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But Mr Mokoena goes further to say 
he gave an undertaking that advanced payments were 
stopped, would stop and he did put a stop to them by the 
end of February 2011.  That’s what he says.  It goes 
further and perhaps I should go further to complete the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 91 of 232 
 
sequence of events.  Mr Mokoena says then that on their 
return to Bloemfontein and after the meeting with national, 
you insisted that they continue to pay the contractors.  
What do you say about that? 
MR ZWANE:  Chair, I, I deny that strongly.  And want to 
say to this Commission even if by chance I would, I would 
have said that, I had said to this Commission I left the 
department the second week of February.  Meaning I would 
not have been a stumbling block for any means for the 
officials to stop that kind of an exercise if it was illegal.  I 
10 
was no longer there.  But I don’t recall me insisting on 
anything that national had actually said it is illegal for us 
to do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There is evidence notwithstanding 
that background that the payments continued.   
MR ZWANE:  That’s correct Chair, I’ve seen that evidence 
when I came to this Commission. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thanks, and you yourself confirm 
that? Let’s move on.  That was dealt with thoroughly at the 
end of the last hearing.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well of course if the advanced payments 
were stopped after that meeting with the national minister, 
that could have or would have interfered with the plan to 
ensure that by the end of the financial year a certain 
amount of progress had been made in the building of 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 92 of 232 
 
houses and the spending of the money on housing, is it 
not? 
MR ZWANE:  Chair the information in front of this 
Commission that we all know is that finally money was 
taken.  A resolution on the 12 t h of January 2011, a letter 
was written by the DG to the HOD indicating that their 
seven days have lapsed, lapsed and so money will be 
taken.  And we all know the response by HOD with end that 
he’s 
...[indistinct] 
the 
slate, 
he 
thought 
we 
were 
progressing well.  So there was a decision that money 
10 
would be taken.  Why would the department continue with 
advanced payment if money was taken?  Because that 
would have created a situation for the financial year.  I 
must say Chair that it is correct that for all intents and 
purposes we had tried our level best to build houses.  And 
that information is here.  I don’t want to dwell in it.  And to 
a certain extent we succeeded.  But the control or 
oversight, administrative oversight, because from where 
I’m standing, where I am seated, I should say the issue of 
advanced payment or tripartite arrangement has been done 
20 
by a number of provinces.  But the how that issues 
monitored, I think becomes a problem and we must … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m going to stop you. 
MR ZWANE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because my question was simply whether 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 93 of 232 
 
you would accept that if the advanced payment was 
stopped, that would mean the building of houses further 
would have to stop, because and that the spending of the 
money allocated for housing would also – it would mean 
that by the end of the financial year the department might 
not have used all the money that had been set aside for 
houses.  But I think your answer is, you are simply saying 
well there is correspondence that the, there was a decision 
to take the money away.  But I thought you could say yes, 
that would be the, that would be the effect of stopping 
10 
advanced payment or no, that would not be the effect.   
MR ZWANE:  That would have mean a project which was 
linked to that money which was taken was going to suffer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR ZWANE:  You are correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And at the last hearing we dealt 
with that letter of January and the response by the 
department and the press statement, we dealt with that at 
some length you will recall Chair.  And its common cause 
20 
that the program was called to a halt in January, is that 
correct?  We know it continued after that, but there was an 
occasion in January where the program was stopped.  Is 
that correct? 
MR ZWANE:  I can’t remember Chair.  I remember that they 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 94 of 232 
 
were discussions with national in January that continued.  
And finally I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well we’ll look we’ll look at that. 
END OF RECORDING 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  … in that regard and … 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 95 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In our summary for the Chair we’ll 
deal with that issue.   
MR ZWANE:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair page 178 of the transcript of 
22 September 2020.  It is correct that Mr Mokoena 
corrected his statement.  I was referring to the statement.  
And said, he did not mention the document.  He just spoke 
about his plan without mentioning the document.  So he 
mentioned neither, he neither presented the document. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Nor referred to the content of the 
document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It spoke about issues that would 
have been contained in the document.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The disciplinary proceedings that 
followed as a result of which five officials were dismissed 
and not Mr Mokoena.  Heard the evidence of Mr Sisha, S-I-
20 
S-H-A 
from 
national 
treasury, 
who 
testified 
that 
the 
Division of Revenue Act, Section 50 which we’ve dealt with 
in evidence here and the Treasury Regulations prohibited 
advanced payment for goods where they had not been 
delivery of those goods for the benefit of government.  And 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 96 of 232 
 
those, that evidence was confirmed and the disciplinary 
inquiry findings by Advocate Van Graan.  The proposition I 
want to put to you is that a fully informed official or MEC 
ought to have known that the advanced payments system 
was unlawful.  As at least being in contravention of the 
Division of Revenue Act and the Treasury Regulations.  
What do you say to that? 
MR ZWANE:  I would say, I said in my earlier evidence that 
in terms of DFMA and Treasury Regulation 8.2.3 advanced 
payment when there is a clear contact of what is going to 
10 
be paid in advance is not illegal.  I have said earlier on, 
today that on the hindsight one must admit that the, the 
administration 
of 
the 
whole 
process 
had 
the 
loop, 
loopholes in terms of mitigation, risk, mitigation controls, 
internal controls and things like that.  But the scheme itself 
Chair, in terms of this facts I’ve mentioned, even at that 
time nobody brought it to my attention even when I have 
said they must go and research, that this could be a legal 
kind of a scheme.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There was a judgment of the full 
20 
bench of the Free State division which went further in 
commenting on the tripartite agreements.  And the session 
agreements that were part of the advanced payment 
system.  There the presiding judge who wrote the judgment 
said the material supply session agreements were and I 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 97 of 232 
 
quote: 
“Used as part of the documentation to create the 
farce of legitimacy so as to make the payments look 
regular and in accordance with the law.  As 
indicated above it was done to circumvent the 
provisions of DORA, that’s the Division of Revenue 
Act.” 
 
Are you aware of that finding? 
MR ZWANE:  No.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now you’ve been through the 
10 
session agreements, their implications and their import.  I 
don’t want to repeat that now.  We’ve been through it 
exhaustively.  But I just wanted to put that finding before 
you. 
MR ZWANE:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The auditor general found and I 
quote: 
“Goods and services with the transaction value of 
over R500 000,00 were not procured by means of a 
competitive 
bidding 
process 
as 
per 
the 
20 
requirements of …” 
 
And reference to various instruments of national 
treasury.  We know that there was no competitive bidding 
process before the allocations were made for involving 
advanced payments.  We know that.  Don’t we? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 98 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:  I think without really going back Chair we 
have dealt with that matter earlier and I have expressed my 
understanding. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, well we know that during 2010, 
2011 and in respect of the expenditure for 2010, 2011 there 
was no competitive bidding process that was completed.  
Correct? 
MR ZWANE:  The open tender was abandoned. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And there was no other competitor 
bidding for ...[indistinct]. 
10 
MR ZWANE:  And that ...[indistinct] were taken, yes Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The disciplinary inquiry 
reviewed the evidence of a number of witnesses as a result 
of which those five officials were dismissed.  It was found 
in those proceedings by Advocate Van Graan that the 
advanced payment system, particularly the act of paying on 
session was introduced through a decision of the MEC, 
yourself, the former HOD Mr Mokoena, and the former chief 
financial officer Ms Dlamini.  You have a comment on that? 
MR ZWANE:  Through, I would say through a decision of 
20 
the executive committee which was researched at that 
particular time.  And finally brought to me when it was 
signed.  And I agreed with that.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Certain adjustments had to 
be made to the housing subsidy system to accommodated 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 99 of 232 
 
these advance payments.  Do you know about that?  And 
we’ve discussed the retention clause.  Do you recall that? 
MR ZWANE:  I remember the retention clause and the 
guarantees that were supposed to be there.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh.  Those were removed.  Did you 
know about that?  Did you give those instructions? 
MR ZWANE:  No Chair, I wouldn’t give such an inst – in 
fact I did not tamper with the, the legal means of 
instrument in running this scheme.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Notwithstanding your participation 
10 
in the advanced payment scheme and the participation of 
Mr Mokoena, we know that there were no consequences 
that you face disciplinary or otherwise in the ensuing year, 
am I correct?  The only people to be disciplined and 
dismissed, lose their jobs were the five officials who were 
subject to the disciplinary inquiry.  And they were found 
guilty of participating in the war room meetings and in the 
advanced payment system.  That was what they were found 
guilty of and fired for.  Is that not somewhat unfair?   
MR ZWANE:  Well Chair as I went through this document I 
20 
think there were other matters that were also put as 
charges to those officials.  But when it comes to the 
specific matter, I think it would be, it would have been 
unfair that the junior officials under the accounting officer 
would be called and faced the music for the documents 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 100 of 232 
 
that was researched and produced and signed, or approved 
by the accounting officer.  I think it is unfair that that 
process had to be dealt with the way it has been dealt 
with.  I always carried a view and as I read here that some 
of these officials had other issues like giving contract out 
of the signed allocations and other matters.  Otherwise I 
would agree with the Chair that pertaining to this matter it 
would have started at the head.  And if there is any issue 
that the, the team, the disciplinary team wanted to raise or 
find out at least, I would have been gladly wanted to 
10 
cooperate with that process to say the least. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, well an observer might remark 
that the more junior officials were targeted as escape 
goats for the decisions of more senior officials.   
MR ZWANE:  Well Chair, it, it seems like that publicly as, 
as it happened.  I wouldn’t, I wouldn’t blame the HOD who 
took that decision that if there’s something untoward what 
was supposed to be the normal running of things, that 
issue should be corrected. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  You’ve gone as far as the 
20 
HOD, what about the MEC Mr Zwane? 
MR ZWANE:  Well Chair the – to be fair with this 
Commission 
I 
had 
not 
committed 
any 
wrongdoing 
knowingly, or any – I have not rejected any proposal as the 
MEC by then that was brought to me by my team.  Even 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 101 of 232 
 
when we were at the meeting where issues were raised, I 
gave them a chance to go and research and make sure that 
we have a sound document that we can work on.  During 
December the minutes will, will tell you.  30 t h Of December.  
A concern was raised.  I called the meeting in Bethlehem 
where the CFO had raised issue in terms of the controls.  
And I requested that those controls must actually be 
addressed.  So from where I am seated, I have done 
everything in my power to ensure that any wrongdoing 
should be eliminated.  And there is proof to that effect.  I 
10 
wouldn’t have participated in any way, in any wrongdoing, 
knowingly.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I hear your denial and let me put 
the proposition to you.  Well let me put another proposition 
to you because it does seem from the evidence that a 
legitimate argument can be made that the law was 
deliberately ignored for the purposes of spending the 
money before the end.  And in fact that was said by the 
department 
in 
its 
founding 
affidavit 
in 
later 
review 
proceedings.  But let me not tax you with that.  You were 
20 
not part of that drafting.  That evidence is before the Chair 
and 
your 
evidence 
will 
be 
weighed 
up 
against 
that 
evidence, including the evidence that we’ve dealt with over 
the last three days.  Court will bare with – I’m sorry.  Chair 
if you would bear with me for a moment.  Given our 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 102 of 232 
 
discussion before we started with evidence Mr Zwane, we 
over that hour.  So if I may say you lose the bet, but 
hopefully we can speed up.  I want to put certain different 
propositions to you and I dread asking this question or 
raising this topic again and that’s the list of the 106.  You 
remember we spent a day discussing that and other lists.  
That evidence is on record and I hope we don’t have to go 
down that route again.  But I need, I need to put to you 
certain things that Mr Mokoena said and Advocate Van 
Graan found about that list.  Mr Mokoena says that he was 
10 
given a list of contractors, 106 contractors by yourself and 
he was told by you to appoint those contractors.  What do 
you say to that?  It seems to be reasonably consistent with 
your evidence. 
MR ZWANE:  I deny that issue Chair.  I have earlier on 
indicated how the process was run in that department and I 
never interfered that process.  There would be a time 
where the officials lead by HOD, that will after following 
processes, due processes in terms of procurement will then 
approach the MEC to say we are ready, this is what must 
20 
be done in terms of allocation and the contractors. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
MR ZWANE:  So I deny that I, myself gave him a list that 
he does not know where it comes from.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright, well he might have known 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 103 of 232 
 
where it comes from, but we know from your evidence at 
least that you approved that list.  And signed it, in 
September 2010.   
MR ZWANE:  I did not sign only that list Chair.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well you might have signed other 
lists. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But you signed that list and we 
know that that was the list which formed the basis of later 
appointments of contractors and suppliers.   
10 
MR ZWANE:  Even in my evidence I have not denied 
knowing the list Chair.  My issue has always been how the 
list was developed.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
MR ZWANE:  The list I know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We’ll come to that in a moment.   
MR ZWANE:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But for the moment you signed the 
list.   
MR ZWANE:  That is correct, ja. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You approved the list. 
MR ZWANE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is your evidence. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We’ve been through that. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 104 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  For hours on end.   
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that list was the list from which 
suppliers and contractors were chosen in November and 
December and part of January 2010 and 2011.  Correct? 
MR ZWANE:  That is the list that came as a result of the 
earlier dispute by contractors when we had actually said 
the work must started earlier in August.  Exco gave that 
decision.  And there was a dispute declared by this other 
10 
contractors, so the whole process had to, had to be 
stopped. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I was hoping we wouldn’t have to … 
MR ZWANE:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Go down there again.   
MR ZWANE:  Oh okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, I can’t stop you if you wish to 
go down there. 
MR ZWANE:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But all I can say … 
20 
MR ZWANE:  I’m saying … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well let me, let me stand back.  You 
give your evidence.  
MR ZWANE:  Maybe it would have helped me to hear what 
the leader of evidence wants to say. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 105 of 232 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, alright.  I will try and help.  
But it’s not very helpful.  We’ve studied the evidence of 
that day closely.  And there is not one consistent version, 
but there on our calculation varying versions that total 
about seven in total.  And I’m not going to go through that 
because we would spend weeks here. 
MR ZWANE:  Okay, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The evidence that you gave 
understandably as evidence from your own recollection 10 
years ago. 
10 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And I think you will concede that 
during the course of the day it differed from time to time.  
You corrected yourself, different explanations were given.  
But what – you agree with that, because you nod? 
MR ZWANE:  No, I do agree Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  That list of 106 we eventually 
learned from your later versions that it was not the list 
presented to Exco on the 30 t h of January, oh 30 t h of June 
2010.  It was a later list compiled and signed by you in 
20 
October.  Let’s can we settle for that at least? 
MR ZWANE:  We can settle for that provided it would say it 
also contained some of the contractors that were there in 
the list of June.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well whether it did or not there 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 106 of 232 
 
were 23 of those contractors … 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That we know from the open 
auditor ’s report. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But there were 83 others that came 
from various sources and I’ll give you some detail in that 
regard in due course. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But what I wanted to put to you for 
10 
the moment is not the chequered history of that list, to put 
it at its lowest, but simply to tell you what Mr Mokoena said 
and asked for your comment. 
MR ZWANE:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Mokoena said that he queried 
with you that on that list were many companies or 
contractors that he was seeing for the first time.  And he 
asked, why are there so many new contractors on this list.  
And he resp – you responded according to Mr Mokoena by 
saying, this is my list or this is my plan and I have the 
20 
power to allocate.   
MR ZWANE:  I deny that fact Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And he said that after the war room 
meetings 
that 
you 
made 
allocations 
of 
contracts 
to 
contractors and suppliers.   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 107 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:  I deny that fact Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That was also a finding of mister, 
Advocate Van Graan after reviewing the evidence put 
before him.  That, that evidence was confirmed by Mr 
Mkhatshwa who said that you chose contractors that would 
be allocated unit to build.   
MR ZWANE:  Mr Mkhatshwa would have never been with 
me at any moment as I have indicated our interaction was 
with HOD.  I would not understand how, how would he know 
at least to say the least to what he is saying.   
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We dealt with this last time very 
briefly and I think your response to the proposition which is 
important now to raise in respect of questions I’m about to 
put was that on that list there were a number of contractors 
who had not been part of the group of contractors that 
submitted bids in the open tender process in April 2010.  
You said you didn’t know about that, do you recall that? 
MR ZWANE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There were also a number of 
contractors who had been disqualified during that process.  
20 
Do you know anything about that? 
MR ZWANE:  No Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well we’ve compared the bidders 
list and the documentation relating to that process, the bid 
evaluation committee documents and the bid adjudication 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 108 of 232 
 
committed documents, and we’ve compared that with the 
list of 106.  Not going to go through those lists with you 
but merely to say there were, there was a material number 
of people who did not partake in that process who found 
their way onto the list of 106.  And there were in addition 
people who had been disqualified.  There was some 
discussion – you nod your head. We’ve established that.  
We’ve established that you don’t know anything about that, 
can’t contest it.  But there, there was a discussion at the 
last hearing that perhaps that list of 106 comprised those 
10 
people who had passed the threshold of acceptance in the 
tender process.  And I just want to put to you that’s not 
correct on our research.  And we’ll put the detail in our 
submissions.   
MR ZWANE:  That was my assumption as you will 
remember Chair.  When I was asked my understanding of 
the list I had signed.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR ZWANE:  I’ve said those lists should have been 
composed of all the contractors who have passed the test.  
20 
That is what I said in this Commission and I want to stand 
with that.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Well an examination of the 
list will show what it shows.  And that in fact is confirmed 
in the open waters report and just for the record if I could 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 109 of 232 
 
give a reference, it is at best there is 15 page 537 and 
following paragraphs 7.6 where those particular bidders 
are listed for people who didn’t bid are listed and people 
who did bid and were disqualified are listed.  Now 
according to the investigators and the evidence leader ’s 
examination of these various lists, we found a number of 
contractors who found their way onto the list of 106, but 
did not tender at all in the open bidding process.  And two 
of those were Rob’s Construction and Thuthella Logolo(?).  
Do you know of those entities? 
10 
MR ZWANE:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Mr Mokoena in his 
statement said that on that list of 106, he did not recognise 
the first six contractors that were recorded on that list.  He 
remembers the names of three of them.  That Allatory, 
Koena Property Developers and Raloto Properties.  Do you 
recall the names of those contractors? 
MR ZWANE:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Mokoena he put it as a belief he 
had no, more than a belief based on what I will put to you.  
20 
But these contractors were close to you Mr Zwane because 
you called Mokoena personally to expedite their payments.  
What do you say?  You have read Mr Mokoena’s evidence, 
what do you say about that? 
MR ZWANE:  I deny that evidence Chair.   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 110 of 232 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He also says, well Mr Makesi(?) 
said in the founding affidavit, in the review proceedings, 
that it would have been irregular for a MEC to be involved 
in the appointment of contractors.  You would concede 
that? 
MR ZWANE:  That’s what I’ve been saying all along Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Let’s just deal with Rod’s 
Construction for a moment and I want to put to you what 
the investigators have found during the course of the 
investigations.  Rob’s Construction with that name appears 
10 
on the list of 106.  I presume you don’t contest that.   
MR ZWANE:  I would not contest any name appearing on 
the list that I have signed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And they do not appear on the bid 
evaluation committee minutes which is a full list of all 
those who tendered.  So the allocation list reference Chair 
is it is for 14.224 and 225.  That’s where Rob Construction 
name would appear on the list at those pages.  And the bid 
evaluation committee minutes appear at FS20 page 63.  All 
this will be summarised in the work yet to be done by the 
20 
legal team Chair.  The investigators go further in their 
report to say that Rob’s Construction appears to be a 
trading name for Rob’s Investment Holdings Pty Ltd.  Do 
you know anything about that? 
MR ZWANE:  No Chair. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 111 of 232 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  And the reason they say 
that is in a later tender Rob’s Investment Holdings Pty Ltd 
including, included housing allocations given to Rob’s 
Construction as part of its own experience.  So it cited 
Rob’s Construction as part of Rob’s Investment Holdings 
experience.  So they related companies according to the 
researchers.  
MR ZWANE:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You understand the proposition? 
MR ZWANE:  I understand Chair. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Rob’s Bricks received a payment of 
seven million rand.  It’s not clear whether that was as a 
material supplier or not.  That payment is shown in the 
investigator ’s report at FS20 page 203 to 205 Chair.  So 
the investigators have concluded that Rob’s Bricks and 
Rob’s Investment Holdings are associated as and part of 
that association would include Rob’s Construction.  Do you 
know a Mr Blackie Seoe, S-E-O-E?  Seoe? 
MR ZWANE:  Yes, I know him Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you know that he was the sole 
20 
director of Rob’s Investment Holdings at the time? 
MR ZWANE:  No Chair.  
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
That 
also 
appears 
in 
the 
supplementary investigator … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well do you know, even if you don’t know 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 112 of 232 
 
that he may have been the sole director, do you know him 
to have been part of that entity. 
MR ZWANE:  I know him Chair as somebody who was very 
close to sports especially boxing.  If I am not mistaken I 
think at a particular time he participated because I used to 
see him in that kind an activity.  I know he is from Free State 
also. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh but you do not know him to be 
connected to any particular company or entity? 
MR ZWANE:  No I would not know all his companies. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright. 
MR ZWANE:  I would not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The relevant references just for the 
record for the moment Chair appear at FS21.827 and 
FS21.832 to 3.  That by way of background we know from the 
researches of the investigators that Robs Construction 
received housing allocations towards the end of 2010 -2011 
– beginning of 2011.  Do you know that for a fact or not? 
MR ZWANE:  Outside – outside the 106. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No they were on the 106. 
MR ZWANE:  And then they received other allocation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No and as a result of being on that 
list they received housing allocations. 
MR ZWANE:  My recollection is that all the 106 contractors 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 113 of 232 
 
should have been allocated. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right so you would not have a 
problem with the fact that if Robs Construction were on that 
list they received allocations? 
MR ZWANE:  I would not have had a problem with any 
contractor Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On that list because I would have assumed 
that it had gone through processes and it is correct for them 
to be there. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well we know that they did not go 
through the open tender process and they were not on that 
result and data base but let me just put that to you as a fact 
I do not want to go back into the data base the 106’s the 
journey enough for the moment unless of course you want to 
go there of course you are entitled to do so.  But anyway let 
me just take this story a little further.   
 
Lucky Seoe and Mr Magashule were co-directors of 
an entity called Sambal, S-a-m-b-a-l Investments, did you 
know that? 
20 
MR ZWANE:  No I do not Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  That evidence comes from the 
transcript of an interview that the investigators had with Mr 
Seoe he is since deceased recently deceased.  So it is a 
transcript of an investigator interview for the record again 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 114 of 232 
 
FS13 3AA 389.  So the CIPC the official record show that Mr 
Magashule and Blackie Seoe were former directors in a 
company together.   
 
But we know too from FS12 391.31 that a payment 
was made from Rob Investment Holdings to Ms Cholota in 
the Premier’s office and that receipt was acknowledged by 
Ms Cholota.   
 
So we know that without a formal process a company 
received a benefit as a contractor towards the end of 2010 
that there was some association – business association 
10 
between the rector or that company although you do not 
know that and Mr Magashule and that subsequently a 
payment was made from Robs Investment Holdings to the 
office of the Premier.  Do you know anything about that? 
MR ZWANE:  No Chair.  I only saw the transcripts in this 
document but prior to that I did not know anything. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Really.  And interviews have been 
held with the person of Robs Investment Holdings who made 
the payment Mr Mtwentula, do you know him? 
MR ZWANE:  Mr? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mtwentua – M-t-w-e-n-t-u-l-a 
MR ZWANE:  No Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Chair all that information is 
contained in the Investigators Report in some detail.  You 
recall that at the last chairing we spoke about a person 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 115 of 232 
 
Rochelle Els, do you recall that? 
MR ZWANE:  Rochelle? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Do you know who she was? 
MR ZWANE:  I have met Rochelle I think when we were 
expecting some – inspecting some houses. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes she is a member of the Thuthela  
Bogolo Trading Enterprise CC an entity which also appeared 
on the 106 list but did not appear on the bid evaluation 
committee lists as a tenderer. She received a housing 
allocation and Mr Mokoena’s evidence is that he believed 
10 
that Rochelle Els was close to Mr Magashule.  We have dealt 
with that you recall? 
MR ZWANE:  Yes I recall Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And the reason given by Mr 
Mokoena for that evidence was that because you Mr Zwane 
used to tell Mr Mokoena that Mr Magashule has said that Els 
should be appointed and her claims should be expedited.  
What do you say about that? 
MR ZWANE:  I can put it in this commission that Mr – the 
HOD Gift Mokoena was more close to the former Premier 
20 
than me.  I think if there was issue of that nature that issue 
would be communicated with him not me as he have 
indicated in this commission of how far they come both of 
them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have also since obtained a 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 116 of 232 
 
second affidavit of Mr Mokoena and again I must put it to 
you although I do not want to revisit the evidence of the last 
hearing but if you wish to do so of course you may.   
Mr Mokoena says yes indeed a data base of eligible 
contractors was kept.  That there was a data base that was 
kept.  But he said it was never the position that someone 
could just be given a contract because they appeared on the 
data base or that one’s presence or listing on a data base 
entitled one to receive an allocation of houses to be built 
and the like. 
10 
 
The purpose of a data base was to notify people on 
the data base or to notify entities on the data base that a 
tender was going to be issued and that they could then 
tender in a formal process.  Have you read that affidavit? 
MR ZWANE:  Yes I have. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What do you say about that? 
MR ZWANE:  I find it very strange Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well… 
MR ZWANE:  In fact other evidences including Mmuso 
Tsoametsi’s evidence would say they will call it – they will go 
20 
out for tenders and those tenders will be adjudicated and 
become a data base where it could be allocated for the next 
five years for those contractors that appear on the tender 
and that is what I was told. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well the fundamental difference 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 117 of 232 
 
between you and Mr Mokoena on that because what 
Mokoena says in his affidavit is your – you could be invited 
to an advertisement process to express interest in appearing 
on a data base but thereafter the allocation of work would 
depend on a fair procurement system.   
MR ZWANE:  Well Chair that is not what I was told.  That 
process lies with him when he was a HOD. Mr Mokoena was 
there in 2004 when this other process did take place.  So I 
would not do – I would not delve much in terms of how they 
administered administratively because that was not my space 
10 
and I have never interfered with that space.   
If an open tender was called for I had all supported 
it.  If they came back with the data base giving me reasons 
there is people who have been there I have never given them 
a problem but I am saying officials who have been there 
longer than me are giving different versions of how the 
department used to perform there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course you did testify that although you 
might not when you came to the department you might now 
have known about the Housing Act.  You did know the – you 
20 
did know about the PFMA and you did know about – ja you 
did know about the PFMA and you had an understanding of 
that, is that correct? 
MR ZWANE:  I did… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is my recollection of your evidence 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 118 of 232 
 
correct? 
MR ZWANE:  I corrected myself Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZWANE:  On the 12 October. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZWANE:  That I had seen the Housing Act. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZWANE:  And I knew about it – I was told about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZWANE:  Although I relied more on the PFMA. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ZWANE:  Because I was from the municipality. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes.  The – Section 6.3 I was taken aboard on 
those sections where the MEC administered and so forth and 
so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.   
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are saying that your last evidence was 
that … 
20 
MR ZWANE:  I corrected it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You corrected yourself and you said you 
knew about the Housing Act. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 119 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:  That is – yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and you had an understanding of it or 
you just knew about it? 
MR ZWANE:  The – I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Housing Act. 
MR ZWANE:  I understand it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You understood it as well. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes I understood it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright.  But you – my focus is the 
PFMA. 
10 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – you – am I correct in understanding 
that 
what 
you 
said 
last 
time 
was 
that 
you 
had 
an 
understanding of the requirements of the PFMA? 
MR ZWANE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now was it your understanding that if 
there is a data base – if there are companies who are on the 
department’s data base there is no need to go on open 
tender or was your understanding that the two are not 
inconsistent with each other.   
20 
The fact that you have a data base of companies 
does not mean – does not exempt you from going on open 
tender when you are supposed to go on open tender.  What 
was your own understanding of the position? 
MR ZWANE:  I think it will help us Chair to separate the data 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 120 of 232 
 
base as it appears on the PFMA because it will have 
limitations in terms of the amounts and so forth.  Maybe try 
to understand how the data base used by the Department of 
Housing at that particular time used to be done.   
 
A competitive process would be entered into like the 
constitution and other relevant acts would want.  And out of 
that action instead of looking for ten contractors that are 
going to get a job for that particular year you go and look for 
150 and then you come back and put all these contractors 
that have undergone that competitive process to be on the – 
10 
on your list which is famously  
CHAIRPERSON:  That data base. 
MR ZWANE:  Which has famously gone to data base. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ja. 
MR ZWANE:  But… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja the list. 
MR ZWANE:  The list. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ZWANE:  This is the list that even the evidence of some 
of the people who were here was saying for the next five 
20 
years that list will be used.  Maybe for the purpose of this 
commission let use the word list. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZWANE:  And that list will be used until it expires. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 121 of 232 
 
MR ZWANE:  In the next five years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZWANE:  And – so because that had followed a 
competitive process Chair that is how things were happening 
when I came there and I expressed at some point a view I 
must say which is not in my evidence that – why is that so?  
Why can we not every time when we have a project go 
through this process? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Open tender process. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes.  They said there is no time when we are 
10 
not building houses in this department whether unfinished 
houses or new houses.  
 
Now if you are here after you are going to be entering 
into this process it takes time and you are not going to 
finish.  So this is how we are doing it here and well I – I then 
understood what they were saying and that is what I aligned 
myself with when I was there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay just to – to summarise that.  Am I 
correct in saying what you are saying is after talking to them 
about this data base of list phenomenon. 
20 
MR ZWANE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Your 
understanding 
was 
that 
once 
companies or entities had been included in the data base or 
in the list one that would be for five years. 
MR ZWANE:  That is correct Chair. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 122 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And two there would be no open tender 
process in respect of each project that might come up. 
MR ZWANE:  Within the five years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Within the five years and – but your 
understanding was that before a company or companies were 
put onto the data base there would be a competitive process. 
MR ZWANE:  Process yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So therefore your understanding was that 
in respect of the building of houses during any particular 
term five year term it is in order for companies that are on 
10 
the data base to be given contracts to build houses without 
any further open tender process, is that correct? 
MR ZWANE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes well let us from our point of view 
just summarise that because your most recent answer does 
not accord with the law but I think you have foreshadowed 
that by referring to the amounts contained in Treasury 
Regulations. 
MR ZWANE:  Yes sure. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  On the limits imposed by that.  But 
the first proposition is pressure of time for the completion of 
a particular project is no reason for departing from the 
prescripts 
governing 
procurement. 
 
There 
are 
some 
provisions that allow emergency procurement processes to 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 123 of 232 
 
take place but they are very strict.  Time alone is not 
sufficient.  You – are you aware of that? 
MR ZWANE:  Yes I am aware Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Secondly the Treasury 
Regulations deal with data bases but they specify that above 
a certain amount I think at the time it might have been 
R500 000, I am not … 
MR ZWANE:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You still have to despite your 
presence on a data base be subject to a competitive bidding 
10 
process, do you know that? 
MR ZWANE:  I know that Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And many of the allocations that we 
are dealing with here exceeded that amount.  Correct? 
MR ZWANE:  There are those who exceed yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  So despite your presence or 
listing on a data base and perhaps I should not use the word 
list because I will come to that in a moment. A competitive 
bidding process may yet be required in relation to a 
particular contract over R500 000.00.  For those under 
20 
R500 000.00 different provisions apply.  You are aware of 
that?  You mentioned it. 
MR ZWANE:  I thought I had clarify myself that my 
understanding of this process is that let us take a company 
who will tick all the boxes of being able to be awarded well 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 124 of 232 
 
beyond 500 the company who will tick all those process 
during an open tender as this is explained.   
The difference will be instead of looking for ten 
companies that are going to build 100 houses there will be 
150 companies that have gone through the same process 
that the ten companies have undergone.  Meaning they tick 
all the boxes.  They then are as reserves of any project that 
comes.   
That is the explanation I got Chair which – which to 
me as I am seated here becomes slightly different from a 
10 
data base.  Because a normal data base as described by the 
law can only be compiled with a particular amount as the 
leader of evidence is saying, that I know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes well a data base is a legitimate 
tool in the procurement process.  The establishment of a 
data base is governed by law and particularly Treasury 
Regulations. But even one’s presence on the data base does 
not entitle one to be granted a contract over R500 000.00 if 
that is to happen there must be a competitive bidding 
process.  That is what the law says. 
20 
MR ZWANE:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Your understanding of it we can look 
at in the course of time and assess it.  But what I do want to 
put to you is that there appear to be two issues that may 
have been conflated or confused. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 125 of 232 
 
 
The first issue is a list.  That is an established list 
from which you believed as a department contractors could 
be appointed.  A data base says Mr Mokoena is something 
that precedes the compilation of the list.   
There would be an advertisement and I will give you 
an example in a moment to contractors that advertisement 
would say, please give us any interest you may want to 
express in getting work.  We will then put you on a data base 
and when there is a need to allocate work we will contact 
you and invite you to bid.  
10 
 And if you would look at page FS12 372.23 you will 
see an example of such an advert.  Okay.  You do not want 
to go and trust me on it. 
MR ZWANE:  I have seen it Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You have seen it. 
MR ZWANE:  But the question becomes in this commission 
let us take the nearest.  The tender year 204 and 2009 was 
such a process of the expression of interest used.  Even in 
terms of the evidence given here by other people who were 
called 
here 
I 
think 
this 
issue 
we 
must 
in 
my 
own 
20 
understanding Chair is an issue that seeks to address the 
inadequacies which were there – which we must accept in 
this commission that in terms of the law there were issues 
that were not followed properly.  And at a particular time 
these issues they were an endeavour to try and correct these 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 126 of 232 
 
issues.  I would accept that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  In fact that is what the 
department went to court to establish in order to review the 
contracts given.  You know about that.  There has been 
extensive 
evidence. 
 
But 
perhaps 
that 
comment 
is 
unnecessary the evidence is on record.  It does not require 
your comment. 
 
I would like to move to another topic.  The  
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry Mr Pretorius maybe we should take a 
short adjournment I see it is four o’clock. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ten minutes and then we can continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we will be finished … 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is your estimate? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not putting pressure I just… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I think we would like to be finished by 
five but I think we may be finished by half past four. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no, no that is fine – that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay we will adjourn for ten minutes.  We 
adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 127 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, I would like to place 
something on record.  It seems I may have, in fact probably 
did, put a misleading proposition 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it must be corrected.  When 
dealing with the Robs Construction payment.  The payment 
by Robs Investment was made to an entity called SUD Trade, 
s-u-d t-r-a-d-e.  This may have been on the instruction of the 
premier’s office.  We do not know that.  That may be an 
10 
inference that might be drawn.   
 
But that payment was copied to the premier’s office and 
to Ms Cholota.  And acknowledgement of that payment was 
noted by Ms Cholota in the premier’s office.  So that is the 
correct sequence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You will recall evidence concerning 
the meeting of Exco on the 30t h of June 2010.  And we have 
dealt with the minute of that meeting.  You recall that?   
MR ZWANE:   Yes, sir. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mokoena says in his additional 
affidavit, and you would have noted that, that: 
“In the normal course of events, if the department 
reports to Exco, that report would be signed off by 
the head of department.” 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 128 of 232 
 
 
In other words, Mr Mokoena.   
MR ZWANE:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that a correct statement? 
MR ZWANE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And not only that but that the head 
of department would have been invited to the Exco meeting. 
Is that correct? 
MR ZWANE:   Yes, that is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  The Exco Resolution which 
we have dealt with refers to a report from the department but 
10 
Mokoena says he did not sign off on any such report, nor 
was he invited to the meeting.  Can you confirm that? 
MR ZWANE:   Well, Chair.  I think I must say what I have 
said – agreed with, is correct.  But ...[indistinct] [00:02:45] 
Mokoena should have also said that before the Exco, there is 
a structure called Four(?) Hot(?)/Forward(?) [00:02:52].  
That 
structure 
is 
a 
structure 
composed 
of 
head 
of 
department and the DG in preparing for Exco.   
 
So if somebody for any reasons is not going to be part of 
Exco, they would be part of Four Hot/Forward [00:03:15] 
20 
wherein an agenda is prepared.   
 
They would also become part of the Four Hot/Forward(?) 
[00:03:22] after the Exco could track down in terms of what 
they needed to make follow-ups and report back in terms of 
the timeframes.   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 129 of 232 
 
 
So it will not be correct that all these other processes, 
the former HOD would come here and deny.  He knew about 
this meeting.  He knew about the outcome of the meeting.  
And as much as I – I knew of them.  I think that is what I 
want to depose to this Commission.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, we know that the minute 
mentions a list given to the Exco for its consideration, 
correct? 
MR ZWANE:   The...[intervenes]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...mention? 
MR ZWANE:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What Mr Mokoena says further that 
he never, at that time, knew of any list, whether for new or 
existing projects that had been sent to the MEC.  That is 
yourself, and by implication. Exco. 
MR ZWANE:   The question...  Then the question becomes:  
What did he do?  Because if he did not know about this list 
and this list was produced by me and it was irregular...   
 
According to the PMFA, he should have objected to this 
20 
matter and reported the matter.  And this matter is only 
raised here in the Commission.   
 
Mr Mokoena knew about all the lists that were there.  He 
supported them.  He even participated in terms of drawing 
contracts for all these lists Chair.  If he was – he had a 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 130 of 232 
 
problem with any of the lists, he should have not even 
participated because that would have been illegal and it 
would have formed fruitless and wasteful expenditure and we 
all know what the law says about that.  He knew.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You were the one who attended that 
meeting and made that report.   
MR ZWANE:   I was the one who did what Chair? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You attended the meeting of Exco on 
the 30t h of June and made that report to Exco referred to in 
the minute. 
10 
MR ZWANE:   I made that report Chair and there was 
presentation.  In that presentation and the presentation, if I 
am not mistaken, it is part of these records.  It even says the 
department has gone into a vigorous process to ensure that 
all the participants that were in that list are correctly there.   
 
They had been vetted and so they qualify.  That was the 
presentation according to the minutes and I could not without 
the help of administration knows those issues because I do 
not vet any people.  I do not do those issues.  They are 
administrative issues. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Well, we have been through 
the list, how they were comprised and the existence or 
otherwise of competitive bidding processes preceding the 
compilation of the list.  I do not want to go there.  I do want 
to deal briefly, finally, with the affidavit you submitted to the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 131 of 232 
 
Commission regarding the Housing Act.   
MR ZWANE:   Yes.  Do I want to do what Chair? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, I want to deal with it. 
MR ZWANE:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I may? 
MR ZWANE:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The procurement policy required in 
terms of Section 3(2)(cA) of the Housing Act was, according 
to our researchers, introduced by the minister with effect 
from April 2002.  It was – that is Chapter 3A of the 2000 
10 
Housing Code.  That is simply for the record.  Those 
references.  But did you know, at the time you were MEC, of 
that procurement policy?   
MR ZWANE:   No, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then I would like to deal with 
this issue of delegation because it may be a matter of 
concern to the Chair to consider certain recommendations to 
tighten any loopholes that might exist.   
 
The earliest reference that we could find and in the short 
time available to us – perhaps our researchers need some 
20 
further work - but in 2013 there was a document entitled 
Principles 
of 
Public 
Administration 
and 
Financial 
Management Delegations, approved by Cabinet which stated 
that: 
“Any delegation or authorisation to exercise a power 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 132 of 232 
 
or perform a duty, does not diverse the principle 
functionary of the responsibility concerning the 
exercise of the delegated power or performance of 
the duty.” 
 
Now we know that in the Housing Act, the MEC has 
certain duties and powers.  Those delegations would in 2013 
had been subject to these delegations conditions.  Their 
accountability would have remained.   
 
And we have established that, certainly as far as we 
know and as far as you are concerned, those provisions did 
10 
not exist before 2013.  And may need to be looked at once 
again Chair in relation to delegation and accountability for 
the functions delegated. 
MR ZWANE:   If I may just comment Chair?  I think this issue 
gels in with what I have said earlier on that due to some 
development, new acts were introduced to try and deal with 
those developments and I think it is a good example of that 
kind of – an issue that I have raised earlier on.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is there anything you wish to add 
Mr Zwane? 
20 
MR ZWANE:   Chair, I think I agree that with the - with the 
answering of a democratic government.  A number of things 
had to be taken care of.  And the issue of tightening the act, 
coming with new acts, could try and look at the situation that 
was prevalent at that particular time.  It became a big issue.   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 133 of 232 
 
 
And over time, we were able as government to plug the 
holes that seemed to be there unchecked because of 
legislation.  I think that is what I want to put on this issue 
Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And finally and in summary, let us – 
the legal team gives the wrong impression Chair.  We would 
still rely on the allegations made in the review affidavit 
submitted by Mr Mkhize as to the nature and intent behind 
the Advanced Payment System but you know about that and 
we have put it.  Chair, those are the questions.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Zwane.   
MR ZWANE:   Chair, I just wish to quickly express my 
appreciation for the commitment that this Commission has 
shown.  Under normal circumstances, we would have been 
given a chance to go and be with our family.  It is Christmas 
time and we have many other issues.   
 
But this Commission has taken its work seriously.  And I 
want to say on my part, as I have said earlier on, I want – I 
wish to cooperate with this Commission and I think I have 
displayed that.   
20 
 
Even this morning, I was supposed to come here at four.  
I was called earlier and I availed myself.  I will continue 
doing that even for future if I am needed.   
 
I did say the last time, I feel very comfortable in terms of 
how this Commission has treated me up to this part.  I also 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 134 of 232 
 
want to thank you for having made this time for me to come 
and clarify those issues that may remain hanging in the 
minds of people.  I have indicate that I did not have anything 
to do with the Rochelle or Blakey.  I did not take any 
instruction from anybody.   
 
And I will try in the future to ensure that whatever 
information I have, needed by the Commission, will assist 
the Commission.   
 
Otherwise, a blessed festive season for all of you.  I 
hope I will be called in January [laughs], not in December.  
10 
But should it happen that the Commission remembers me 
[laughs] during December, I am still committed to assist this 
Commission.  Otherwise, thank you very much Chair and the 
evidence leader and everybody.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, thank you Mr Zwane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, thank you very much Mr Zwane.  On 
all the information that I am aware of for now in the dealings 
between the Commission and yourself, the information I have 
is definitely that you have been cooperating.  That you have 
given this Commission cooperation.  So on the information 
20 
that I have, certainly that appears to be the position.   
 
And you are right that you were meant to appear only 
later and you were called and asked whether you could come 
earlier and you and your legal representatives agreed and 
we are grateful for that.   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 135 of 232 
 
 
Because there was a challenge which had happened but 
because you were able to come earlier, we are going to be 
able to also – I am going to be able to hear another witness.  
And if you had come at four o’clock, there might have been a 
clash.   
 
So on the information I know, you certainly have 
cooperated.  And we appreciate that you express – you feel 
free to express that you feel that you have been treated 
properly by the Commission.  We will always try.  Maybe we 
will not always be seen to be succeeding but certainly we 
10 
will always be trying.   
 
Thank you very much.  As you say, you will still come 
back because there is still some outstanding business and 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we reserve our rights. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  So.  But thank you for all the 
compliments you have given to the Commission.  And we 
also wish you an enjoyable festive season.   
 
We will try and make sure that we do not remember you 
on the 23r d of December or the 24t h and call you to come and 
20 
finish the outstanding business.  We will try and remember 
you in January or beyond that.  [laughs].   
 
Okay thank you.  And we – I take it that your legal 
representatives do not intend to – do not wish to re-
examine? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 136 of 232 
 
RE-EXAMINATION 
BY 
THE 
LEGAL 
REPRESENTATIVE:   
[Microphone not working properly] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you.  So you are now excused.  
Thank you very much.   
MR ZWANE:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think I must adjourn to allow the new 
evidence leader for the evening session to set up so that 
then I will come back and hear the next witness.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Otherwise, from your side, you and 
10 
your team are also excused. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Zwane’s legal representative is 
also excused.  Okay.  We will adjourn for ten minutes.  We 
adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon, Mr Seleka.  Good 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Good afternoon, Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Are we ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Please administer the oath.  Good 
afternoon Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 137 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Administer 
the 
oath, 
registrar, 
or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record? 
WITNESS:   Matshela Moses Koko. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objections in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes. 
10 
REGISTRAR:   Do you then swear that the evidence you will 
give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but 
the truth?  If so, please raise up your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
MATSHELA MOSES KOKO:  (d.s.s.) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, please switch on your mic Mr Barry. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Before you commence.  May I just hand 
these documents up to you Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   You will recall when we were in this 
chamber before, when I was not here, I did refer you to the 
issue regarding the documents that we were – you can 
recall, the records that we were unable to source from the 
Commission’s staff.   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 138 of 232 
 
 
And I then mentioned to you that it might be necessary 
for us in the circumstances to revert to the promotion of 
Access to the Information Act which we did have to do during 
the course of this week.  You are the Information Officer in 
terms of the act and the documents we ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it not the secretary the person? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   I cannot hear you sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it not the Secretary of Commission? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   No, not in terms of the legislation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Not in terms of the legislation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, what does it – do you remember what 
it says? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Well, it is the head of the organisation 
and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And that is you.  So you – so what I 
really want to enquiry about is.  Where you have been put in 
your put in your capacity as Information Officer, whether you 
have been put in possession of those documents?  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE SC:   The originals, you will see there on the 
9t h of December, two days ago. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have no recollection of seeing them but 
that does not necessarily mean they have not been placed 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 139 of 232 
 
on my desk? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   As you say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Especially if they are not recent, they may 
be on my desk and still to be seen but it is good that you 
have said now. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Ja, we needed assurance ...[intervenes]  
Yes. 
...that you are in possession of it ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...and that in your capacity under the act 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...you will give it the necessary attention.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, as I said the other time.  If it is 
information that we do have and it is relevant and there are 
no grounds why you should not be given, such information 
should be made available.  It, ordinarily, should not even be 
necessary to resort to the act but I am not criticising you for 
resorting to it for the reasons you have.   
20 
 
But there is no reason why, in principle you should not 
be given any information that is relevant to your client’s 
evidence if we have information.  Unless there are special 
grounds. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Thank you. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 140 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if there are special grounds, then one 
can deal with those. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   There is one further issue.  And that is 
rising from the earlier testimony of Mr Koko and what you put 
across during that.  We have drafted a supplementary 
affidavit which [laughs] attorney(?) [00:04:17] apparently on 
the 11t h of December if it is a Friday, you cannot find them 
anywhere near the office.   
 
So we had some difficulty for the affidavit to be 
commissioned but we did succeed in doing that.  And my 
10 
learned friend is in possession of the original which has now 
been commissioned and I understand the copies have been 
made.  So I assume that that will also now be made available 
to you.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no fine. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   So it would be relevant to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
BARRIE 
SC: 
 
 
...what 
happened 
on 
the 
3rd 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV 
BARRIE 
SC: 
 
 
...as 
well 
as 
what 
happened 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...what is at issue today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 141 of 232 
 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Then the third issue is, though, and that 
is referred to in affidavit is.  Where he said yesterday:  My 
attorneys seemed ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second Mr Barrie.  The aircon is 
quite noisy but I do not know if it is without it, it might be too 
hot.  How is the...?  Is it hot? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   I am ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You are fine? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...very well.  So. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe if you do not switch it off 
10 
completely, at least if you – can you down it a little bit.  That 
would help.  Before you continue Mr Barrie.  Registrar, give 
these documents to the secretary and say he must discuss 
them with me.  Okay.  Yes? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Chair, and then, yesterday at about – I 
think my attorney received the document at about quarter 
past ten in the morning and it is quite a substantial affidavit, 
a further affidavit that Ms Daniels has deposed to.  I think it 
was deposed to on the 30t h of November but it was only 
given to us yesterday.   
20 
 
And in this affidavit, we would have really liked to deal 
with that affidavit as well because it is directly relevant to 
today but in the circumstances, we were unable to do so.   
 
I do not even know when it came to my attention and to 
my client’s attention but we are going to respond on affidavit 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 142 of 232 
 
to that affidavit in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   So I just want to draw that to your 
attention.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine.  My understanding, 
given the time that we are commencing, is that we will try 
and finish evidence at least relating to the suspensions 
today.  It appears from what I have been told that there is 
someone to have said Mr Koko must come in the morning at 
ten o’clock but it said he must come at four.   
10 
 
The witness that I was hearing earlier on, Mr Zwane, 
was the one who was arranged to come at four o’clock.  So it 
looks like...  Well, Mr Seleka is the one who knows.  It looks 
like some problem happened.  And if mister...   
 
If the summons had said ten o’clock, it may have been 
possible to cover more than the issue of suspensions 
because we would have had the whole day but now we do 
not.  But the – an arrangement will be made for Mr Koko to 
come back in due course to cover whatever else we will not 
have been able to cover today.   
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   On that subject Mr Chair.  There are two 
further subjects, apart from the suspension of the executives 
that my client was directed to, provide a response.  The one 
relates then to the Tegeta Contract if I can put it broadly in 
that way.  And the other relates to the McKinsey Master 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 143 of 232 
 
Services Agreement.   
 
From what you have just said.  Can we assume that the 
plan of the Commission if I can put it in that way, is that 
those two subjects will be dealt with at the same time? 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no reason why they cannot – they 
should not be dealt with at the same time, as far as I am 
concerned.  I see Mr Seleka nods.  So I think that is the 
idea. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Okay.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, shall we proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   May we proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You confirm that you nodded? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I do.  I do Chairperson indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us proceed then. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
EXAMINATION BY ADVOCATE SELEKA SC(CONTINUES):   
Thank you, Chair.  Mr Koko, is coming for the second time.  
We could not finish the suspensions last time.  So we intend 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 144 of 232 
 
to do so this evening Mr Koko.  Chairperson, we are using 
for the proposes of Mr Koko’s evidence, Eskom Bundle 15.  
One, five.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Exhibit U-27. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Koko’s affidavit appears on page 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I got it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It has already been admitted as Exhibit 
U-27.1. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Ja.  Mr Koko, the 
Commission is trying to – its endeavour is meant to achieve 
the truth about what transpired in matters that it is 
investigating and we try to get to what is the truth.  And in 
this matter of suspension, we know that you have in your 
affidavit set out what you believe are the reasons why you 
were suspended.  And last time, we went through that 
exercise, also looking at the evidence that has been given by 
others and what the board itself had said. 
20 
 
Now, you have in your testimony last time, just to recap, 
you have said that Ms Tsholofele Molefe’s version is correct 
and you were referring specifically to where she goes to 
Mr Matona and speaks with him about the suspension as it 
appears from her affidavit. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 145 of 232 
 
 
And he in response, according to Ms Tsholofele Molefe, 
she says: 
“He also informed me that he had heard from 
outside sources that we were going to be suspended 
at the board meeting later that day.” 
 
Do you recall that? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Now, in your testimony you were 
saying that Mr Matona said to her:  I know about the 
suspension.  There is a slight difference in what you are 
10 
saying 
and 
what 
Ms 
Tsholofele 
Molefe 
says 
in 
that 
Mr Matona, according to Ms Tsholofele Molefe, he said: 
“He also informed me that he had heard from 
outside 
sources 
that 
we 
were 
going 
to 
be 
suspended...” 
 
Now I will come to Ms Tsholofele Molefe’s version in a 
moment.  Let us look at what you say is the knowledge you 
and Mr Matona had about your suspensions.  So according 
to you, you knew from Mr Matona that the two of you will be 
suspended if you do not unsuspend – and I use that word 
20 
which 
you 
have 
used 
in 
your 
affidavit 
– 
unsuspend 
Mr Sikhasimbe.  Correct? 
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You told the Chairperson that you were 
not aware – you did not have prior knowledge of the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 146 of 232 
 
suspension of the four executives.   
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have looked at your – the transcript of 
your testimony at the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee.  
Comparing it to your affidavit, it seems quite clear that, 
according to you, the meeting of the 9 t h and the meeting of 
the 11 t h would have had to do with the suspension of you and 
Mr Matona as the result of you not complying with Mr Tsotsi’s 
instruction.  Is that correct? 
MR KOKO:   Chairperson, I have listened to the audio and I 
10 
can certainly say the meeting of the 9 t h did not discuss 
suspensions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I can confirm to you that the meeting of the 11t h 
certainly did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  But my question is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Seleka.  There was 
something I wanted to say while Mr Barrie was on his feet 
which I forget.  I just want to... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Barrie, I just want to confirm that I did 
read the letter that you handed up last time.  Remember the 
letter that you handed up?  I did read it.  I did ask the legal 
team to ensure that they respond to the letter insofar as 
anything that relates to them.   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 147 of 232 
 
 
But it would help – I know that in the letter you talk to 
your client through your attorneys, talks about the various 
matters or things that he would like to be done or he wish to 
be done but he says they have not been done and so and so 
on.   
 
I – it would help me a lot if there was a chance that a 
separate document would be prepared that gives – say there 
is a clear list of the kind of things that we are asking for.   
 
Probably, if one goes through the letter – it is just it is 
not a short letter, it is quite lengthy – one can get them.  But 
10 
it would be help if a document is send to say:  We are asking 
that, for example, with regard you look at the audio, in 
regard to that meeting with regard to this, this is what is 
relevant about it.   
ADV BARRIE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know, if one has that list, then one 
can then say:  Okay this we have.  This we do not have.  Or 
this we can do.  Maybe this we cannot do.  It makes it easier 
to see how much of that we are able to do and how of that 
we are not able to do. 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If there is a chance that we could get 
something like that that would be helpful. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Much of what was in the letter...  Well, 
the whole letter is confirmed in the affidavit. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 148 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   In his supplementary affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And more detail is given. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Particularly about the issues that we 
submit do fall within your terms of reference. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But have not, apparently, been 
investigated before you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   So that is a major aspect of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And but I understand what you...  Is in 
other words, if we can point your investigators in the 
direction of where matters should be available, that could 
potentially support my client’s version of events. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, if we could get that.  But 
also it will help me because then I can just look at the list 
and say:  Well, what about that?  What about that?  What 
20 
about that? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Mr Chairman, there is another thing I 
must raise with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And that is, in the previous proceedings 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 149 of 232 
 
there were certain documents that were requested from my 
client.  And to be perfectly frank.  It was my responsibility 
and I ran out of time.  We will insofar as possible make those 
available to my learned friends. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But we have not yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   We apologise for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.   
ADV BARRIE SC:   Really.  It is just that ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   [Indistinct] [00:18:05] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, no.  That is fine.  Certainly, 
we may – certain things might not happen or might not be 
done at a certain time, but as far as I know, there is no 
reason to say we are not doing this because we have a 
certain narrative.   
 
In 2018, there is a clear letter or memo that I sent to the 
Head of the Legal Team and the Head of the Investigation 
Team and that memo, amongst other things, said the 
20 
Investigation Team and the Legal Team must make sure that 
they follow evidence.   
 
It does not matter who it leads to.  No matter what his 
position was before, what his position is now, what his 
position is likely to be in the future.  If the evidence leads to 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 150 of 232 
 
that person, they must do that.  And nobody must be spared.  
There is a specific memo that says that.   
ADV BARRIE SC:   We are gratified to learn of that.  Thank 
you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  I am sorry Mr Seleka.  I 
interrupted you.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, that is not a problem Chair.  Should 
I proceed Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Mr Koko, my question stems 
10 
from – because it is a different question.  It is not whether or 
not there was discussions about the suspensions in the 
meetings of the 9 t h and the 11t h.  It is about what you say 
was going to happen in those meetings.   
 
According to the way you narrate the issues, you give 
the understanding that that was your understanding that 
Mr Matona says you ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  But you know that Mr Matona has 
denied your version from his affidavit you have seen?  That 
20 
he – he says he did not say to you that if you do not 
unsuspend Mr Sikhasimbe, Mr Tsotsi is going to suspend you 
and him.  You see his denial? 
MR KOKO:   I have been Mr Matona’s affidavit and I am sure 
that he denies that.  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 151 of 232 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now.  And you have also admitted that 
you did not raise the issue of Mr Sikhasimbe with the board 
at the time of your suspension. 
MR KOKO:   I did not raise the issue with the board.  That is 
correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   When I was suspended on the 11t h of March. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   The earliest opportunity I got to meet the board 
after the 11t h of March, I certainly did and did so sharply. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  It is clear from the minister’s 
affidavit, Minister Browne, that she was also aware of the 
Sumitomo matter.  I have read a paragraph from her 
affidavit.  Do you remember that?   
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   And she said an executive from Eskom 
came in person to tell her about the issue.  Do you 
remember that? 
MR KOKO:   I remember that Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And you have listened to the audio 
20 
recordings, you have looked at the minutes of the meeting.  
It is apparent. from both the audio and the minute, that the 
minister came to the board on the 11t h of March around 
eleven or half-past eleven, had a meeting with the board but 
never raised the issue of Sumitomo with the board.  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 152 of 232 
 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, the meeting of where the minister 
was is not recorded.  And I have not seen the minutes.  So I 
do not know what the minister raised.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, I heard you earlier saying you have 
listened to the audios.  I think you do say in your affidavit, in 
fact, that the issue – even here you said, five minutes ago – 
the issue of the suspensions was definitely raised in the 
meeting of the 11 t h.  So you cannot be definite unless you 
know what took place in that meeting. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, there is no audio recordings, nor the 
10 
minute of the meeting of the 11t h where the board – where 
the minister was.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Yes, to the extent that he may have 
said that, Mr Seleka, he might have meant it was raised 
during the meeting of the 11t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not when the minister was there but 
maybe the one that came after. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course, that can be checked with 
20 
him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I have listened to the audio of the meeting after 
the minister left.  I have read the minute of the meeting after 
the minister left.  The minute – the meeting of the board with 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 153 of 232 
 
the minister was not recorded, nor minute taken.  So I do not 
know what the minister raised at the board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, but what I was saying was 
something different because you have made that point. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What I was saying is.  To the extent that 
you may have said as Mr Seleka was saying.  You may have 
said that issue was raised during the meeting of the board 
on the 11t h.  You may have meant during the meeting of the 
10 
board after the minister had left. 
MR KOKO:   Oh, certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I was saying, he could check with you 
whether that is what you meant. 
MR KOKO:   Certainly, that is what I meant. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Mr Koko I think you are right that it 
20 
was established before the Commission, at least insofar as 
evidence is led, that the audio record – the minute – the 
meeting with the minister was apparently not audio recorded.  
I think you are correct in that regard.  That is what has not 
been done here.  You follow? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 154 of 232 
 
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   You follow? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But we do have the minutes of that 
meeting in the file.  The evidence here does not show that 
the minister raised the Sumitomo matter with the board.  In 
fact, the minister comes there.  Dr Ngubane testified.  It is in 
his affidavit.  Mr Khoza was here recently.  It is also in his 
affidavit.   
 
That the minister, when she arrives there, raised four 
10 
areas of concern to the board and that area included your 
area.  And said the four executives should step aside.  It will 
be better if they step aside so that they do not hinder the 
inquiry that the minister wanted to have undertaken.  So that 
is the evidence before the Commission.  Do you have any 
comment? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, the part that I recollect is that the 
minister raised areas that she needed to be investigated and 
there were four areas.  I also recall the evidence in this 
Commission that says the minister did not instruct that 
20 
executives in those four areas be suspended.  She left it to 
the board.  That is the part that I remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I must check whether you heard 
evidence that said that she did not instruct or whether you 
heard evidence that she said at the time:  I cannot instruct 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 155 of 232 
 
the board ...[intervenes]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
MR KOKO:   No, I heard evidence here that the minister said 
she cannot instruct the board to suspend. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, did you hear evidence this week of 
Mr Khoza who said the minister – I think he said something 
like he wanted us to read between the lines. 
MR KOKO:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I asked him whether he could say that 
by implication the minister was instructing and he said yes 
10 
by implication.  Did you hear that evidence? 
MR KOKO:   No, I missed that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   I... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   When Mr Khoza was testifying, I was 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Busy. 
MR KOKO:   ...busy with the counsel putting together the 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  No, that is fine.  But certainly, 
there has been a lot of evidence to the effect that the 
minister made it clear that she cannot – she could not 
instruct the board.  And then of course, what each member of 
the board would make of what she said is another matter but 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 156 of 232 
 
that line was there. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, Chair.  I cannot comment on what the 
minister told the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Except what I just heard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  In fact, Dr Ngubane...  
Chair, you will recall.  He says after the minister left, it was 
absolutely clear to them that the minister wanted the inquiry 
and the minister wanted the executives to be suspended. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is the one thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The – we also asked Mr Khoza the same 
question whether it was clear to you after the minister left 
that that is what she wanted and he also confirmed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So Sumitomo, Mr Koko, was not raised 
with the board.   
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
I 
think 
what 
Mr 
Koko 
has 
been 
20 
emphasising, whenever you have raised that question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that, he did not raise it on the 11 t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he raised it later on. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 157 of 232 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   At the first earliest opportunity Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   When I realised ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...that the story that the board told me, was 
when they told me that they had – the board has information 
in their possession that points to sabotage in the area of my 
business.  Now once somebody...   
10 
 
You know, you should come to a meeting prepared.  And 
the board comes to you and say:  You know what?  We have 
evidence that your area of business has actually committed 
sabotage to the National Regulation, which is treason, that 
succumbs you.   
 
You immediately – it does not matter what – whether you 
wanted to – whatever you wanted to tell.  The board, the 
respectable board says:  We have evidence.  We have the 
evidence that your area is sabotaging the country by passing 
load shedding.  That succumbs you completely.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay continue Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Koko, that 
obviously should be contrasted with your attitude which you 
talked about when – by the time of Dr Ngubane’s board 
sought to suspend you and you say you told the board: If you 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 158 of 232 
 
suspend me you will be protecting corruption and I will go to 
the police immediately.  Do you remember that? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  So and that also be compared with 
your attitude that you went at length with the board to tell 
them that but you are suspending the person who is not 
responsible for maintenance.  You mentioned those two 
gentlemen. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, Mr Govender and Mr Ntsokolo. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right.  Now let us then look at 
10 
what you say in your affidavit in regard to your suspension.  
Please turn to page 45.  Eskom bundle 15, page 45, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   45.  Are you there, Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I found it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Mr Koko, are you also 
there? 
MR KOKO:   I am there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So just to put it in context, you talk 
20 
about a Dentons’ report and Ms Suzanne Daniels who does 
not have the report, says the report is destroyed and you 
question her why she cannot produce this report and this is 
at the time of the Dentons giving its investigation and 
report to the board.  Paragraph 154, Mr Koko you write: 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 159 of 232 
 
“Remember, the board at the time…” 
Now at a time that would have been June/July 2015 or 
even in March 2015. 
“…was acting on instructions from government to 
get 
rid 
of 
me. 
 
Why 
would 
the 
board 
have 
suppressed information that would have served its 
purpose 100%?  In addition, why would the board 
then 
in 
October 
2015 
appoint 
me 
as 
Group 
Executive 
Generation 
and 
Technology 
implying 
confidence 
in 
my 
abilities, 
competence 
and 
10 
integrity?  It is unthinkable that the board would put 
me in charge of the whole of Eskom’s power 
generation after such allegations had been made.  
It would have been a very serious dereliction of 
duty on their part” 
Now what is intriguing here, Mr Koko, is that fair sentence 
that the board at the time was acting on instructions from 
government to get rid of you.  That cancels everything 
about Mr Tsotsi seeking to suspend you because of 
Sumitomo. 
20 
MR KOKO:   No, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Comment? 
MR KOKO:   This, I am playing back to the Commission, I 
am saying if Mr Tsotsi’s version is right, that he was 
directed by the former President of the Republic together 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 160 of 232 
 
with Ms Myeni, one, when the opportunity  arise through 
Denton after interviewing witnesses who can vouch for 
what – for my corrupt activity, the government and the 
board should take that opportunity to say here is now real 
evidence we can work on to get rid of Mr Koko because 
witnesses that have been talked to by Dentons, we hear 
from 
Ms 
Daniels, 
brought 
in 
damning 
incriminating 
evidence to Denton.   
 
Now if the government in terms of what Mr Tsotsi’s 
version is all about is correct, they would have been – it 
10 
would have been a clinical finish.  Mr Koko, here is the 
evidence, here are the witnesses, step aside.  But I am 
simply saying that is – I mean, it is a dereliction of duty for 
the board that has got before it information from Denton 
that says I have acted corruptly and there are witnesses to 
support that.  Instead they bring me back but that 
information of Dentons does not find its way through the 
final report and I respect Dentons, I think if Dentons is 
aware of criminal activities, whatever instructions, they are 
professionals, that information should find its way through 
20 
the final report.   So I do not buy the story that the 
documents were destroyed.  Even if they were destroyed, 
Dentons, as professionals, will stand by the report and say 
you have asked us to do this but we have come across this 
information.  It did not find its way there.  They bring me 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 161 of 232 
 
back allegedly to cooperate with other so-called agents of 
state capture to do what the transactions they are doing 
and on top of that, in October they promote me.  Does not 
make sense. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What is telling in that paragraph, Mr 
Koko, is that it does not bear what you have just explained. 
MR KOKO:   But this is what it means. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is, if Mr Tsotsi’s version is 
correct, that is not there.  In fact, the opposite is true in 
your statement …[intervenes] 
10 
MR KOKO:   No. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me finish.  You urged the reader to 
remember, you add the word remember, that at the time – 
the board at the time was acting on instructions from 
government to get rid of me. 
MR KOKO:   Of course, at the time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can I finish? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let him finish, Mr Koko.  That statement 
is unqualified, there is no qualification to the statement.  
You understand what I mean? 
20 
MR KOKO:   I understand what you mean.  But, Chair, I am 
here to talk to my affidavit and I will talk to my affidavit 
and I will not feel less to talk to what I meant, I wrote this.  
Remember, this Commission was told that it is government 
through the former President who directed our suspension.  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 162 of 232 
 
Remember that.  This is what this paragraph says.  So 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just before you proceed, Mr Koko – do 
not forget the point you point you want to make.  Mr 
Seleka, do you know whether prior to paragraph 1.4 Mr 
Tsotsi in his affidavit has indicated what he believed the 
reason for his suspension was? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where do we find that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You find that from paragraph 19 
10 
onwards.  I mean 79, I will give you the page reference, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 79? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   79.  That is on page 26. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I just want to… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I should warn you, that reason 
spans fifteen pages of that document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I will not need to – I just want to 
quickly – 26 you said? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 26, the first paragraph on page 
20 
26,.which is 79. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In effect does he say that he believed 
that it was Mr Tsotsi? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, it is unequivocal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry? 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 163 of 232 
 
ADV BARRIE:   Chair, I am a bit lost now.  What document 
are we referring to? 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are Mr Koko’s affidavit, I have asked 
whether prior to paragraph 154 of Mr Koko’s affidavit, 
which is the paragraph on which Mr Seleka is asking him, 
whether – you follow now? 
ADV BARRIE:   I was under the impression that you were 
referring to what Mr Seleka said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, no, no. 
ADV BARRIE:   But I must be mistaken, I am sorry. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  So, Mr Seleka, in those 
paragraphs does Mr Koko say he believes that he was 
suspended because of Mr Tsotsi? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, can I take you to paragraph 114 on 
page 35? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 35?  Yes, 114. 
MR KOKO:   Page 35. 
CHAIRPERSON:   “This was only a ruse, Mr Tsotsi wanted  
to 
get 
rid 
of 
me 
because 
I 
suspended 
Mr 
20 
Sikhasimbe”   
Yes.  Okay, alright, I wanted – I think, Mr Seleka, you are 
free to pursue the line you pursue and Mr Koko will explain 
or defend what he said or the way he was. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 164 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But maybe there is a possibility that 
when the paragraph is read in context it may be that 
having said what he believed the reason was for his 
suspension in earlier paragraphs it may be that he was 
saying well, if what has been officially said as the reason 
why we were being suspended is true then maybe blah blah 
blah blah.  But I am just saying, you know? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you must feel free to pursue but Mr 
Koko was answering and I interrupted him.  Do you want to 
10 
finish your answer? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, I am very clear before this paragraph in 
my affidavit on the reasons why I was suspended and I am 
also very clear that the version that I was suspended 
because there was an inquiry that was mooted on the 6 
March in the President’s guesthouse that culminated in the 
meeting in Nkandla on the 8 t h.  That may be well be true 
and I will not quibble to it and you will remember that Nick 
Linnell says it is him on the meeting of the 6 t h with Ms 
Myeni who suggested that it is not possible to do an 
20 
inquiry of this nature without getting the executive to step 
aside.  That is the evidence of Nick Linnell.  He also says 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just hang on one second because you 
mentioned that point even last time.  If you team, Mr 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 165 of 232 
 
Seleka, or even Mr Barrie, if they are able to – if somebody 
is able to go to that part of Mr Linnell’s evidence where he 
says what Mr Koko says, I would like to look at that but not 
necessarily now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in due course.  Continue, Mr 
…[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Ja, I am certain that he said that, I am 
hundred percent sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can I get that Mr Koko, what he said? 
MR KOKO:   In the meeting in the presidential guesthouse 
where the President was supposed to attend but did not 
attend and he …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In Pretoria. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, it ended up in the meeting between Ms 
Myeni and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, Mr Linnell. 
MR KOKO:   Mr Linnell.  When the discussions of the 
inquiry was mooted Mr Linnell says to Ms Myeni it is not 
20 
possible to do an inquiry of this nature and still leave the 
executives in their offices.  That is what Mr Linnell says.] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes – yes, sorry, I can confirm that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Linnell says in his view the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 166 of 232 
 
executives responsible because of influential presence, he 
would advise that they be suspended to avoid them 
influencing their subordinates.  So Mr Linnell did say it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, yes. 
MR KOKO:   The President allegedly did not pitch up and 
they were directed to be at Nkandla and they had 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, not at Nkandla at the Durban 
official residence of the President. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Durban, ja. 
MR KOKO:   Yes and then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 8 t h. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  And then he says – first there was a 
discussion around the need for the inquiry and then there 
was discussion about the areas that must be investigated 
and at that point the areas that must be investigated were 
three, Generation, Commercial and the [indistinct] 13.44 
problem and then he says he did not know Eskom and none 
of the people in the meeting knew Eskom.  The names of 
20 
the people to be suspended were later emailed to him later 
that evening and the names were Mr Matona, Mr Koko and 
Mr Marokane.  Now I am not in a position to dispute or 
agree with that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 167 of 232 
 
MR KOKO:   That may well be.  What I am putting to you is 
that Mr Tsotsi who testified here and said he has always 
wanted an inquiry into Eskom but he has not acted on it.   
 
When the opportunity  arose through that process, 
to throw my name in there, he did it, otherwise he would 
have been objective and if he had been objective my name 
would not stand against Generation.  The real person who 
was managing Generation, at least at that point for the 
short time, when Mr Ntsokolo would have been there or his 
predecessor who managed Generation for the last seven 
10 
years and the only reason Mr Tsotsi, I think – and then that 
is my thinking, between now and then he did not mention 
Mr Ntsokolo and Mr Deba(?) is because he wanted to force 
my name at all costs because he wanted to get rid of me 
because of how I responded to him with Mr Sikhasimbe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Koko, I believe 
that you said you had been appointed into this position in 
October 2014 prior to you being suspended, Generation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just repeat what position so that it is 
20 
clear. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The position from which he was 
suspended on the 11 March 2015.  Is it October 2014? 
MR KOKO:   I was appointed October – I was appointed in 
the position – in the Generation position in October 2014. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 168 of 232 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no, I apologise.  I was appointed the 
head of – the GE Technology and Commercial October 
2015 and then 12 months later, October 2015, the head of 
Generation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, I think that is confusing. 
MR KOKO:    
ADV BARRIE:   It seems to me the witness misspoke when 
he referred to 2015, he intended to refer to 2014 and then 
he said a year later in 2015 [inaudible – speaking 
10 
simultaneously] 
MR KOKO:   I appointed in 2015, October. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay …[intervenes] 
ADV BARRIE:   But it is on record but he misspoke.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja, no, that is fine.  Let us just get 
it clear …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   October. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which position, appointed from when?  
And when position appointed from when? 
MR KOKO:   October 23, 2015 I was appointed the head of 
20 
Generation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2015? 
MR KOKO:   2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And then the other 
position?   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 169 of 232 
 
MR KOKO:   October 2014, Technology and Commercial. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, yes, so …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So part of the point you make is that to 
the extent that at the Durban meeting on the 8 t h only three 
areas were identified that were to be investigated.  The 
area of which you were in charge was not one of them, is 
that the one? 
MR KOKO:   You are partly correct.  You are partly correct.  
I was responsible at that point on …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in March 2015? 
MR KOKO:   In part – in March – no, no, I was responsible 
during that meeting for Commercial. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Right, now the trick about Commercial, it is 
quite elegant actually and if you know Eskom you are going 
to laugh at it.  The reason they have put Commercial there 
is because of the evidence again led by Nick Linnell based 
on the letter, a very poorly written letter by a gentlemen 
that I have never met, called Jabu Masangwane(?).  Joe 
20 
Masangwane 
Masangwane 
says 
the 
corruption 
in 
Commercial is based on the diesel expenditure and at that 
point, Chair, Eskom was burning a billion rands per month 
on diesel.  Jabu Masangwane to create an excuse and a 
force narrative to get me suspended on Commercial issues, 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 170 of 232 
 
he says we have converted – and please listen to it again 
on Nick Linnell - Mr Linnell’s affidavit.  He says we have 
converted the open cycle gas turbines in Ankerlig and 
Gourikwa to base load and because of that then we were 
having this billion rand expenditure.  That can only come 
from a person who is mischievous because it is not factual 
or who is clueless, does not know because the only reason 
we were burning diesel of a billion rands a month is 
because the Generation fleet was sitting at an energy 
availability back factor at that time, and I am telling you a 
10 
number that is factual, of 69%.  That is the only time when 
the 
government 
set 
up 
a 
war 
room 
because 
the 
performance of Eskom at that time was at the lowest.  It 
has since become the lowest now in 2020 and that was the 
only time – that was the time we had a Majuba coal silo 
collapse and we lost 3 600 megawatts at Majuba. 
 
So at that point, given the 69% of the burn energy 
availability factor and the fact that we lost Majuba, we had 
no reason but to burn diesel to keep the lights on, it had 
nothing to do with corruption. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the – you see, when you made the 
point that you made about when you became head of 
Generation and when you were head of the other portfolio 
…[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 171 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought that the point you sought to 
make was that your portfolio that you occupied, which you 
were heading in March 2015 when this meeting in Durban 
took place was not one of the portfolios that were – one of 
the three portfolios that were mentioned and that may be – 
that is what I thought – that is where I thought you were 
going, that Mr Tsotsi brought it in because of your issues 
with him but from what you are saying, it looks like you 
accept that your portfolio which you were heading in March 
2015 was one of the portfolios that were mentioned, am I 
10 
right? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I think you …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It may be that you might say wrongly, it 
should not have been mentioned, but do you accept that 
factually it was mentioned or you know nothing of that. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, the affidavit of Mr Linnell first said 
there were reasons given for which areas were to be 
suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Investigated. 
MR KOKO:   He says there were reasons.  The reason that 
20 
they gave for Commercial, which was my responsibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Were false.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Were false and does not matter how you look 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 172 of 232 
 
at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I understand that, I was 
simply saying I was not on another point which I thought 
you were pursuing, I was wanting just to have clarification 
that whether rightly or wrongly your portfolio was one of 
the three that were mentioned.  I think from what you are 
saying is they provided a wrong basis as far as you are 
concerned. 
10 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For including it. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:   Correct.  And, and, and they made to carry 
the monkey that did not belong to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I am moving on.  Mr Koko, in 
regard to that paragraph you have assisted us with, 
paragraph 114, where you say: 
20 
“This was all ruse, Mr Tsotsi wanted to get rid of me 
because I suspended Mr Malesela Sikhasimbe and 
refused 
his 
unlawful 
instruction 
to 
make 
the 
misconduct case against Malesela Sikhasimbe to 
disappear.” 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 173 of 232 
 
“Unlawful - refused his unlawful instruction to make 
the 
misconduct 
case 
against 
Mr 
Malesela 
Sikhasimbe to disappear.” 
So I have contrasted that with what you said in that 
paragraph where you say remember, the board at the time 
was acting on instructions from government to get rid of 
me.  So you are emphasising this to be the reason in this 
paragraph 1.1.4, the rust. 
 
So if this matter, which as we have gone through 
your testimony last time and looking at your affidavit which 
10 
made you angry, you went to Melrose Arch to get away 
from Mr Tsotsi, you called Ms Daniels to come to you at 
Melrose Arch to be assisted on what your legal rights 
against this intended suspension.  Why this issue, of the 
misconduct of Mr Sikhasimbe was settled at 12 months at 
the CCMA? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, what is …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Why was it settled? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me just hear the question, why…? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Why this burning issue of Mr  - 
20 
misconduct of Mr Sikhasimbe was settled at 12 months with 
him at the CCMA? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, this is quite an interesting point.  So Mr 
Sikhasimbe was dismissed and I effected the decision 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 174 of 232 
 
itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, there was a recommendation by an 
independent chairperson.  There was a recommendation by 
a 
senior 
counsel 
who 
says 
guilty, 
dismissal. 
 
I 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You implemented that. 
MR KOKO:   I implemented that.  Then he went to CCMA.  
Ms Daniels was handling that and Ms Daniels came to me 
and with IR and said what is your strategy?  I said the guy 
must not come back.  The guy was not come back, he is 
10 
dismissed, that is it.  Then 2015, contrary to what many 
people think, Mr Chair, and the board members came here 
and struggled very much to give you a picture of what was 
happening in Eskom in 2015 and, I mean, I invite your 
investigators to go and check the minutes of the IFC of 26 
February.  It tells you the real picture of Eskom.  It was a 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   IMC or …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   IFC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Investment and Finance Committee. 
20 
MR KOKO:   The Investment and Finance – if there is any 
single document that tells you the position of Eskom is that 
it is those minutes, I think it is paragraph 5.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   It says …[intervenes] 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 175 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said it is February 2015? 
MR KOKO:   February 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   The 26 February. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  
MR KOKO:   It says we are bankrupt, the government is 
not going to help us, the IMPD4 must be expedited.  The 
load shedding in 2015 cost the economy, if you use CSI 
numbers, close to R85 billion in 2015.   
 
I said to Suzanne, go handle this, I support you.  
10 
My focus is not to go to CCMA and courts, my focus is to 
stop the loss of R85 billion to the economy.  My focus is to 
make sure that we stop the primary energy cost and you 
will read it in there.   
 
Suzanne Daniels came to me, the hearing of Mr 
Malesela took very long, the internal hearing, it took 
extremely long and I was very clear and I told everybody I 
told – I even went to – I think Mr Molefe was the CES, I 
said Mr Molefe, I am not spending time at the CCMA given 
what the IFC says about the position of Eskom, my focus is 
20 
to stop load shedding.   
My colleagues at Eskom will tell you, in 2015, when 
I took over Generation, they were having meetings, I 
cancelled all meetings.  I cancelled all meetings, I 
cancelled all executive meetings, I said our focus – our 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 176 of 232 
 
focus is to keep the lights on. We are load shedding, we 
are costing the economy over R80 billion a year, so - and 
so that is the reason why.  Ms Daniels came to discuss it 
with me and say we want to settle this matter, say 
Suzanne, make it get away, but I do not want this person 
here, my focus is to keep the lights on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And Mr Sikhasimbe 
says - you see the affidavit from him, that he is puzzled 
that he would have been so important to cause the 
10 
suspension of four top executives and in fact the loss of 
the jobs of three of those executives at a high cost to 
Eskom.  Your comment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, I am not sure that we should 
be really going much into …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I am moving on, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The merits of whether Mr Sikhasimbe 
should or should not have been suspended or should or 
should not have been dismissed, so …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, it is not the purpose, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is not the purpose. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The purpose is again testing Mr Koko’s 
validity of the reasons given for his suspension. I am 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 177 of 232 
 
moving on, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja please I think try and – ja because I 
do not want us to - because whether I think Mr Sikhasimbi 
should have been suspended or should not have been 
suspended or should have been dismissed or should not 
have been dismissed, I am not sure that it is something 
that has much bearing on anything. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Yes, Chair my question was if you 
look at the totality of the evidence, that if Mr Koko is 
correct that his suspension is as a result of Mr Tsotsi and 
10 
Mr Sikhasimbi being suspended, Mr Sikhasimbi says wow, 
then I was so important that I caused four executives to be 
suspended and three of them to be gotten rid of. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not see his point.  Ja, I mean he 
may be quite interested in that because he was involved in 
that, but the Commission is really looking at other issues.  
The only reason why his issue comes in is because Mr 
Koko says Mr Tsotsi sort my suspension because of that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    That is right, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Tsotsi has not said because Mr 
20 
Koko unfairly suspended Mr Sikhasimbi I wanted him 
suspended that is not suspension, ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:    Correct Chair.  Now let us – I had said 
that I will come back to the version of Mr Tsholofelo Molefe 
and Mr Koko, by the way you testified about the Koko hunt 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 178 of 232 
 
last time in your appearance can you tell…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I am sorry can I ask this Mr Koko 
following upon what you said earlier on in regard to Mr 
Mosongaai and with regard to Mr Linnell if…[intervene]    
MR KOKO:   Mr, I heard Mr Linnell and Mr? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Linnell and Mr Mosongaai.   
MR KOKO:   Mr Mosongaai? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, based on what you are saying Mr 
Linnell’s evidence was which I think Mr Seleka confirms 
you are right that he mentioned to Ms Myeni at the Pretoria 
10 
meeting something along the lines that he could not see 
how the investigation could be done without the heads of 
the particular portfolios being suspended which included 
your portfolio.   
Number one if at the Durban meeting the person 
who  
gave 
certain 
reasons 
why 
your 
portfolio 
should 
be 
investigated was not Mr Tsotsi but Mr Mosongaai does that 
not, don’t those two points suggest that the inclusion of 
your portfolio among the portfolios to be investigated and 
20 
the idea that you should be one of the three executives 
mentioned 
or 
rather 
one 
of 
three 
executives 
whose 
portfolios 
were 
mentioned 
in 
Durban 
that 
should 
be 
suspended don’t those points suggest that the idea that 
you should be suspended did not originate from Mr Tsotsi.     
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 179 of 232 
 
MR KOKO:   Except that the audios of the 11 t h it is Mr 
Tsotsi who talks passionately about me.  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the audios of the meeting.  
MR KOKO:   The 11 t h of March meeting.  
CHAIRPERSON:   The Durban meeting or? 
MR KOKO:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh the 11 t h of March.  
MR KOKO:   The 11 t h of March meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh yes, okay.  
MR KOKO:   Except that it is Mr Tsotsi who is very 
10 
passionate about me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no we can come to that but do you 
accept that if you do not look at what was discussed at the 
meeting of the 11 t h if you just look at those two points you 
made.  Do you not accept that they seem to suggest that 
your inclusion or the inclusion of your portfolio among the 
portfolios to be investigated did not originate from him?   
MR KOKO:   No let me tell you why. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MR KOKO:   When Mr Linnell tried to explain how he knew 
20 
or how he met Mr Masanganye he frequently said in this 
Commission I have met him at Zola Tsotsi’s house.  I was 
introduced…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Jut repeat at Mr Zola Tsotsi’s house.   
MR KOKO:   Zola Tsotsi’s house. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 180 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MR KOKO:   Yes, so I cannot rule out that it was a caucus 
position between him and Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay but when you say that, when you 
say you cannot rule out I understand that to mean I cannot 
assert it as a fact but I cannot exclude it as a possibility 
that they conspired.  Am I correct to understand you that 
way?     
MR KOKO:   Chair I am and you might be unhappy with my 
answer but I certainly…[intervene] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No I am not I just want to make sure that 
I understand you correctly.   
MR KOKO:   I am certainly of the opinion that Mr Tsotsi 
and Mr Masongwane conspired. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay but as you put it now it might 
be – you based that more on what Mr Tsotsi said on the 
11 t h plus what you have testified happened involving you 
Mr Matona and Mr Tsotsi prior to the 11 t h.     
MR KOKO:   Correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. Mr Seleka.  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Thank you Chair.  Yes, Mr Koko I had 
asked in regard to the testimony the Koko hunt.  When did 
that start the Koko hunt?  
MR KOKO:   Chair and you will need to give me a chance 
this is very, very important to my heart. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 181 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:    I just want an indication of when did it 
start.   
MR KOKO:   It started December 2014.  
ADV SELEKA SC:    Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:    So what does it entail? 
MR KOKO:   So Chair the Koko hunt started with a matter 
that landed on your desk that you…[intervene]  
ADV SELEKA SC:    Yes, but I am asking what does it 
10 
entail? 
MR KOKO:  I am explaining that Chair Mr Seleka has to 
give me a chance here he cannot push me I will give my 
story. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I will give you a chance yes. 
MR KOKO:   We…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you had just said it is a matter that 
we are not aware of the matter.  
MR KOKO:   Yes, so let me do that, so there was a project 
at Eskom and there is still a project called the Koeberg 
20 
steam 
generator 
replacement. 
This 
steam 
generator 
replacement was delayed for quite some time before I was 
appointed but I am an engineer and I understood the 
dynamics 
of 
having 
the 
Koeberg 
steam 
generator 
replacement done and quite frankly the toing and froing we 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 182 of 232 
 
then ascertain like the steam generator was nonsensical.   
One, two there were serious issues with the project 
team that was running it.  Just to summarise the story 
short the Koeberg steam generator contrary to what many 
people do not understand in my view was the Picasso to 
the nuclear bid into the future.  It was the single biggest 
nuclear project in the country second to the big nuclear 
future.  So we had to do it and do it properly and I made 
sure that we do that but the story of nuclear was 
politicised.  Nuclear is President Zuma and renewables is 
10 
alleged to be Mr Ramaphosa.  So we had – and those 
dynamics played big time towards the ANC conference.  
But in my mind I was clear it is the right thing to do and we 
will do it and I will take no prisoners.   
Chair I have never been attacked so much I mean 
the document that is served before the court was a similar 
conspiracy to what we are doing now and the conspiracy 
was the Board tender committee awarded the steam 
generator contract to Western House and overnight Mr 
Matjila and Mr Koko changed the decision and awarded it 
20 
to Ariva and they went to I think it was to the Minister and 
between the Minister Brown and Mr Matjila and Mr Koko 
moved the decision from Western House and to Ariva.   
At 
the 
time 
Mr 
Chair 
the 
story 
sounded 
the 
believable you could have heard another Commission of 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 183 of 232 
 
Koeberg generator force but I was the phase of it, I took 
claim on that.  Everybody the newspapers criticised me left 
right and centre because they argued that I am anti-
renewables and pro-nuclear.  That is where the Koko hunt 
start the culmination of the Koko hunt was in June 2016 
when we were supposed to sign the renewable IPP’s.  Now 
purely on the economics of Eskom anybody who buys a 
product and listen to me Chair anybody who buys a product 
for R83,00 when he can make it for eighty-three cents a 
unit for eighty-three cents when he can make it for forty 
10 
cents and then sell it for R2,25 is stupid and does not act 
in the interest of Eskom.   
It is happening today and I repeat it is stupid 
whether government is doing it, whether Eskom is doing it, 
it is stupid.  You can make it for forty cents, you buy it for 
eighty-three cents, you sell it for twenty-five cents.  I 
objected to that, till today I am carrying the brunt of it that 
is the Koko hunt.        
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the Koko hunt?                
MR KOKO:   Yes, and everybody take that opportunity to 
20 
say this guy is corrupt, his pro-nuclear, his anti-renewables 
if I have done something wrong for as long as I mentioned 
his name that is good.  When the issue of Koeberg steam 
generator was raised in this Commission your response 
which hurt me because you created an impression to the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 184 of 232 
 
public that Mr Koko is out of line.   
You said but the merits were not discussed, I wrote 
the judgment the merits were not discussed.  What you did 
not tell them is that the contract, the person who came 
before the court was not the person who tendered the 
person who came before the court did not have a local 
standing to court that is what when you should have said 
when you should have told the public it hurt me Chair that 
here is a DCJ telling the public that I wrote the judgment 
and if Mr Koko had read the judgment he would have, you 
10 
did me wrong but that is fine that is the Koko hunt.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay well the fact remains that that 
judgment was decided on local stand that remains it did 
not go into the merits.  There was a Mamelodi judgment 
which went into the merits so that part is factual, okay.      
MR KOKO:   And the minority judgment of then Deputy 
Justice Moseneke ruled in my favour. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MR KOKO:   And the South Africans must know that there 
was a minority judgment by Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke 
20 
that said Koko was right the words that he used was that 
Mr Eskom was meticulous.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but Mr Koko all judgments of the 
Constitutional Court are public so that minority judgment is 
known.  Mr Seleka.    
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 185 of 232 
 
MR KOKO:   I accept that Chair I made your point.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay, Mr Seleka.  
ADV SELEKA SC:    Chair let me try to expedite.  Mr Koko 
I am going to run through the version of Ms Molefe 
because that version is correct as you have accepted. Now 
the version is that on the 10 t h of March 2015 they were in 
the second day of the strategy session.  Ms Veleti tells her 
that you are calling her to come to Melrose Arch and she 
did not know Ms Veleti why you were calling her and makes 
enquiries with Ms Molefe and Ms Molefe say well do not go 
10 
if Mr Koko calls you again let him call, let him speak to 
me… 
That’s on the 10 t h, on the same date in the evening 
she, Ms Molefe, is called by Mr Dan Marokane and Mr Dan 
Marokane tells her let’s meet and they meet, wherever they 
met, and he relays to her what he had been told by Ms 
Suzanne Daniels, which is the meeting with you at Melrose 
Arch has ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just raise your voice Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which is the meeting with you and Mr 
20 
Salim Essa at Melrose Arch, so I am just giving you that 
version.  With that information she meets, she goes to Mr 
Matona the next day, on the 11 t h of March, and that is when 
she says to Mr Matona I hear that we are going to be 
suspended.  Mr Matona says I hear – I have heard rumours 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 186 of 232 
 
also that we are going to be suspended. 
 
Now Mr Matona does not say to her well you know – 
or let’s start with her first, she does not say to Mr Matona I 
understand that you and 
Mr Koko are going to be 
suspended, and for the ...[indistinct] reason, nor does Mr 
Matoma respond along those lines. 
 
So clearly her suspension, or what she had heard 
was the suspension was in regard to the four executives as 
told to her by Mr Dan Marokane, Mr Marokane told by Ms 
Suzanne Daniels. 
10 
 
I want to take you to a paragraph in your affidavit 
on page 46, paragraph 156 ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Chair I ...[indistinct] about what he says but I 
need to answer his question because I want to come back 
to ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair I can give him time to go back 
now. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, my counsel told me to keep quiet when 
the lead investigator speaks, and ask for permission to 
comment. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And I will do that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, but I am saying the version of Ms 
Tsholofelo Molefe which ...[indistinct]  
MR KOKO:   I am at page 46. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 187 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 46? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja page 46 Chair.  What I was saying 
to Mr – to you Mr Koko, is that the version of Ms Molefe, 
which you say is correct, you said it last time, that is the 
one that is outlined there and when she goes to Mr Matona 
saying we – I understand we are going to be suspended 
she is referring to the four executives, but I want to refer 
you to this paragraph, paragraph 1 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on before you referred him to the 
paragraph he wanted to say something. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, yes Chair. 
MR KOKO:   Thank you Chair, I don’t believe Ms Molefe’s 
affidavit or what Ms Molefe was told that I called Ms 
Dlamini to come to Melrose Arch, that is false, I don’t 
believe that because it is false.  I have never called Ms 
Dlamini, Ms Nonkululeko Veleti, to come to Melrose Arch, I 
called her I told her I am at Melrose Arch, so the 
discussion between her, Ms Molefe and Ms Veleti that I 
told Ms Veleti to come to Melrose Arch I don’t believe it 
because it never happened, it is false. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, now it is important that we 
understand exactly what you say yes.  Ms Dlamini testified 
that she is the one that told Ms Molefe about the content of 
– well about the fact that you had called her to about the 
content of the discussion that she said happened between 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 188 of 232 
 
the two of you, so are you saying that to the extent that Ms 
Dlamini conveyed this to Ms Molefe Ms Dlamini is not being 
truthful or is mistaken or are you simply saying that well 
the fact that there was such a conversation between the 
two of them about this is rejected, or ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   No, no, no I cannot reject the conversation 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but what I am saying ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:  I was not there when they talked so I cannot 
reject that there was a conversation between the two of 
10 
them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:   What I am saying is that if Ms Veleti Dlamini 
told Ms Molefe that I called her to Melrose Arch she is 
mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine, yes, I think you 
made the same point last time about that ja. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, the part that I agree that with Ms Molefe 
and that is based purely on my interaction with Mr Matona, 
is when Mr Matona says he knew, he knew from, he knew – 
20 
he says he knew from outsiders, I think he owes you an 
explanation who the outsiders are, that they will be 
suspended.   Ms – no, yes, that is Ms Molefe, that make it 
because it accords to the conversation that I had been 
having.   The part that should interest all of us is that Mr 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 189 of 232 
 
Matona denies that, she says I only learnt about the 
suspensions of the four when I was suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Seleka don’t forget the point 
you were pursuing please.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well what you say Mr Koko with regard 
to your assertion that Ms Dlamini was mistaken to hear to 
say you had called her to a meeting at Melrose Arch, what 
do you say to this proposition that how come Ms Dlamini 
tells Ms Molefe something that is consistent with what Mr 
10 
Masango tells Ms Kraai about in regard to him and tells Mr 
Marokane about and how come Ms Dlamini is mistaken 
about something that is consistent with what unbeknown to 
her from what I understand her position Ms Daniels tells, 
told somebody, I don’t know whether it was Mr Marokane or 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Marokane yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Marokane about on the same day, so 
what you have is Ms Daniels says on the 10 t h tells Mr 
Marokane on the 10 t h of March 2015 Mr Koko called me to 
20 
a meeting at Melrose Arch, where I met him and Mr Salim 
Essa, or maybe doesn’t go to the details of Salim Essa but 
he told – I was told, he called me to a meeting in Melrose 
Arch where I heard that four executives are going to be 
suspended.   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 190 of 232 
 
Mr Abram Masango also testifies and says on the 
same day I got a call from Mr Koko as well and he called 
me to Melrose Arch and there in that meeting I was told 
that four executives would be suspended.   All of these 
people, 
as 
I 
understand 
the 
position, 
are 
acting 
independently of one another.   Ms Kraai says indeed that 
is what Mr Abram told me either it is the same day or the 
following day reported to me, Mr Dan Marokane also says I 
don’t know if it was a week or whatever later or two weeks 
that’s what Mr Abram Masango told me as well. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   On the 14 t h Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the – okay ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  The Saturday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so what do you say to the 
proposition that it looks very strange that Mr Marokane, 
that you spoke to her and you were at Melrose Arch on that 
day, you admit that you spoke to her, you called her, you 
admit you were at Melrose Arch but you are saying that in 
terms of the content of the conversation she is mistaken 
about you having said she must come to a meeting at 
20 
Melrose Arch, but it so happens that there are these two 
other people who independently tell other people that same 
things, same calls were made to them and same discussion 
happened.  What do you say about that? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman you are not correct to suggest that 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 191 of 232 
 
Ms – no – Ms Daniels and Mr Masango are acting 
independently and I will come back to that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, you must tell me, I am just 
saying from what I have heard or not heard that they 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Ja, so I am coming to that, I am saying 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you must come to that ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...you are not correct.  I called Ms Dlamini, 
that is a fact, I told her I was at Melrose Arch, I actually 
10 
thought she is at Megawatt Park, and what she did not tell 
you because we were very close, before I knew that she 
was at the college I was harassing her to find out what is 
going on, in the corridors at Megawatt Park, because that 
was the day I was supposed to be suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry, I am going to ask you 
to repeat that, I don’t think I heard clearly. 
MR KOKO:   I am saying what she did not tell you about 
our conversation when I called her and I told her that I am 
at Megawatt Park and I told her why I was at Megawatt 
20 
Park, I told her I ran out of the office, I did not want to 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh you mean you told her you were at 
Melrose Arch? 
MR KOKO:   I told her at Melrose Arch, I ran out of 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 192 of 232 
 
Megawatt Park because Mr Tsotsi has a permanent office 
at Megawatt Park, he interacts, and I did not want to come 
across him, but I believe that he was going to suspend us 
on that day and Ms Veleti Dlamini was quite senior and I 
said just find out for me what is going on in the corridors 
talk, when I – I don’t know whether I phoned him first – her 
first – or Mr Masango first, but I also phoned Mr Masango. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:  So at no stage that I told her I am at Megawatt 
Park, but here is a clue for your answer, at no stage did I 
10 
tell her to come to Megawatt Park, I told her my story 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you still keep on saying Megawatt 
Park, Melrose Arch. 
MR KOKO:   I apologise, and I think you are right Chair.  
Here is a clue to your answer, Ms Veleti and this makes me 
not to sleep because I am wondering why would she do 
that.  She says in her affidavit in the afternoon when we 
met at Midrand, and remember the meeting of Midrand I 
told you, she did not tell you, she was asked to comment 
20 
on it, she said Mr Koko told me that she will be suspended 
with other executives and she writes it in black and white, 
she did not tell me who else was going to be suspended. 
 
When she comes here to sit here and she looks at 
you and you asked her did Mr Koko tell you that the CFO 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 193 of 232 
 
will be suspended.  She says yes, that – and it is 
irrational, her affidavit is very clear that I did not tell her, 
she comes here she says I told her.  I cannot explain why 
other than to say she looks, she came here, she looks at 
the trends, she thinks that is what you want to hear.  If you 
go to Ms Daniels based on the suspension letters, the four 
suspension letter that were shown to you by Mr Khoza and 
Ms Daniels that were written by her on the 10 t h in the 
evening ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is now Ms Daniels? 
10 
MR KOKO:   Ms Daniels, written by her and aided by Mr 
Salim Essa, when in her version she was not asked to 
assist either me or Mr Essa to write suspension letters.  
That is  classical example of if ever you needed evidence 
that Ms Daniels was in contact with Mr Essa on that day it 
is those four letters.  The source of the information to Mr 
Marokane, to Ms Molefe he is the same person who based 
on the evidence here, met Mr Essa at least at seven 
o’clock, that is the issue for me.  She had contact with Mr 
Essa based on the suspension letters.   They both, Mr 
20 
Masango and Ms Daniels, go to Parliament and they say 
we worked together to get rid of Mr Koko, so they did not 
act independently.   It is a story Chairman a concoction 
created after March 2017 after I have dealt with her – with 
him and Ms Kraai.  Ms Kraai and Mr – Ms Kraai and Mr 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 194 of 232 
 
Masongo [00:00:11] created this story after I issued an 
instruction that they must be investigated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes now of course we dealt previously I 
think with the question that as at the 10 t h and 11t h March 
2015 you were still close Ms Daniels, you were still close to 
Mr Masongo.  So with regard to Mr Dan Marokane saying yes 
Mr Masongo did tell me. 
MR KOKO:  But Mr Marokane does not say that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang – hang on one second we will need 
to check up.  I am under the impression that he does. 
10 
MR KOKO:  But he does not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But we need to check.  To the extent that 
he confirms that Mr Masongo did tell him during 2016 then 
we would need to look at why he would say that.  Mr Seleka 
is my recollection incorrect? 
MR KOKO:  Chair I listened to the testimony. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  That was put to Mr Masango by Mr Seleka that 
Mr Masongo – Mr Marokane denies what Mr Masongo says. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I am mistaken. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well Mr Masongo did answer my question 
saying – he answered it in the affirmative that he told Mr Dan 
Marokane but I did put to him that Mr Dan Marokane did not 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 195 of 232 
 
confirm that and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he confirm that he was told by Ms 
Daniels. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No that one is confirmed yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He confirmed that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That one is confirmed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What he did not – but was he asked about 
Masongo’s version that is Mr Dan Marokane? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I did provide him with Mr Masongo’s 
affidavit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I specifically asked him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  But he confirmed the one 
relating to … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Daniels. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I think maybe the – what I would put – 
20 
what I would want you to comment on that is limited to Ms 
Daniels and Mr Marokane.  Would you have a reason why Mr 
Marokane would confirm that Ms Daniels told her something 
in – on the 10 March if she actually did not tell him? 
MR KOKO:  Sir you – Chair. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 196 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he have the reason? 
MR KOKO:  Chair you have said we were close with Ms 
Daniels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:  We had a very good professional relationship 
that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  But she did not tell me that she met Mr Essa 
and wrote the suspension letters against the four of us and it 
was created by Mr Essa.  She did not.  I cannot explain that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  I just cannot explain her behaviour that here is a 
person on evidence before us met Mr Essa, wrote the 
suspension letters, Mr Essa edited the suspension letters 
and then she goes to Mr Marokane and say, Mr Koko took me 
to Mr Essa and the four of you are going to be suspended.  I 
just cannot explain that type of behaviour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Continue Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Just to clarify on this 
Vilene Chairperson.  When she testified the transcripts 
20 
shows now she is telling before we ask her questions. 
“And he indicated that I might be referring to 
Mr Koko I might be asked to ask in the role – 
in the role because there was not in those 
words there was chance that the FD was also 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 197 of 232 
 
in the list of suspensions.” 
So but then we – it is incumbent on us to get clarity from her.  
So she says: 
“Not in those words.” 
She said there is a chance the FD was also on the list of 
suspensions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  And Chair there is a – there is a.. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So – can I – let me just finish. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja let him finish ja 
10 
MR KOKO:  I apologise Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So then we would have asked questions 
to clarify and she would have answered which is what Mr 
Koko is referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And that is what the evidence is Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay Mr Koko you wanted to say 
something? 
MR KOKO:  No the – I do not think that I was understood 
why in my discussion in my dinner discussion in Midrand 
20 
which Ms Vilete says is – was twenty minutes and it was not.  
And when we were discussing and she says so if you are 
going to be suspended – because I was very clear.  I said me 
and Mr Matona are going to be suspended.  I did not talk 
about other people who will most likely act, I said I do not 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 198 of 232 
 
know you may probably act.  There is a reason for that 
[00:05:20]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry Chair but that is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let him finish – let him finish. Let Mr 
Koko finish. 
MR KOKO:  And there was a reason for that.  And the reason 
for that is because if you look at the Eskom organisation 
structure the most senior person at the time in commercial – 
remember I was head of commercial it was her.   
She had set up what we call Shared Services all the 
10 
transactional activities on finance and commercial were 
centralised into one and she set it up and she did so well to 
it and she became an executive of the year.   
So if you look at the succession planning and you say 
who is more – who are the two or three or four people who 
will step into the position of the Chief Procurement Officer 
you will be naïve if you do not mention her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair thank you.  Let me put it this 
way Mr Koko.  You see your explanation for the – for your 
20 
suspension it does not explain why these executives who are 
four who we understand in two different meetings before the 
11t h they get suspended – talked about that is including 
yourself and they get suspended on the 11t h just as it is said 
to have been discussed at the Melrose Arch meeting.  Your 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 199 of 232 
 
version does not explain that.  That is one.   
Let me add the other one.  It does not explain why 
the Minister comes there on the 11 t h and he – the other 
board members have said he speaks in support of what Mr 
Tsotsi had said on the 9 t h.  Identifies four areas of her 
concern and she says these four executives should step 
aside.  
 
I will add the third one.  It does not explain why the 
executives who were appointed to act they say you told them 
they will act – at least these two.   
10 
 
But I told you also about Mr Abram Mabolane that you 
said to him this meeting you are being called to the 
Chairperson it is maybe about you going to act because we 
are going to be suspended but you did not tell him who is 
going to be suspended.  He walks away from your office 
under the impression that he is going to act in your position.  
And all three of them get appointed just as they say you 
suggested to them. 
 
Your version does not explain that so how – how does 
the Chairperson view… 
20 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I cannot – I cannot carry that – the 
monkey of a Melrose Arch meeting with Salim Essa.  It did 
not happen.  I did not know Salim Essa in 2015.  I have put it 
to you go check my telephone records, go and probe 
whatever intelligence you can employ you will not find my 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 200 of 232 
 
contact with Mr Essa either telephonically or on the emails.   
 
Ms Daniels met with Mr Essa on the 10 t h the evidence 
shows that before you.  So I cannot carry that monkey.  I did 
not have a discussion with Mr Essa and Ms Daniels about 
the suspensions.  I did not meet Mr Masongo at Melrose 
Arch.  I phoned him during the day he was in a meeting.  I 
said on the 3r d I phoned in the afternoon towards five o’clock 
I was driving to go and meet Ms Dlamnini.  She – he asked 
me he will come to where I am.  I said no, no we are 
neighbours so I know where he lives.  Do not come to 
10 
Joburg.  But I told him exactly, exactly what I was going 
through.   
 
I did not tell Mr Mabalane that he is going to act.  I 
have not seen his affidavit.  I am looking forward to it.  I 
explain to the commission why I think I was suspended and I 
am convinced why – I am convinced why I was suspended.   
 
I cannot explain what Minister Brown did.  I cannot 
explain it but I can tell you why I think I was suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It also does not explain your version why 
20 
the coincidence – is it a coincidence or what that Mr 
Masango says he told me – Mr Koko four executives are 
going to be suspended but I will come back and the other 
three will not.  And exactly that happens. 
MR KOKO:  Chair I once again am – if you want a witness 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 201 of 232 
 
that has said too many things that do not tie up it is Mr 
Masango.  And you go with his version at your own risk. 
 
What I can tell you is that the story that the board 
was in a conspiracy with me to take me out and bring me 
back.  They had an opportunity to leave me there.  I – it just 
does not make sense.  This story of a conspiracy that brings 
me back is just as a minimum just ridiculous. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  It does not explain Mr Koko which is 
what Mr – Ms Daniels was told that there will be an inquiry 
by an independent firm. And what happens is this.  Mr Linnell 
10 
who was embraced by the board to be the coordinator he had 
suggested the different in mind.  One to be headed by a 
judge and to appoint a law firm and an auditing firm.  What 
happens the Audit and Risk which was headed by Ms 
Mabude declines that terms of reference and the board goes 
out of its way to appoint one independent I suppose law firm 
Dentons to conduct the investigation.  Exactly as she was 
told at Melrose Arch. 
MR KOKO:  Chair once again when you asked Ms Daniels 
that – when she said to you Ms Essa told me that four 
20 
executives will be suspended and they will not come back.  
And you asked me – you asked her but why did you not say 
so?  She could not give you a decent answer I do not think 
you got a decent answer.  I cannot speak for the Audit and 
Risk. I do not know how Dentons was appointed.  I just know 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 202 of 232 
 
I dealt with them, they interviewed me many times.  I cannot 
talk for the board.  They must come here and speak for 
themselves. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Chair as to the four executives and 
one returning we know that from Mr Masango.  That is from 
his side. 
 
And it does not explain the genesis of all these 
meetings – the meetings at the President’s but you said you 
cannot dispute that because you were not there.   
 
It puzzles the mind that if you – if your statement 
10 
could be said prior to the 11 March and prior to this 
executives – the three being gotten rid of that they will be 
gotten rid of and the witness says, I heard it from Mr Koko.  
And you see the board is at pains to negotiate – to exit them 
and pay them huge amounts of money as harsh money to go 
away.  That s I said here previously that that is either a 
coincidence or it is an orchestration.  Your comment?  Which 
on the face of it it seems if you look at this witness’ evidence 
you would have been part of or behind it. 
MR KOKO:  If ever there was an orchestration I was never 
20 
part of it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Seleka … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Shall I ask the last question Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am not saying ask the last question I 
just want to make sure that we are all on the same page.  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 203 of 232 
 
We have – all have the same idea of how much time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Still – you still need.  We are at twenty 
eight minutes to seven, what is your assessment of how 
much more time? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I ask a question in a minute Chair.  In 
less than a minute – I ask a question in less than a minute.  I 
cannot control the answer how long it is going to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But let me see I can simplify the 
10 
questions and… 
ADV BARRIE:  Mr Chairman I have actually got a problem 
with what has just been stated to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
ADV BARRIE:   I actually have a problem with what my 
learned friend has just put to you because what it really 
amounts to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE:   The intimidation of the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No hang on… 
20 
ADV BARRIE:   Because what he is saying to you and he is 
suggesting that you and I are on the same side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I did not take it seriously. 
ADV BARRIE:   May I speak Sir?  May I speak Sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 204 of 232 
 
ADV BARRIE:   So it is – he is indirectly trying to limit the 
witness’ answers that is what he is doing and that is not fair 
Sir and you should not allow it.  That is not a joke. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no. 
ADV BARRIE:   It is not a joke Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  What – no, no I do not think 
he meant it seriously.  The position is … 
ADV BARRIE:   This is my very point he hides behind 
supposed humour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja no. 
10 
ADV BARRIE:   But that is not what is happening here Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  Let us talk about what your… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Time estimation Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja what your assessment is of the time you 
need. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I think we – we could be less than ten 
minutes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just wanted to have an idea so that we all 
20 
we know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It might be a little more or less. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I just wanted an idea. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 205 of 232 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR KOKO:  Chair my sincere apologies I can do with a 
comfort break. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay let us take ten 
minutes? 
MR KOKO:  No five minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Five minutes will do. 
MR KOKO:  Five minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But walking to where you might walk and 
10 
coming back. 
MR KOKO:  I will run quickly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Let us take a five minutes break 
then. 
MR KOKO:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, there, they fixed it.  And then Mr 
Koko, the board returns you.  They returned you back from 
your suspension on the basis that the Dentons Investigations 
did not find any wrongdoing against you but when, in fact, 
the board never gave Dentons the mandate to investigate 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 206 of 232 
 
any misconduct against any of the suspended executives.  
Your comment? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I think that the board must be ashamed 
of themselves from day one because the suspensions were 
not warranted.  They must be ashamed.  I told them – and 
the minute of the 11t h is very clear.  I went in to create a – 
they even had to cut – to send me outside for a cool-off, you 
know, like a rugby player who has been out of order.   
 
They had to say – I had to stay outside for close to 40-
minutes because I just did not agree with them.  They were 
10 
not making sense.  So I was not surprised.  And when I met 
them, I told them.  When they gave me a settlement, I did 
not even look at it.  I told them by blood is blue.  I did 
nothing wrong. Charge me if I have done something wrong.  
So I was not surprised. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Then I have referred you to page 
46 of your affidavit, paragraph 157. 
MR KOKO:   46? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   157. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, on my bundle there is not a 157 at 
20 
page 46.  There is 167. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, Eskom Bundle 15 Chairperson.  
Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the one.  You said... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 46. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 207 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, no.  I am terrible sorry.  This is page 
46 of the affidavit, not the bundle. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you mean the paginated pages? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paginated, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  That is fine.  Yes, okay I 
am there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  There is a paragraph there 
Mr Koko, paragraph 146 and I think you are specifically 
dealing 
with 
paragraph 
27 
of 
Ms 
Tsholofele 
Molefe’s 
10 
affidavit.  You say: 
“I do not believe what Ms Molefe deposed to in 
paragraph 27 of her affidavit regarding what other 
had told her.” 
 
And then you go on to say: 
“I, again, suspect that she has been precognise[sic] 
by the Zondo Investigation Team.” 
 
Now Chair, it is important we look at paragraph 27 of 
Ms Molefe’s affidavit.   
CHAIRPERSON:   What bundle? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Eskom Bundle 11.  Please assist 
Mr Koko.  Eskom Bundle 11, page 15.  Paragraph 27 Chair is 
at the bottom of the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have got paragraph 27. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The paragraph reads: 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 208 of 232 
 
“My suspension, although difficult to believe and 
understand, did not come as a surprise.   
The day before my suspension, the Senior General 
Manager 
for 
Shared 
Services, 
Ms 
Nomkuleko 
Dlamini aka Lettie, came to me in panic and 
informed me that Mr Matshela Koko called her and 
requested that she go to Melrose Arch to meet some 
people.   
At the time, we agreed that she would not go and if 
Koko called her again, she would refer him to me.  
10 
Later on the same day, Mr Dan Marokane, Group 
Executive of Group Capital Division, informed me 
that he had heard from Ms Suzanne Daniels, 
Executive in the Office as the Chief Procurement 
Officer that he, Koko, Matona and I would be 
suspended the following day, 11 March at the board 
meeting.   
Before the board meeting commenced at nine a.m.  
I went to see Matona in his office and he also 
informed me that he had heard from outside sources 
20 
that we were going to be suspended at the board 
meeting later that day.” 
 
And Chair you can also read paragraph 28 which is of 
interest but let me deal with 27 because paragraph 28, it 
says: 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 209 of 232 
 
“While we were waiting to be called, I also received 
a call from one of the general managers, I cannot 
remember which one, asking me if it was true that 
we are being suspended.   
I received information from reliable sources that at 
Essa’s behest, four of the general managers were 
called to his office at Melrose Arch.   
These general managers were informed of the 
suspensions that would take place the following day 
and that they should be ready to act in our stead.” 
10 
 
But Mr Koko, I want to focus now on what you singled 
out in your affidavit which is paragraph 27 about which you 
say you do not believe what she is deposing in paragraph 
27. 
 
And you go on to say: 
“I, again, suspect that she has been precognise by 
the Zondo Investigation Team.” 
 
Can you explain what this means? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I saw the letter that my attorney sent you 
because I do believe and you may disagree with me and I 
20 
could be wrong, it is okay.  I do believe that your 
investigators are chasing people with evidence.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   What 
MR KOKO:   By chasing people in their evidence.  And I do 
believe that they coach certain witnesses.  I could be wrong.  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 210 of 232 
 
By some of the things that I read in this evidence, based on 
what I know, I get shocked.  It is only – it is something that I 
can say only in this place.  And if I am wrong, I will take it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   That is my belief and I have to say it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   And that last sentence points to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   But let us go to what I am saying about – we 
talked about it.  I cannot dispute the conversation between 
10 
Ms Molefe and Ms Dlamini.  I was not there.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   But the content is not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   The content is simply not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now let us got to page 37 in the same 
bundle Mr Koko.  Eskom Bundle 11. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Eskom Bundle 11? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, the same one Ms Molefe’s affidavit is 
found.  Page 37 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the same? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Of the same bundle.  Eskom Bundle 11. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 211 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Where we are reading ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 37? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 37. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But before we go there.  I just want to ask.  
Ms Molefe says that ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE SC:   [Microphone not switched on] 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   We ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on.  Let me say what I want to say 
10 
first.  Then I will give you a chance. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Molefe says at paragraph 28 of her 
affidavit that she received information from reliable sources 
or that she says that four of the general managers were 
called to Mr Essa’s office in Melrose Arch and that there they 
were told – informed of the suspensions that would take 
place the following day and that they should be ready to act 
in our stead.   
 
Has somebody investigated this part, talked to those 
20 
general managers, got more information? 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Chair, 
what 
I 
understand 
the 
investigators have found in regard to that paragraph is to the 
extent they accrued there is three executives or managers 
who acted on the 12t h. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 212 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You see, Mr Zethembe Khoza has denied 
having a prior meeting.  He was here.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He only went as – even though the 
meeting of the 19 t h show that he had a meeting with those 
people who were to act.  So he has denied that part.  You 
will recall in the meeting ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But all I want to find out is whether this 
has been pursued to check with Ms Molefe who those 
10 
managers were and talk to them to find out there is any truth 
that they were called to ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   We have...  Ja, checking was done with 
her Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  You will, at some stage, draw 
my attention to where I must check if there is material here, 
arising out of that in this ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  As you say, it is – she says reliable 
sources Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So... 
CHAIRPERSON:   But she should be able to...  Well, I...  
She should be able to say ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   To substantiate it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or if she cannot tell you what the – who 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 213 of 232 
 
the reliable sources were ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...at least she should be able to tell you 
whether the four general managers are the people who 
ultimately acted or it is different people.  And they should be 
asked whether they were called to such a meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Mr Barrie, what 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Chair, it is much more than that.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR KOKO:   It is much more than that.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   We are untrusted in the telephone records 
because we want to know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   ...who was Ms Molefe talking to, who reliable – 
told her that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And what was the discussions about.  And that 
is the discussion that the telephone records my counsel has 
been asking.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Barrie, you wanted to say 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 214 of 232 
 
something? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Chair, I think the conclusion of the 
previous hearing, in the absence of my learned friend, 
because he was in conference with you after the hearing, 
you will recall.  I had a conversation with Miss Govender(?).  
And...  With Ms Jaggenhout(?) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   My learned friend’s junior. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And the reason for that conversation was 
10 
that 
Mr 
Koko 
was 
during 
the 
testimony 
on 
the 
3rd of December, confronted with bundles that we do not 
have and that he was not supplied with beforehand.  That 
leave us in an embarrassing situation.   
 
And the arrangement was and we referred to the files 
that were behind Mr Koko and said we would like to have 
them.   
 
At that time, I insisted I wanted it in hard copy but the 
next day on the 4 t h of December, we wrote the letter and we 
said:  No, no.  Forget about the hard copy.  We are quite 
20 
happy to have it in electronic copy.  So what we then 
subsequently received were Bundles 12, 13, 15 and 18.   
 
But the arrangement was that the bundles that are going 
to be referred to you – before you during the examination of 
my client, will be made available to us.  Now suddenly there 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 215 of 232 
 
is Bundle 11 that is being referred to.   
 
I now see there are seven bundles there at the witness.  
We are not supplied with it.  And it is a simple matter of 
giving us a link to an electronic site.  Then we can know 
what is going on before and Mr Koko can acquaint himself 
with the issue of the bundle.  So we are upset about it.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, what do you say to that point? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, the bundles, as my learned friend 
says, some of them were given to him.  The request for hard 
copies, I was not aware of it but I am not sure whether the 
10 
Commission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But he says that they changed that.  He 
says that they ultimately said electronic is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But his complaint is that you are now 
referring to a bundle that has not been provided to him.  That 
is his complaint. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Oh, yes.  I have just provided my 
learned friend with it.  Last time ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  He is saying it should have been 
20 
provided earlier.  That is what he is complaining about. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I understand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And he is complaining about last time.  
The last time, we only referred to Mr Koko’s bundle. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 216 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  He is complaining about now.  He 
says you are referring to Bundle 11.  He says Bundle 11 is 
not amongst the bundles that you made available to him 
before.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, that is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was not available to them before. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The bundles which we used, we 
determined that during the course of our preparation.  So I 
10 
decided today, during the course of the day, that I will seek 
to rely or refer to bundle – not bundle, but the affidavit of 
Ms Molefe.  So we did not provide it then last week or during 
the course of the week.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, but ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   But the affidavit would have been 
provided to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the principle that he is talking about 
is.  There is an agreement – at least he – they made the 
point and ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...they thought you had accepted the 
principle 
that 
they 
should 
be 
provided 
in 
advance 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 217 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...with the bundles that will be used in 
questioning their client. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he says the use of Bundle 11 now 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to question his client ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...when Bundle 11 has not previously been 
given to them, is unfair to them. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the point he is making. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, Chair I accept that.  We would 
have shared the affidavit of Ms Molefe only with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, your voice is low again. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The affidavit...  But is that correct?  
Because when they are sent - my understanding is - when 
they are sent, the Rule 3.3. Notice about a particular witness 
Chair, they are provided currently with a password that gives 
them a link to the documentation that goes with that.  So I 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but he says you may have given that 
at some stage or the Commission might have done that at 
some stage. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 218 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But there comes a time when you inform 
him or you give them notice ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...we are going to use the following 
bundles to question your client. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So even if that affidavit may have been 
given to them at the stage of the 3.3 Notices, if you do not 
include it in your list when you say these are the ones we 
are going to use on that day, it is unfair that you know use it 
10 
without them having had a chance to look at them.  It seems 
like a fair point to me.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, it is a fair point Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am not sure...   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   What ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if it is a fair point, it seems to me, 
you should not question Mr Koko using a bundle that they 
have not had a look at them.  Unless they say:  Look, okay it 
20 
is fine.  Go ahead for the purposes of finishing, you know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, may I explain? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can explain. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 219 of 232 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I know I said it is a fair point but is has 
to be assessed in the context of what parties get provided 
with in terms of Rule 3.3.  So the bundles are available to 
them electronically.  So they will always have them.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you remember I said the point is.  
You might – I might have 100 affidavits that you have given 
me in terms of 3.3 Notices. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But closer to the date when my client is 
going to be questioned, you give me notice that you are only 
10 
going to use ten out of those 100 affidavits.  And then when I 
am at the hearing, having prepared only on the basis of the 
ten affidavits, you then go back and take – use another 
affidavit that I have not notice about.  Then that is the point.  
So I might have that but I did not bring that because you did 
not include it as one of the literary you are going to use. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that is the point I was making 
because we provide with electronic versions.   
ADV BARRIE SC:   Yes, but ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So it is not hard copies Chair.   
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   May I...?  Like you and I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I am not sure [laughs]   
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...on this point.  We are not provided 
with electronic access to all the bundles. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 220 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   These were the only bundles that we 
received electronically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   I have...  If I my learned friend wants to 
ask questions about this bundle, Mr Koko will be able to deal 
with it, I am sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   So that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:   For this limited purpose.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   To refer to this bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but for ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE SC:   We are going to come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And we would then really like to be put in 
possession of the bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Electronically.  In any old way, use home 
20 
inspection. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But if it is like ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 221 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So I think Mr Barrie says okay for 
purposes of today, that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But for future, please give them the 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Give them the bundles ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...all the materials that you use, ja.  Okay 
alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  Then page 37 of Eskom 
Bundle 11.  Three, seven.  Eskom Bundle 11.  Chair, this 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   We are at seven o’clock.  I think we 
should try and wrap up if we can. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   37.  Yes, continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Chair, this is a transcript of 
Ms 
Molefe’s 
testimony 
at 
the 
Parliamentary 
Portfolio 
Committee.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You will see that this transcript is dated 
20 
8 November 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The starting page is page 20 
Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Just say that again. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 222 of 232 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The starting page of the transcript is 
page 20. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But the portion I want to read is in – is 
on page 37.  Against miss ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I am not sure.  I think you are 
confusing me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said page 37 and I went there.  Then 
you said page 20. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh.  What I am explaining is.  The 
transcript Chairperson starts on page 20.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paginated page 20. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paginated page 20. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The passage I want to read from is on 
page 37. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I am there. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that is against Ms Molefe’s name 
Chairperson.  You get the first two names.  Honourable 
Mazzone and then Ms L..  Is that Ngcanga?   
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 223 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thabiso(?).   
CHAIRPERSON:   You can skip that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right.  Let me skip that.  [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then there is Ms Tsholofele Molefe.  And 
there – Chair, the paragraph I...  Well, just let me read it 
quickly.  It says: 
“Thank you, Chair.  If I can address the issue of my 
suspension?  I think Dr Lingenye(?) had also asked 
10 
a question on which I have just realised that I did 
not respond to. 
You know it is really a difficult one because to a 
large extent I would be speculating but the issues 
around our suspension did not... and out on the day 
that the same meeting took place. 
I have been informed by people, you know, from 
various areas that there are news out there that we 
are going to be suspended because we – we are not 
playing ball or we do not understand the mandate. 
20 
And when I looked at why – would be suspended – 
what I have I done?  I knew exactly that I have said 
no to which I think would lead to my suspension. 
In fact, I had heard, I think a couple of days before 
our suspension...” 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 224 of 232 
 
 
I was, stand the words, not fully typed out. 
“...there is a board meeting coming and you would 
be suspended on that board meeting. 
Because it was a rumour, I did not have factual 
evidence to it.  So I really ignored it.” 
 
But this is the part Chair I want.  She says: 
“But what I remember vividly happening on the day, 
the day before the suspension, I had a strategic 
session with my team. 
And one of my direct reports, Nomkuleko Felete(?)... 
10 
 
There they typed Fele(?).   
“...came to me in panic saying he(sic) has just 
received a call from Mr Matshela Koko saying that 
she must come to Melrose Arch and she asked me 
why do I not go?  Why must she go there?  And I 
said I have no idea ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Seleka.  I quickly have gone 
through ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Have you gone through it Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am not sure what is different in that 
20 
passage. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She says from what we have read in her 
affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair.  If we have just 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 225 of 232 
 
gone through it.  Mr Koko – I can see his anticipating my 
question.  Mr Koko, this testimony which is exactly the same 
as in that paragraph 27 of her affidavit was done on the – 
was given on the 8t h of November 2017.  You know that 
exactly, is it not? 
MR KOKO:   I beg your pardon? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you know that exactly, is it not? 
MR KOKO:   Do know what 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That she gave this testimony on the 
8t h of November 2017. 
10 
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And at that time, this Commission had 
not been established.   
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So this Commission or the team of the 
investigators could not have done what you allege in your 
affidavit in paragraph – the paragraph I have read.   
ADV BARRIE SC:   What page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   157. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The point that ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You want to answer the question? 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...is being made Mr Koko by Mr Seleka is 
that.  You said that miss...  Was it in regard to Ms Molefe or 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Molefe. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 226 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Molefe. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She gave – in reaction to her version, you 
said 
well 
you 
think 
she 
must 
be 
precognise 
by 
the 
investigators of this Commission.  I think Mr Seleka is 
saying, but here before this Commission was established, 
she was given the same version.  So how come you say she 
is giving this version because she has been precognise? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, the...  Here is the point.  And it is not a 
single event.  It is – there is a trend.  There is a trend that 
10 
starts with the Parliamentary Inquiry on Eskom on State 
Capture.  And the only difference between here and in 
parliament is, I think we got a better Chair here that asks 
difficult questions.   
 
But the tendency of investigators to given this purpose 
and then come and just follow that line, that is what I am all 
about.   
 
Instead of saying we had to but where is your evidence?  
Where are the people you say called you?  Let us interview 
those people.  You say four people have met with the 
20 
chairman.  Where are those people?  Let us interview those 
four people.  Nobody is telling me about that.  And that is the 
point I am making. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you then suggesting now that she 
gave that version to – in parliament because somebody, 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 227 of 232 
 
whether they were investigators or whatever, that they have 
dealt with her, also precognise her? 
MR KOKO:   I am saying exactly that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To...  So the investigators of this 
Commission and whoever was – may have been involved in 
regard to her parliamentary appearance, also did the same? 
MR KOKO:   I am saying exactly that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   If I have to be blind about it.  It is the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Seleka.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I think the documentation speak 
for themselves and I have no further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Barrie, it may well be 
that you would want to re-examine at the end of everything 
or did you want to – do you have some re-examination for 
this evidence? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Yes, Chair.  Chair, it is a matter of time.  
The re-examination will take a substantial period of time but 
what I do want to do is, because the issues that have been 
debated with the witness here today, have all been dealt with 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...in the affidavit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...that was ...[intervenes]  
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 228 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Handed up. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Well, it has not yet been handed up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   That is the real point I want to make. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   So his more comprehensive responses 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...to this whole issue ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...are contained in here and the original 
of this has apparently been taken by the person on the 
Commission’s staff who prepares the bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And – but these have already been given 
page numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Bundle 15. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   So on that basis, if I may hand up to you 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...a copy of the signed affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Then shortly, the accompanied bundle 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 229 of 232 
 
which is going to be a substantial bundle ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...will be made available electronically 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...to the secretariat. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But the issue here is that the matters 
that have been raised are dealt with in this affidavit in great 
detail. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And you will find that from paragraph 51 
on page 18 of the affidavit itself.  I see it has not been 
numbered in accordance with bundle 15. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE:   And we would argue, Mr Chairman, that 
you should have regard to what is in this affidavit in this 
regard.  Similar matters have been dealt with in the 
original affidavit but in the meantime what has happened is 
that the evidence has come available that on the 10 March 
20 
Ms Daniels was part to a document that was exchanged 
with Mr Salim Essa. That is of very crucial importance to 
where the truth lies. 
 
I would also point out that the passage that was 
referred 
to 
in 
Ms 
Molefe’s 
evidence 
before 
the 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 230 of 232 
 
parliamentary commission makes for interesting reading 
and it does not accord, but that is for you to look into, with 
what was said to the Commission.  What she did report at 
that stage is apparently that Ms Vileti came to her and said 
Mr Koko wants her to come to Melrose Arch and that was 
all and that she then later learnt the following day that the 
four people who were going to act in the positions of the 
suspended people had all been called to Melrose Arch. 
 
Now what has happened about that version of 
events, we have no idea but we just want to point out that 
10 
it is any event inevitable that over a passage of time there 
are going – conflicts are going to start, people start – and 
you are fully experienced there, people actually start 
believing what is imprinted in their minds and it makes the 
fact-finder or the trier of facts version very difficult.   
But the point that we are making is, there are of 
course avenues which can be followed to track the 
movements of people.  The cell phone companies know 
where calls are received and where they are made from. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV BARRIE:   Because they know which towers have 
been activated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE:   So if somebody says I was at Melrose Arch 
but it then appears he was on his way to Witbank, you can 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 231 of 232 
 
know about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE:   That evidence is available provided of 
course that you ask for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE:   And so that is the issue, is eventually one 
looks for concrete evidence.  Evidence that cannot be 
contravened by the mere say-so of witnesses.  But we 
make the point that we have dealt with these issues 
comprehensively in this affidavit and we now place it 
10 
before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE:   So that it, I would imagine, becomes 
available for public consumption as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I assume you have given one to 
…[intervenes] 
ADV BARRIE:   As I say I am not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you say the Commission already has? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, it was given before we started. 
ADV BARRIE:   Yes, yes, my learned friend has it and the 
20 
original has gone off to be copied. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, no that is fine. 
ADV BARRIE:   The point that I am making is that it is 
going to take time, the re-examination because we will take 
you through this affidavit. 
11 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 323 
 
Page 232 of 232 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, that is fine. 
ADV BARRIE:   And so that is going to take some time.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV BARRIE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV BARRIE:   And thank you for [indistinct] 03.39 
yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is alright.  Thank you 
very much to everybody.  Thank you, Mr Koko, thank you, 
Mr Barrie, thank you everybody, thank you Mr Seleka and 
10 
your team and the staff.  We are going to adjourn now.  
This is the last hearing of the Commission this year.  The 
next hearing will be next year in January and the date will 
be announced.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS SINE DIE 
 
