 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 339 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 235 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 3 of 235 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 08 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Freund, good morning  
everybody. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Good morning Judge.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready this morning? 
ADV FREUND SC:  I am indeed Judge.  We have available 
two witnesses to lead this morning if all goes well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay go ahead you may call your 
first witness. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  The first witness is 
10 
Ms Dikeledi Magadzi.  Ms Magadzi could you maybe come 
on screen please? 
MR FROLICK:  Thank you very much; good morning Deputy 
Judge President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Magadzi. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Good morning Ms Magadzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning thank you for making 
yourself available to come and assist the commission.  Yes 
Mr Freund may I ask the Registrar to administer the oath or 
affirmation? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Please do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please Registrar.  Please come back on 
the screen Ms Magadzi.   
ADV FREUND SC:  That is only Ms Magadzi say something 
and then you will come on screen. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 4 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can you hear me Ms Magadzi? 
MS MAGADZI:  I can hear you Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MAGADZI:  Deputy Chief Justice I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I see you are promoting me this 
morning.  Yes can I just confirm  
MS MAGADZI:  I can hear you Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Can I just confirm the correct 
pronunciation of you surname.  Is it Magadzi or what is the 
correct pronunciation? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Magadzi. 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct it is Magadzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thank you.   
MS MAGADZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay the Registrar will administer either 
the oath; prescribed oath or affirmation in accordance with 
your choice. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS MAGADZI:  Dikeledi Phillistus Magadzi. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS MAGADZI:  No I do not have. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 5 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say; so 
help me God. 
MS MAGADZI:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Ms Magadzi.  Mr 
Freund do you want to proceed? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair you will recall 
on a previous occasion we have made mention of Exhibit 
10 
ZZ1 at the beginning of Volume 1 and you have… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Provisionally admitted the whole of 
ZZ1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Which would include ZZ1.9 which is the 
affidavit of Ms Magadzi but I will now take Ms Magadzi to 
ZZ1.9 it starts in Volume 1 at page 90 - 90. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Freund yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Ms Magadzi can you – Ms Magadzi can 
20 
you confirm that at the request of the African National 
Congress and in response to an invitation from the 
Commission to your political party you were one of several 
people who deposed to affidavits and submitted them to 
the commission through Mr Krish Naidoo? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 6 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And do you have with you a copy of 
your own affidavit paginated in accordance with the 
pagination system of the commission’s? 
MS MAGADZI:  Yes I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  If you would just look 
please at page 90 in Volume 1 that should be the front 
page of your affidavit and then go through to page 99 that 
should be the page where you signed.  Can you confirm 
that that is your affidavit? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:  Yes it is my signature. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Chair to the extent that 
this was provisionally admitted I ask that it be admitted as 
Annexure ZZ1.9. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  The affidavit of Ms Phillistus 
Dikeledi Magadzi which starts at page 90 is now finally 
admitted as Exhibit ZZ1.19.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Thank you Chair.  Ms 
Magadzi I see from the first page of your affidavit that you 
are a member – you are currently Deputy Minister of 
20 
Transport, is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And is it correct that you became a 
member of Parliament in the National Assembly from the 
commencement of the Fifth Parliament in other words from 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 7 of 235 
 
2014 and that you have remained a member of Parliament 
since then? 
MS MAGADZI:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I get the impression from your 
paragraph 3 that in the 20 years before that – before you 
came to Parliament you served in the Limpopo Provincial 
Government as MEC in a number of capacities, is that 
correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And when you came to Parliament as a 
10 
member of Parliament with effect from 2014 as you say in 
paragraph 6 of your affidavit is it correct that you were 
appointed as the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on 
Transport? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now it is precisely because you were 
the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Transport 
between 2014 and 2019 that you were requested by your 
organisation to depose to this affidavit – your organisation 
having been informed that this was one of the committees 
20 
on which evidence would be led before the commission.  Is 
that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Now you say in paragraph 7 of 
your affidavit that your Portfolio Committee consisted of 12 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 8 of 235 
 
members 7 from the ANC 2 from the Democratic Alliance 
and 1 each from the Inkata Freedom Party, Economic 
Freedom Fighters and National Freedom Party that is 
correct is it? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I suppose it follows that because 7 
of the 12 came from the ANC they would by having the 
majority vote be in a position ultimately to determine the 
decisions of that committee.  You agree? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct the ANC had 7 members. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you make the point in paragraph 8 
that this Portfolio Committee’s function was to oversee the 
operations of the Department of Transport and that that 
department 
had 
12 
state 
owned 
entities 
under 
its 
jurisdiction of which PRASA was just one, is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you say in paragraph 9 the first 
sentence: 
“Overall 
the 
Committee 
performed 
its 
oversight obligation well.” 
20 
Is that also in your view? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is my view and I believe that the 
correct – the Committee was doing its work well in terms of 
oversight on all the entities plus the department. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  Thank you.  But you do make 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 9 of 235 
 
the point in paragraph 10 well in paragraphs 9 and 10 you 
say: 
“Save for PRASA the other state owned 
entities 
that 
reported 
to 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
were 
relatively 
stable 
but 
PRASA was a particular concern and the 
Committee focused its attention on this 
enterprise 
during 
your 
tenure 
as 
Chairperson.” 
Is that correct? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then in paragraph 11 you refer – 
well I do not think there is any controversy about this to 
the fact that PRASA was then undergoing a modernisation 
process and it involved very substantial transactions that it 
was involved with including revitalising of platforms and 
stations, refurbishing trains, purchase of a new train from 
France and locomotives from Brazil, renewal of railway 
tracks and so forth – it was undergoing – it was engaged in 
a fundamental process of restructuring and reconstituting 
20 
itself and involving an enormous amount of published – 
public expenditure.  Would that be correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  It is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then you make… 
MS MAGADZI:  The organisation program as we   
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 10 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Please proceed. 
MS MAGADZI:  Thank you very much. I wanted to indicate 
that on our arrival we – we were given a document which 
was indicating the organisation program of PRASA and 
subsequent to that we – we were following up on how work 
was being done and that is why I indicated in the previous 
paragraph to say we met with challenges as we were trying 
to follow up and oversee the work as was indicated not 
only in the organisation documentation but also in their 
strategic planning of the year 2014 to 2019 we saw that 
10 
there were problems in terms of them implementing the 
strategic plan and also even with their annual plans there 
were challenges. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right and we are going to come to that 
is some details shortly but I am just trying to sketch the 
background and part of the background is the point that 
you make in paragraph 12 which is: 
“That it was difficult to carry out the 
committee’s 
oversight 
obligation 
as 
a 
consequence 
of 
the 
high 
turnover 
of 
20 
executives, Chief Executive Officers and 
Board members after 2015.” 
Is that a fair summary of the point you were trying to make 
there? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 11 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you say during your tenure as 
Chairperson there were three Ministers Dipuo Peters, Joe 
Masangwani and Blade Nzimande.  There were four boards. 
There were numerous Chief Executive Officers and that 
this instability you say hampered the Portfolio Committee’s 
efforts to follow up on allegations in the media with the 
trains, with purchase – that the trains purchased were not 
fit for purpose.  Let us just leave that last sentence for the 
moment other account – we will come back to that. 
 
I think the point you really trying to stress here is 
10 
was a period of very considerable instability at the level of 
Minister; at the level of Board and at the level of Chief 
Executive Officer and frankly also at the level of senior 
management at the level directly below Chief Executive 
Officer, am I understanding you correctly? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you then say in paragraph 13 that 
despite 
the 
high 
turnover 
of 
Ministers 
you 
did 
not 
experience any pushback from the Executive Authority and 
there was alignment you say between yourself and the 
20 
different Ministers.  Now I would just like to focus very 
briefly on that feature of Parliamentary oversight.  The 
importance of the relationship between the Chair of the 
relevant Portfolio Committee and the Minister responsible 
for that same Portfolio.  You would agree I presume that 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 12 of 235 
 
that 
is 
an 
important 
relationship 
which 
affects 
the 
effectiveness of Parliamentary oversight in respect of that 
Portfolio? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct.  We – I would say all the 
three Ministers we really worked amicably and whenever 
there were issues I will raise with the Minister responsible 
and we will have discussions even them attending the 
Portfolio Committee meetings was not an issue at all. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  And then in paragraph 14 you 
say: 
10 
“Another factor which made it difficult for 
the 
committee 
to 
exercise 
to 
proper 
oversight over PRASA was the difference of 
approach between the committee and the 
PRASA board as to how challenges at 
PRASA should be dealt with.” 
Now I – I would ask you please to elaborate bearing in 
mind the very point that you have made about instability.  
There was – there was a board that had been chaired by if 
I am not mistaken Siphiso Buthelezi. 
20 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  It was that board that replaced that 
board that was chaired by Mr Popo Molefe if I remember 
correctly. 
MS MAGADZI:  Huh-uh. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 13 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  That board itself was removed by the 
Minister and replaced by an interim board.  That interim 
board was again replaced by Mr Popo Molefe’s board.  
That board’s turn of office came to an end and another 
board was installed.  That board in due course was itself 
removed and so forth.  So it is important for us to – to 
refer to that in order to understand what it is you are trying 
to say in paragraph 14.  When you say there was a 
difference of approach between the committee and the 
PRASA board could you be a little more specific please? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:  Thank you very much we indeed like we 
had indicated we had Mr Buthelezi who was on our arrival 
the board did not stay very long it had reached their term 
of office expired and the board that was chaired by Dr 
Molefe came in and then we had a board which actually 
was chaired by the now Judge Maluleke and Mr 00:17:27 
came back again for a short stint and then there was Mr 
Kweyama but I need to indicate that our challenge was – 
what we were seeing as the Portfolio Committee and I will 
speak particularly to the board that was chaired by Mr 
20 
Molefe was that whatever we wanted information; we 
wanted to oversight; most of the things Mr Molefe was – 
would always remind us that we are like over-stepping our 
mark with respect to the oversight that we want to do and 
the – we are interfering with his fiduciary duties as the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 14 of 235 
 
board.  And these were some of the things which actually 
we were experiencing with him to an extent let me indicate 
that we had an oversight meeting that we – we wanted to 
go and see the tour trains; we wanted to have discussions 
with the board on the SA Phasing issue and lastly our 
oversight in particular it – I – was also to go and see the 
factory that was established in Nigel.  But let me indicate 
that we were also accompanied by the Portfolio – the 
Portfolio – this – the Portfolio Committee on Appropriation.  
We were together with that committee. 
10 
 
On our arrival when we wanted to – to deal with the 
issues of the SA Phasing in a meeting we ended up not 
talking to the issues because the chairperson of the board 
left us in that meeting indicated that he has got other 
issues to deal with and therefore knowing very well that 
the – the acting Group Chief Executive has said to us that 
the reinstatement of the SA Phasing was the decision of 
the board therefore it became a futile exercise for us to 
can continually talking to the issues of the SA Phasing.  
She wanted to get issues from the board.   
20 
 
And I need to indicate that the other thing which 
was kind of challenging to us was whenever we wanted to 
meet with the board of PRASA it will only be the 
chairperson of the board who will come to the meeting. 
 
Even when we were dealing with matters that are 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 15 of 235 
 
relating to Audit and Risk the chairperson of Audit and Risk 
will never be there.  It will only be the chairperson of the 
board which actually was as Portfolio Committee it was a 
challenge for us to can be able to deal with issues because 
you will have different sub-committees of the board which 
actually you know expects that they should be able to be 
held accountable in this regard.  
 
And I need to say going back to this time when we 
were with the Appropriation Committee we went indeed to 
go and look at the 00:21:00 and we satisfied ourselves that 
10 
we will go back to Parliament and every – we will sit down 
and as committee and say these are the findings that we 
had which indeed we were able to do and lastly the other 
site visit that we had to do was to go to Nigel to go and 
check the factory. 
 
Whilst we were there we were told that the factory 
is not ready and therefore we could not go and visit that 
factory.  But at the centre was that you will have 
functionaries do not have the board which can be able to 
explain some of the things which you see being spoken to 
20 
in the documents.  When you want to go and do in loco 
inspection you are told that the factory is not – has not 
been established. 
 
I also need to indicate that this for us to do 
between the two Portfolio Committee we were following up 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 16 of 235 
 
on what the Auditor General had indicated when we were 
there – the PRASA audit and came to Parliament and I 
need to indicate that we worked for a short while with Me 
Maluleke who actually part of our focus was namely on the 
trains and the – besides the trains we were worried that 
PRASA does not make a follow up on – or does not even 
come and report back to the issues that have been raised 
by the Auditor General and this was a concern 
 
Remember once we have gone through the process 
of what the Auditor General would do you will have a 
10 
budget review report that will be sent to Parliament which 
actually will be able to indicate that these are the findings 
that we had with respect to this SOE and therefore we 
expect that we must make follow ups as to whether what 
we have raised in this report of Parliament is implemented. 
 
But to our – let me say to the dismay of the 
committee many a times the issues that will be raised 
either by the Auditor General; by the Portfolio Committee 
will find themselves being repeated over and over.  I can 
just simply indicate that there are 00:27:53 that the Auditor 
20 
General would raise and there will be no correction of the 
issues that were raised by the Auditor General. 
 
Let me just say that the last committee that came in 
of Ms Kweyama it was for me a very short stint.  I would 
not talk much about that because that is when we went into 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 17 of 235 
 
elections and the – subsequently I cannot say as to what 
really – we did with the committee of Me Kweyama but for 
me the committee that I worked quite a long time with was 
the committee that was led by Dr Molefe. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Now you have raised a 
whole host of issues which we are going to need to come 
back to.  But one of the points you yourself had raised for 
discussion is the problems revealed by the Auditor General 
and the failure to resolve those problems. 
 
I do not know whether you had an opportunity to 
10 
follow the evidence of Mr Godi on Monday of last but Mr 
Godi referred to some information in the draft affidavit from 
Mr Makwetu – the late Kimi Makwetu who was then the 
Auditor General. 
 
And Mr Makwetu and Chair just for your reference 
the witness will not have this page – for your reference this 
is in Bundle 4 page 871 in paragraph 61.  Mr Makwetu 
highlights amongst other things the problem of irregular 
expenditure being out of control. 
 
And I am just going to read to you evidence that is 
20 
already on the record.  He says that the irregular 
expenditure in the year 2013 to 2014 was 0,01 billion. 
 
In 2014/2015 it was 0,55 billion.  Half of the – more 
than 500 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second – one second Mr Freund.  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 18 of 235 
 
One second.  Thank you Mr Freund what paragraph did you 
refer to in Mr Makwetu’s affidavit? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Paragraph 61 which is at page 871 in 
Volume 4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I have got it thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  I will repeat this Chair so 
that you may follow and the witness may follow. 
 
That 
in 
2013/2014 
the 
irregular 
expenditure 
revealed by the Auditor General’s report was 0,01 billion.  
In 2014/2015 0,55 billion.  In 2015/2016 it is 15,3 billion.  
10 
In 2016/2017 it is 20,3 billion and in 2017 to 2018 it is 24.2 
billion. 
 
Now my first question to you Ms Magadzi is you 
have no reason to dispute that those are the – those are 
the figures that was revealed by the Auditor General’s 
report, you accept that? 
MS MAGADZI:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Would you also accept that it paints a 
really truly disastrous collapse in financial management? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now what the Auditor General – the 
late Auditor General also said in his draft affidavit if I can 
refer the Chair to – let me just check this page 71?  Bear 
with me please.  He – the – Mr Makwetu said that every 
year the Portfolio Committee called the Auditor General’s 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 19 of 235 
 
team for a briefing on the Auditor General’s reports and he 
says: 
“I cannot fault the Portfolio Committee for 
the Transport Portfolio on its diligence by 
calling the Executive Authority and entity to 
account in the sense of calling the Auditor 
General and calling amongst others the 
Minister.” 
I take it you would accept that praise from the Auditor 
General? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:  Thank you very much I appreciate. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But he says the following and I am now 
reading to you from page 959 paragraph 249 of his same 
draft affidavit.   He says this: 
“Although 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee’s 
interrogation of the audited results was 
visible from the records of the PC’s – the 
Portfolio Committees.” 
He says: 
“No real recommendations or 
corrective 
20 
action had been noted during the period 
under 
review. 
 
Furthermore 
there 
was 
evidence that the Portfolio Committee would 
request an action or initiative to be taken 
but the follow up thereon was lacking.” 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 20 of 235 
 
And I must say that it is not only he who has been critical 
of the follow up – the actions Mr Godi for one and others 
have made the same point. 
 
Now if I have heard you correctly a little earlier you 
yourself accept I think that this is a real problem that – 
that it is one thing for the Portfolio Committee to draw 
attention to a problem to refer to it in its report; to have its 
report adopted by the National Assembly and it is another 
thing to get those – those concerns addressed and 
addressed timeously and appropriately.  I think I see you 
10 
nodding, you agree that this is a real problem? 
MS MAGADZI:  It is indeed a serious challenge and a real 
problem because many times in the Portfolio Committee we 
were raising lack of consequence management in – at 
PRASA and we were also raising the question of recurred 
findings by the Auditor General which actually were never 
being addressed by the PRASA as such and hence you see 
the irregular expenditure was growing and growing and 
growing. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now as I read the Constitution the 
20 
Executive is accountable to Parliament and if Parliament 
refers to problems and requires certain issues to be 
addressed and not addressed is it not possible in your 
argument 
for 
Parliament 
to 
have 
done 
more 
– 
but 
Parliament just sit back and once – once it has adopted a 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 21 of 235 
 
report 
is 
that 
the 
end 
of 
the 
matter? 
 
No 
more 
responsibility for Parliament. 
MS MAGADZI:  No not really that is not the end of the 
matter.  Let me indicate like you have so eloquently said 
sometimes there were – the follow up particularly from the 
Portfolio Committee was not as efficient as you want to do 
– to see and let me also say that in – this to me was a 
challenge because you do not necessarily have systems 
which will be able to assist you to say there are these 
issues which we have raised as a Portfolio Committee and 
10 
therefore you need to make a follow up.  In Parliament we 
do not necessarily have those types of systems which 
actually can be able to assist you as a Portfolio Committee 
to – can lay thorough doing of your work with respect to 
critical issues that we will  have raised – we have spoken 
to that you must follow up particularly with the Executing 
Authority so that they do not fall by the wayside.  And in 
this instance I so agree that indeed matters of following up 
on certain issues particularly holding the Executive to 
account on certain matters was one of the things which I 
20 
would say as a Portfolio Committee who were – we were 
found wanting. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well I want to just debate… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Or discuss that very issue a little 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 22 of 235 
 
further – a little more detail.  Sorry Chair were you trying 
to come in? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Freund ja.  Ms Magadzi I – 
I think you need to be commended for making the 
statement that you accept that your Portfolio Committee 
and it may not be the only Portfolio Committee but you are 
talking about your own – the Portfolio Committee that you 
chaired that it was found wanting when it came to following 
up on what needed to be done by the Executive to address 
the comrades. 
10 
 
Am I correct that that is what you have said? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Earlier on Mr Freund read from Mr 
Makwetu’s affidavit where Mr Makwetu although I think in 
another part of his affidavit had some praise for your 
committee but said in another part of his affidavit that 
when one looks at the minutes or the documentation 
relating to meetings of the Portfolio Committee – your 
Portfolio Committee recommendations or corrective action 
that the committee thought needed to be done to address 
20 
the problems seemed to be not reflected in the minutes.  
That is how I understood what Mr Freund was reading from 
Mr Makwetu’s affidavit.  
 
I would like to know what you reaction is to that 
part of Mr Makwetu’s affidavit.  Do you also accept that 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 23 of 235 
 
maybe you did raise issues but fell short in terms of saying 
what needed to be done by the relevant functionaries to 
address the problems? 
MS MAGADZI:   Thank you very much Chairperson.  
Indeed, like I indicated, there were lots from the committee 
to dealing with some of the issues which actually were 
raised.  And even when we would deal with these letters in 
the committee, we would just like deal with the matters in 
an official way.   
 
And no further going to make sure that if at all 
10 
there has this been this type of an issue which was raised, 
whether 
by 
the 
Auditor-General 
or 
by 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee itself.   
 
How do we make sure that the board does its 
fiduciary duty but also the Executing Authority make sure 
that things are done according to the expectation from 
Parliament and also from the Auditor-General?   
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the reason for the committee 
not being able or not doing this part of this work?  What 
would you say?  Was there unwillingness or was there a 
20 
lack of understanding of what it was supposed to do or 
what was the problem?  Why was it not doing this? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me indicate that doing 
oversight 
on 
12 
entities 
plus 
the 
department 
– 
the 
committee to a particular extent was overwhelmed by the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 24 of 235 
 
work that we were doing and that is why you will find that 
there were things that the committee will do as a follow-up 
but I need to indicate that the committee was doing to the 
best of our ability everything that we can be able to do 
despite 
the 
fact 
that 
there 
were 
some 
deficiencies 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Would 
the 
deficiencies 
that 
you 
acknowledge in relation to the committee’s performance of 
these oversight functions in relation to PRASA?  Also, 
would they be found in relation to its performance of its 
10 
functions in relation to the other 11 entities that it had to 
exercise oversight on?   
 
Or, is the position that in regard to the other 
entities - when one goes to the minutes one will find that 
the committee – maybe not all of those entities but in a 
number of them it would not just end up with raising 
issues.   
 
It would actually make recommendations or point 
the way to either the relevant boards of the Minister of 
what should be done and would follow-up on what was 
20 
done?   
 
Or, was this a deficiency that was to be found in 
regard to all the entities that the committee was looking 
at? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me indicate that earlier 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 25 of 235 
 
on in my affidavit I indicated that most of the entities had 
stability.  You will have the board waiting and finishing 
their time.  The CEO’s the same.   
 
And therefore, it was very easy because you would 
have somebody who will be able to follow-up on the issues 
that we have raised and then they are able to come back to 
you.   
 
You will have somebody who will be able, when 
you request a record, will be able to submit a record to you 
as requested.  But in the instance of PRASA, as has been 
10 
indicated, they tell over of an executive in the main, 
particularly on operational matters, you will find that you 
can ask one thing several times and still be unable to get 
the thing that we have requested from PRASA, whether you 
request that in a meeting or you request that in writing.   
 
It was becoming a difficulty because today there is 
this Group CEO.  The next when you came, there is 
another.  You still repeat the same thing again.  And that is 
what was a challenge.   
 
And let me also indicate that, in this instance you 
20 
will have the board that will – they come in and say go and 
do.  And in the end, you do not get the expected outcome.  
But I do not need to say that we were, as the Portfolio 
Committee, somewhere we also could not make it through.   
 
So for me, I would say that it definitely was quite a 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 26 of 235 
 
challenge for the Portfolio Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you raise the problems that you 
raised with the board also with the relevant Minister, 
Ministers at different times? 
MS MAGADZI:   Yes, we did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did they ...[intervenes]  
MS MAGADZI:   Mostly ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did they promise to act but did not act?  
Did they promise not to act?  What was the position? 
MS MAGADZI:   Remember it...  Let me just indicate that 
10 
you have the board which actually – I will take the words 
from Dr Michael who would always be saying:  It is my 
fiduciary duty.  And failed the Portfolio Committee in 
executing its fiduciary duty.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And what about the Minister?  What 
would the Minister say?  Because let – I – let me tell you.  
When I saw these figures that have been of irregular 
expenditure in Mr Makwetu’s affidavit that Mr Freund read 
to you.  They shocked me.   
 
But what particularly shocked me was that every 
20 
year they were going up and up and up, as if there was 
nobody keeping an eye on saying actually the irregular 
expenditure should go down, not up.   
 
And for me the most obvious question is:  Where 
were the people who were supposed to tackle this – these 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 27 of 235 
 
irregular expenditure to not go up every year?  And it gave 
me the impression, it is like the management at PRASA had 
decided, we are going to show whoever that we are going 
to – we do not care about what they about irregular 
expenditure.  It is just going to go up.   
 
I 
mean, 
2013/2014 
financial 
year, 
it 
was 
R 0,01 billion which I think would be about R 100 million.  
Then the...  I may be wrong.  Then the next year, 
2014/2015, that was the first financial year that your 
committee – you were leading the committee.  It is 
10 
R 0,55 billion.  That would be about R 550 million.  It is 
quite a big jump.   
 
And then as if that was not enough.  The following 
year – this is when your committee has been around for at 
least two years or something.  2015/2016, it jumps from 
R 550 million to R 15.3 billion.  How is that possible?  And 
you would have thought that somebody would fix the roof 
and say this can no longer be allowed to continue.   
 
And that the following year it would actually go 
down drastically.  But no, it goes up.  The following 
20 
financial year R 20,3 billion.  The next financial year, 
2017/2018, R 24,2 billion.  So it is like all the people who 
were supposed exercise oversight, it is like they do not 
care about this trend.   
 
And yet, it is a trend that should shock them, that 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 28 of 235 
 
should make them want to do something they have never 
done before on the basis that this cannot happen under our 
watch.   
 
During these years, was your committee aware of 
this irregular expenditure every year and the fact that it 
was going up? 
MS MAGADZI:   Yes, Chairperson we were very much 
aware 
of 
the 
irregular 
expenditure 
which 
was 
uncontrollable.  We would engage with the chairperson and 
the Minister and that is why most of the times with our 
10 
urgent review report - part of the recommendations will 
always be there that this is what we would like to see as a 
committee but unfortunately that was never followed up 
either by the Executing Authority or by the Board of 
Governance in PRASA.   
 
And they – what really happened was that the 
irregular expenditure was just ballooning every year.  You 
can only do your bit Chairperson by making sure that what 
we are expected to do, you do.   
 
But I have to indicate that very challenging was 
20 
the fact that as much as you raise these with the Executing 
Authority and the Board of Governance, there was no 
change at all.   
 
And this is one of the things which actually was 
making us to really focus onto what exactly is happening in 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 29 of 235 
 
PRASA.  Because the other thing that was for us a concern 
was that the capital programmes were not being done 
thoroughly as our anticipation as was in the strategic plan.   
 
You would have expected to go and see the 
stationary revitalisation and nothing is happening.  You 
want 
to 
see 
the 
change 
that 
has 
been 
then 
been 
refurnished.   
 
We do not really see that but instead, you see the 
irregular expenditure going up and up just like that.  And 
for us, this was – what was very frustrating to the Portfolio 
10 
Committee because you – that is why I said, PRASA was 
our main focus in the Portfolio Committee.   
 
And despite the fact that we were focussing on 
what was in PRASA.  We were not getting the expected 
outcomes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not know what the protocols 
are between the Portfolio Committee and the National 
Assembly.  But my own thinking is that at some stage your 
committee or you as the chairperson with this ballooning 
irregular expenditure would talk to the leadership of 
20 
Parliament and say there is something really shocking 
here.  Something needs to be done.   
 
And maybe the National Assembly should raise it 
with the President and say you are the head of the 
Executive.  There is this shocking thing that is happening.  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 30 of 235 
 
The Portfolio Committee has spoken to the board, has 
spoken to the Minister but it just keeps on ballooning.  
Take steps to address this.   
 
Is 
this 
something 
that 
was 
done? 
 
Is 
this 
something that your committee could not do because it has 
to follow certain channels or what?   
 
But I just think that this was something that if - the 
relevant – if the board and the Minister were not giving 
proper attention to, should be – should have been raised 
even with the President because he appoints the Minister 
10 
and the Minister appoints the or – I do not know – appoints 
the board if they do not do their job.  And the Minister 
appoints the CEO, I guess.   
 
If people do not do their job and they have been 
given a chance to say sort this out, they should be fired.  
They cannot do their job.  They have been given a chance 
to do it properly and they cannot, particularly, if we talking 
about taxpayers’ money.   
 
Was this something that could be done, was done, 
could have been done but did not succeed?  Do you know? 
20 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, we have raised this matter 
with The House Chair.  We even submitted a report and 
subsequent to that, The House Chair, I think after we have 
submitted our report, came back to us to say we need to do 
our investigation into what is happening but in the matter 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 31 of 235 
 
which was challenging was raised.   
 
And let me also indicate that with the Budget 
Review Report, the Speaker of the National Assembly, once 
the report has been accepted by Parliament, referred the 
report to the Minister for actions to be taken with the 
recommendations that will be included in the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you do not know whether it went to 
the point of it being raised with the President?  That you 
do not know? 
MS MAGADZI:   That I do not know Chairperson.  The only 
10 
thing that I know be that the Minister responsible will get 
the Review Report with the recommendations and as the 
Portfolio Committee you would expect the Minister to act 
on the Review Report.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I am going to raise something that 
maybe Mr Freund was going to raise later but it is 
convenient for me to raise it now.   
 
During most of those years that Mr Makwetu refers 
to when the irregular expenditure was ballooning, I happen 
to know from evidence given in this Commission by other 
20 
witnesses under the PRASA work stream, that PRASA did 
not have a permanent Group CEO because Mr Montana left 
in, I think in 2015 around June.   
 
And so some of the years – I do not know if I heard 
recently that finally the Group CEO for PRASA has been 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 32 of 235 
 
appointed or not but I do know that at least for most of last 
year there was an administrator, I think.   
 
But the last Group CEO who was permanently 
appointed as at some time last year was Montana, who left 
– Mr Montana who left in 2015.   
 
What did your committee do about the failure on 
the part of the Minister or the Executive to appoint a 
permanent Group CEO at PRASA as soon as possible after 
Mr Montana had left? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, thank you very much.  Every 
10 
time the board came to the Portfolio Committee, we were 
more interested in wanting to know because it was not only 
the Group CEO that was acting.  You had even in other 
areas your CFO.  There was challenges and the Portfolio 
Committee would also want to know from the board as to 
when is the appointment of the CEO.   
 
And let me tell you that the departure of Mr 
Montana 
left 
the 
PRASA 
with 
acting, 
acting, 
acting, 
whether even in the subsidiaries or in the other entities of 
PRASA.  I think there were very few areas where you will 
20 
be having permanent CEO.   
 
PRASA in properties, that is where you will have 
your permanent CEO but the other entities, the Auto Pax 
you will have your person, a PRASA review have somebody 
who is permanent but the other areas within PRASA there 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 33 of 235 
 
would be somebody who is acting.   
 
And hence, the challenge that we are seeing.  We 
did – were raising these matters with the board, with the 
Minister 
but 
unfortunately 
the 
turnover, 
like 
I 
had 
indicated, in five years we got three Minister, in five years 
we have got like four boards, in five years you have got a 
plethora of acting Group CEO.   
 
It definitely becomes a challenge for you to be 
able to put your fingers on the pulse.   
CHAIRPERSON:   What excuses you remember as having 
10 
been 
told 
to 
the 
committee 
why 
these 
positions, 
particularly the one for Group CEO and maybe and CFO’s, 
there were vacancies there, why they were not being 
filled?  Do you remember what excuses you were told as 
the committee? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, there was not necessarily a 
very – I would not say that we were told that these are the 
reasons why there cannot be any CEO being appointed.  
But from our – let me say, from the assessment of the 
Portfolio Committee, while you are advertising the post as 
20 
in the board, then you leave and therefore the next board 
that comes will also find that the...  
 
I remember the board that was chaired by Judge 
Makhubele, when they wanted to make an appointed, only 
to find that the post was like 18-months it had been 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 34 of 235 
 
advertised and therefore, meaning, that they had to re-
advertise the post again.   
 
So there was not necessarily a good reason to 
hold to the Portfolio Committee as to why was it so difficult 
to be able to appoint the Group CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So as you sit there, you are able 
to say, really, you are as the committee were never given 
any convincing reasons why these appointments were not 
being met by whoever was supposed to make that? 
MS MAGADZI:   Seated here Chairperson, I definitely can 
10 
be able to indicate that for me or the Portfolio Committee 
there was no good reason why an appointment cannot be 
made because the departure of Mr Montana, we expected 
that within six-months or so a group CEO should have been 
appointed but it was never to be.   
 
It was just there will be this person coming in to 
act and then the next person coming in to act and that is 
how it was.  Because even us in the Portfolio Committee, 
you would only invite PRASA to come and deal with this 
matter or that matter.  Then the next thing, you are having 
20 
this person as acting Group CE.   
 
And from the board, there is no word as to what 
has really happened to the previous person who was acting 
in this position.  So that I show I would characterise what 
we were seeing in PRASA.   
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 35 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
H’m. 
 
Thank 
you, 
Ms 
Magadzi.  
Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Magadzi, you 
have dealt with very many issues since last I asked you 
any question.  So I would like to go back over a couple of 
the issues that you have just been dealing with.   
 
The first is that if, I heard you correctly but you 
must correct me if I am wrong, when you first started 
explaining the ineffectiveness of the recommendations or 
requirements in the reports of the committee to actually 
10 
bring about change, I think I heard you say but there was 
no system being in place to monitor to whether what was 
required had been done and had been done in time.   
 
We have used the term in this Commission “No 
Tracking and Monitoring System”.  Am I correct that was a 
problem you experienced? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And I am assuming, given that you 
were a senior person in Parliament, that you would have 
interacted with your colleagues, other chairperson of other 
20 
committees.  I am assuming that it was not your committee 
alone that had the problem of “No Tracking and Monitoring 
System”?  I am assuming that this must have been a 
widespread problem across committees.  Would that be a 
fair assumption? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 36 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:   I would not talk to the other Portfolio 
Committees but I – let me speak to the Portfolio Committee 
that I was chairing, that for me that was one of the 
challenges that we were experiencing.  And I would not – 
let me say that listening to Mr Frolick on Friday, that was 
one of the issues that he highlighted that the systems have 
been put in place but it still has to yield that half-routes.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, did you engage with Mr Frolic or 
anybody else to try to push, to achieve, effective Tracking 
and Monitoring Systems? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:   No, not clearly. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you also said another problem 
you experienced was that requests would be made at 
Portfolio Committee meetings of senior representatives of 
PRASA and the expectation was that at the next meeting, 
and often an arrangement would be made for when this is 
going to take place, the people who you expected to report 
back and the issues on which you expected them to report 
back simply did not happen.  Am I correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.  To a particular extent, 
20 
that is what we were experiencing. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you can fairly point fingers at 
those who failed to honour their undertakings.  But can we 
not also point fingers at your committee for itself not 
following up on those issues?   
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 37 of 235 
 
 
And in particular, is it not correct that you had all 
the legal powers you needed to compel witnesses to 
appear, compel witnesses to produce documents and that 
you simply failed to do that? 
MS MAGADZI:   I agree. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now we focussed thus far quite a bit 
on the problem with irregular expenditure as revealed in 
the reports and as confirmed by the Auditor-General’s 
report.   
 
But there was another important part of the context 
10 
during which your oversight took place and that is the 
Public Protector ’s report on PRASA titled Derailed and 
issued in September of 2015.   
 
I am sure you would have become familiar with 
that report in your capacity as chair of the committee.  Am 
I right? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now the Derail Report is a long report 
with many features but I want to put to you for your 
comment that the complaints that were upheld included 
20 
improper 
awarding 
of 
tenders, 
inadequate 
equation, 
corruption, conflict of interest, financial mismanagement, 
nepotism and improper treatment of whistle-blowers.  Do 
you agree that those were all complaints upheld by the 
Public Protector? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 38 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   So.  And those complaints – those 
findings arose from complaints submitted by a trade union 
in 2012 which were finally upheld in 2015 but only in part 
because the Public Protector said:   
I have not had time to get to grips with a 
number of the other complaints.  So I am going 
to continue to investigate some of that and I 
also want other steps to be taken and I want 
the 
board 
to 
take 
responsibility 
for 
10 
investigating 
and 
for 
procuring 
a 
forensic 
investigation of certain issues.  And I want 
National 
Treasury 
to 
get 
involved 
and 
investigate certain things.” 
 
Am I – is that a fair summary I am giving? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   So you not only have irregular 
expenditure.  You have very good reason to suspect that 
related to this irregular expenditure is corruption, is 
criminal activity. And that, I would imagine, should be a 
20 
matter of very great concern to your committee.  Would 
that be correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I want to take you to something 
that Mr De Freitas told us.  I believe this document was 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 39 of 235 
 
sent to Ms Magadzi but for the Chair ’s reference, I am 
referring to Volume 4, page 485.  And this is a letter that 
Mr De Freitas says that he sent to you.  It is a letter dated 
the 8 t h of July 2016.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund.  Just repeat the 
volume and the page? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am just checking that I am giving you 
the right reference Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV FREUND SC:   It is Volume...  Sorry, I have one 
10 
reference there.  If you can just bear...  Sorry.  Volume 4.  
And I keep looking at Volume 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Volume 4.  I think page 485.  Sorry, I 
am struggling here.  Just give me a moment.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Bundle 4.  Okay.  And what is the page 
again? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I am just checking.  The page I 
said was 485 but I think I have given you the wrong 
reference.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, actually, maybe you can look at it.  
I see it is time for the tea-break.  You can have a look at it 
and then when – after the tea-break we can continue.  We 
will take the tea-break. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you Chair. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 40 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is quarter past.  We will resume at 
half-past eleven.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us proceed, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I was 
referring you in error to the wrong bundle, it is bundle 3, 
page 485, not bundle 4, page 485. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Bundle 3, page 485. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you going to later refer to Bundle 4 
or you are not sure?  I want to see whether you might 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I will in all probability also refer 
to bundle 4. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  I have got it, point…?  Mr 
Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have got it.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you.  Ms Magadzi, this 
20 
particular document which you have told me you are 
familiar with is a letter to yourself dated the 8 July 2016 
from Mr Manny de Freitas, a DA MP on your portfolio 
committee.  It is headed: 
“Request to launch inquiry in to R51 billion PRASA 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 41 of 235 
 
tender process.” 
And I will read you from the letter, it says: 
“I write to you in the light of the recent news that 
the R51 billion tender for the purchase of 20 new 
locomotives by the Passenger Rail Agency of South 
Africa may have been unduly interfered with by the 
Gupta family and Duduzane Zuma.  This is the 
latest reported case in which allegations have been 
made that the Gupta family have attempted to rig 
the tender process so that they may benefit.” 
10 
An then Mr de Freitas refers you to Section 55(2) of the 
constitution and he says: 
“Parliament must use its power to launch an inquiry 
into this matter immediately.” 
And he proposes that the Gupta brothers and the Duduzane 
Zuma should appear before parliament to account and he 
looks forward to a response soonest.  Can you confirm that 
you did receive this letter from Mr de Freitas? 
MS MAGADZI:   Yes, I can confirm that I received the 
letter from Mr de Freitas. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now what Mr de Freitas says is that 
you did not respond to it, that he again enquired about his 
letter and that you acknowledged receipt of the letter and 
said that you would address it but he said that you never 
did.  What is your response to that? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 42 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:   Let me indicate that all correspondences 
which were coming to the committee were addressed by the 
portfolio committee and even the letter that is spoken to 
was dealt with in the portfolio committee and the – I would 
not take a decision on my own that I am calling the Gupta 
brothers or calling any other person to the portfolio 
committee, it will be the decision of the committee as to 
how to deal with the matter or the correspondence that has 
been sent to the Chairperson.  That is how we were able to 
deal with the letter from Mr de Freitas.  Thanks. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now is it your evidence that this letter 
was in fact placed before the committee and was in fact 
discussed by the committee? 
MS MAGADZI:   It was discussed by the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what was the decision of the 
committee? 
MS MAGADZI:   The committee felt that it was not – how 
can I put it, it was not an opportune time or they felt that 
there is no need for us to can be able to engage the Gupta 
brothers at that particular moment.  That is how I can put it 
20 
and we never engaged with the Gupta brothers. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, let me just read to you the 
summary that Mr de Freitas gives of the newspaper article 
that prompted his request.  I am reading, Chair, from page 
381 of volume 3.  He says: 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 43 of 235 
 
“On the 19 June 2016 the Sunday Times published 
a story with details of the R51 billion tender for the 
purchase of 20 new locomotives by PRASA which 
involved the Gupta Family and Duduzane Zuma.  
Allegations 
included 
the 
Gupta 
Family 
had 
attempted to rig the tender process so that they 
would 
benefit. 
 
Other 
allegations 
included 
statements made in the media by previous PRASA 
GCEO Lucky Montana who claimed that he was 
introduced to the Gupta Family and associated 
10 
by…” 
That probably should read “and associates” 
“…by previous Transport Minister Ben Martins and 
that the Gupta Family wanted their associates to sit 
on the PRASA board.” 
Now if those allegations, if true, not be a very considerable 
concern to your committee? 
MS MAGADZI:   Let me indicate that once you put issues 
to the committee and the committee discuss and the 
outcome is such that the committee does not believe that 
20 
there can be able to take the matter forward, it is definitely 
the decision of the committee, not my decision.  Much as it 
was there in the newspapers we never took up because the 
committee felt that it was not necessary at that particular 
moment for us to can be able to take the matter forward 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 44 of 235 
 
and call, as requested by Mr de Freitas, the people as 
mentioned. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But what I am asking you is something 
slightly different.  I am asking you whether if those 
allegations were true, they would be matters that should be 
of very considerable concern to your committee. 
MS MAGADZI:   Indeed we made - from the portfolio 
committee, there were several issues which we raised 
within the committee meetings and as we were doing 
oversight and we felt that at that particular moment we will 
10 
not want to engage into what has been indicated by Mr de 
Freitas. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Ms Magadzi, I am going to ask the 
same question for the third time and if you again do not 
answer it, I will move on.  The question is this, if those 
allegations were true, are they not allegations which ought 
to have been of concern to the committee? 
MS MAGADZI:   Mr Freund, the allegations were a concern 
to the committee hence we had discussions in the portfolio 
committee and even if we were doing oversight we wanted 
20 
to establish what exactly were the issues. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, did you ever ask any of the 
Gupta Family or Mr Zuma, Mr Duduzane Zuma or Mr Lucky 
Montana to come and either admit or deny what had been 
reported in detail in the Sunday Times on the 19 June 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 45 of 235 
 
2016? 
MS MAGADZI:   No, we did not. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 
 
Now 
I 
want 
to 
move 
on 
to 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, hang before you move on, Mr 
Freund.  Why did you not?  Here was an …[intervenes] 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, I am sorry, I am interrupting 
you, I am sorry about that.  Here was an article in a 
newspaper 
that 
was 
making 
very 
serious 
allegations 
10 
including allegations about the Gupta Family and saying Mr 
Montana had said the Gupta Family had wanted their 
associates to sit on the PRASA board.   
Now let us just recall what the public new in 2016 
about the Gupta Family.  The public knew that three years 
earlier in 2013 there had been a huge outcry in the country 
because of the landing at Waterkloof Airbase of a Gupta 
aeroplane and that had raised a lot of questions about the 
Guptas having a lot of influence allegedly on the then 
President Zuma and the government.   
20 
Also, in 2016 the public knew, and I take it that your 
committee and yourself knew, that Mr Jonas had in 2015 
gone public and said that he had been taken to a meeting 
with the Guptas at the Gupta residence on the 20 – or he 
had gone public in 2016 in March, actually, and this was 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 46 of 235 
 
June, he had gone public in March 2016 where he said a 
Gupta brother in that meeting had tried to bribe him in 
order to for him to accept an appointment as Minister of 
Finance on the basis that if he accepted the money and if 
he accepted the appointment, which obviously would only 
be done by the then President, then he would work with 
them.  So this is part of what the public knew by June 2016 
when this article came out.   
A member of parliament says to your committee let 
us act on these allegations, let us call these people to 
10 
come and admit or deny or tell us what they know about 
these allegations, your committee does not ask them or 
summon them.  My question is, why not? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I do not necessarily have an 
answer as why we did not call the Gupta brothers but let 
me indicate that our discussion in the portfolio committee 
led us to a situation where we did not call the Gupta 
brothers and I do not want to lie and say this is what we 
did but my recollection was that having discussed, the 
matter for me was closed in that and that is how I can be 
20 
able to say this is how far we went. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Based on what you are saying, it seems 
to me – and I want you to comment on this – it seems to 
me that you would not be able to challenge a proposition 
that the committee had no good reasons not to take this 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 47 of 235 
 
matter up and try and establish whether these allegations 
were true.  What do you say? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I think you are correct, 
probably the committee – at hindsight I would say that the 
committee should have done out of what was there in the 
newspapers but we decided to say that this, for us, we 
cannot be able to do and that is why I am saying at 
hindsight, for sure we could have done better. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I just want to say I like the idea 
that you – I think you are telling me matters as you 
10 
remember them and I think you are taking responsibility on 
behalf of the committee where it fell short.  The reason I 
like that is because unless we are prepared to examine 
ourselves properly and see whether we have done our job 
the way it should have been done and admit where we have 
not done the right thing, we are not going to be able to find 
solution.  So I like the fact that where you believe the 
committee fell short you are able to say I think we fell 
short, ja.  
 But, of course, this Commission wants to go beyond that, 
20 
it wants to try and establish what is it that would make a 
committee that is made aware of such serious allegations 
not to follow them up, [indistinct – dropping voice] 
 
Now you may not be able to say more than what 
you have told me but one of the issues that other 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 48 of 235 
 
witnesses raised last week in regard to parliamentary 
oversight is that the ruling party has a study group or what 
is referred to as a study group in parliament where 
members of the ruling party were serving different portfolio 
committees 
together 
with 
other 
I 
think 
members 
of 
parliament or maybe – I do not know whether members of 
the ANC or leadership who might not be part of parliament 
also come in, discuss matters that will be coming up at 
different portfolio committees and that the message would, 
I do not know whether it is sometimes or all the time or 
10 
often be to members of the different Portfolio Committees 
that they must be hard on the executive because the 
ministers are ANC ministers and sometimes those ministers 
are in those meetings of those study groups.   
 
So a minister will be going to a committee but he 
knows that the party or the study group has instructed the 
ANC members of the committee not to be hard on them 
which seems to me to be do not do your oversight job 
properly because if you think you should be hard on a 
minister, you should be able to be hard on the minister, if 
20 
you think there is justification. 
 
So in my mind as we look at this matter why your 
committee decided not to take up these issues I am 
wondering whether it might be because of such instructions 
from the study group or maybe not from the study group 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 49 of 235 
 
but maybe a general understanding that as ANC members 
you should not go too far – or you should not be hard on 
ministers and so on.  Do you want to say anything about 
that? 
MS MAGADZI:   Thank you, Chairperson, let me indicate 
that our study groups’ meetings that we were holding, 
whether the minister is there we will always have study 
group meetings in preparation for what we wanted to see 
happen in the committee because one thing for certain that 
you must remember is we have to replenish and make sure 
10 
that we abide by the principles, the policies, the manifesto 
of the African National Congress and hence when we go 
into the study group to discuss matters we discuss based 
on what we would like to see the outcomes being of the 
portfolio committee because what becomes interesting to 
us, Chairperson, is that we must make sure that we do and 
we execute the tasks within the mandate and confines of 
the ruling party and therefore, we would go into the study 
group, debate on issues, agree on the issues but in this 
instance that we indicate that we never in the study group 
20 
discussed the approach towards Mr de Freitas’ letter 
because 
it 
– 
normally, 
I 
would 
not 
even 
take 
the 
correspondences that comes to the Chairperson to the 
study group but we will look at the programme of the 
portfolio committee and then be able to say how do we 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 50 of 235 
 
handle this issue. 
 
The member of the study group will only get to know 
about the correspondences once they are in the portfolio 
committee and therefore, we never discussed that issue in 
the portfolio committee and probably those who would say 
that the study group will get instructions, we already have 
the instructions within the manifesto of the African National 
Congress, those are the instructions that we should be 
abide by.   
We have the policies and the policies of the ANC 
10 
and those are the ones that we should be able to say are 
we doing the right things when we do and we are doing 
that?   And I want to say probably Mr de Freitas also in 
their party they have got matters that they believe their 
party should be able to push and I do not dispute how they 
would want to push their letters but it cannot be correct if 
at all it is his him who says we get instructions, the 
portfolio committee must not do this.   
Every time the minister comes to the portfolio 
committee we are making sure that without fear, without 
20 
favour issues that must be dealt with will be dealt with 
accordingly irrespective of the fact that they are ministers 
of the African National Congress, whatever issues needs to 
be dealt with, it will be dealt with in accordance to what - it 
is at our disposal as the portfolio committee. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 51 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you saying that you have never 
had an instruction or suggestion from any ANC leader 
whether inside parliament or outside parliament to the 
effect that members of the ANC in parliament must not be 
hard on either the ministers, ANC ministers, or the 
President of the ANC when they ask questions or perform 
their oversight functions? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I do not remember getting 
those kind of instructions from my party and that is why, as 
a portfolio committee, we were always making sure that we 
10 
do our work to the best of our ability and that is why I am 
saying 
going 
into 
parliament, 
being 
in 
the 
portfolio 
committee, we always must make sure that we uphold the 
manifesto of the ruling party to make sure that what the 
ruling party has said it is going to be doing in this 
particular term of office gets done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Magadzi, then I 
have to go back to the question that you have already been 
asked.  There is a detailed set of allegations published in 
20 
the press and drawn to the attention of your committee of 
what, if it is true, would probably amount to serious 
criminal misconduct in relation to a R51 billion tender at 
PRASA.  If, as you say, your committee was under no 
pressure or instruction not to enquire into allegations 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 52 of 235 
 
against 
the 
Guptas, 
against 
Duduzane 
Zuma 
and 
allegations of state capture, I want to put to you that it is 
inexplicable that your committee should decide not to 
investigate this.  Do you want to comment please? 
MS MAGADZI:   Thank you very much, Mr Freund, let me 
indicate that part of the things that the committee did was 
to make a recommendation that because there are serious 
issues in PRASA, there is a need for the state apparatus, 
your police, your – the Hawks, National Treasury and other 
state apparatus to investigate the issues that were being 
10 
raised in PRASA and therefore, for us, once we have done 
that, we felt it was opportune moment that we will see an 
investigation 
being 
done 
by 
the 
auditor 
general, 
by 
National Treasury, by the Hawks, by the South African 
Police Services so that those who have done criminal 
activities or if there is corruption in PRASA, they must be 
held accountable, they must be arrested. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Did you committee specifically request 
the Police, the Hawks or any other agency to investigate 
this very allegation that we are now talking about that was 
20 
drawn to your attention by Mr de Freitas’ letter? 
MS MAGADZI:   If you would recall, Dr Molefe came and 
said – and even wrote a letter to the Speaker wherein he 
was indicating that he has requested the state apparatus, I 
think it is the Hawks, if I am not mistaken, for them to do 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 53 of 235 
 
certain investigations and he was indicating that he does 
not see anything coming to fruition and it was out of the 
recommendations that we made as a portfolio committee 
and hence when he wrote a letter to the Speaker, I also 
had an opportunity from the Speaker indicating that letter 
to the portfolio committee that this is what happened, but it 
was – the recommendations that we made to say we 
believe that the state apparatus should be able to make an 
investigation which the Chairperson of the board of PRASA 
took up and subsequently was not happy about how issues 
10 
were unfolding. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And, as I understand it, that exchange 
related to what action should be taken following the Public 
Protector ’s report which was issued in or about November 
2015 and even in relation to that you were aware that Mr 
Molefe was claiming that the Hawks were not doing what 
they should be doing to investigate those allegations.  Do 
you agree with what I have just put to you? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So we go back to my earlier question, 
20 
did your committee specifically takes steps to ensure that 
any agency would pertinently investigate the allegations to 
which I have just been referring which only came to light 
well after the Public Protector ’s report and which allegedly 
very briefly a form of State Capture attempt by the Gupta’s 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 54 of 235 
 
in respect of the Board of PRASA.   Now you either did or 
you did not, which is it?  
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson let me indicate that in 
Parliament you submit regular reports and you expect that 
those reports once submitted should be executed.  But 
from the committee’s side, let me indicate that we did not. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, thank you.  Now there is 
something else I would like to refer you to, it arose during 
the evidence of Ms Mazzone, the DA, Deputy, the DA 
Shadow Minister for Public Enterprises.  She testified last 
10 
week but…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you moving away from these 
particular allegations or is it connected with them? 
ADV FREUND SC:   It is connected Chair, but it is in 
slightly different context, but it is connected.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let me…[intervene] 
ADV FREUND SC:   Perhaps you should allow me a little 
latitude. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Let me ask this question.  Do you 
concede Ms Magadzi that the conduct of your committee in 
doing - in not taking up these allegations to at least 
establish what the people consent had to say about them 
was a serious dereliction of duty on the part of your 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 55 of 235 
 
committee? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson thank you very much, I would 
not say it was dereliction of duty but I would say that when 
you have a discussion in the Portfolio Committee and the 
Portfolio Committee, so agree that this is the route that we 
will take.  
For me, I take it that we did not disengage in our 
duties teachers but or rather as a Portfolio Committee at 
that particular time we saw it fit to take the route that we 
were taking. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I thought about your evidence was 
that the committee decided not to do anything about it at 
that time, did I understand your evidence correctly? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me indicate that – I 
cannot recollect properly, so as to what we said in the 
Portfolio Committee but there was no action that we took to 
that effect and I would not want to say that it was 
dereliction of duty but I can rather be comfortable with the 
fact that we did not take any action. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you not have a duty; you were the 
20 
Chairperson of the committee.  You were the leader of the 
committee and I take it that you were supposed to show 
leadership and give guidance.  Obviously, you could not 
force members of the committee to your view, one way or 
another.  They were free to make such decision as they 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 56 of 235 
 
made but each member of the committee and if they were 
to come here, they would have to decide whether they are 
defending their decision to do nothing, or whether they 
accept that they should have done something and not 
doing something was a dereliction of duty.  
So I asked the question, were you not under a duty 
as a committee to do something about these allegations 
particularly against the background that I gave earlier on. 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I would agree with you that 
they did not do anything. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But my question is a different one.  Do 
you not agree that you were under a duty once you were 
made aware of such serious allegations, R51billion and 
that was said to have been irregularly obtained or in which 
the Gupta Family and Mr Duduzane Zuma were said to 
have been involved and the allegation that the Gupta’s had 
tried to, wanted to ensure that the PRSASA Board had their 
associates in circumstances where we are talking about 
2016.  
Remember, that is the year in which Ms Thuli 
20 
Madonsela issued her reports.  A few months later, we are 
talking about June, a few months later she issued her 
State of Capture report which led to this Commission.  
Already there have been lots of allegations about the 
Gupta’s in the media, and things have happened and you 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 57 of 235 
 
are told, you are made aware of these serious allegations.  
How is it possible that you - it can be said that the 
committee had no duty to do something about these 
allegations, if that is what you are saying? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I – that is why at hindsight, 
when these issues are raised, one believes that for sure 
despite the fact that it was discussed in the Portfolio 
Committee and a particular decision was reached, one 
could have thought through to say, these are the issues 
that we need to follow up but we never did anything.  I 
10 
have to be honest, we never did anything. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but remember I am going to say 
again.  My question is a different one.  Do you accept or do 
you not accept that the committee had a duty to do 
something about these allegations?  You have said that 
you - the committee decided not to do anything or the 
committee did not do anything.  So my question is, do you 
not accept that the committee had a duty to do something? 
MS MAGADZI:   Indeed I accept the fact that the 
committee should have done something. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I guess I am never going to get an 
answer to this direct question that I've asked about three 
times Ms Magadzi.  I am rather disappointed about that, I 
thought I would get a clear answer on what it seems to me 
clearly prior to the committee to do something.  This was a 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 58 of 235 
 
committee that was aware that there was a lot of instability 
at PRASA you told me that, yourself.  This was a 
committee where you were aware, there were a lot of 
allegations of corruption.  The Public Protectors Report 
was out derailed.  
This was a committee that was aware that there was 
irregular expenditure that was ballooning at PRASA and 
then it gets told, becomes aware that there was a tender of 
R51billion 
which 
involves 
the 
Gupta 
family 
and 
Mr 
Duduzane Zuma and the allegations were that the Gupta 
10 
family had attempted to rig the tender process so that they 
will benefit.  
And it was alleged that Mr Montana had said that 
the Gupta family had tried to, had wanted to put its 
associates on the PRASA Board, by 2016 PRASA was in 
serious financial challenges.  There were all kinds of 
allegations of corruption.  On your own evidence, there 
was instability and your committee that you were leading 
refuses to do something about something so serious, and 
you are not able to say having been Chairperson of that 
20 
committee that you know that the committee had a duty to 
do something and it may well be Ms Magadzi that part of 
the problem is that a lot of people were not making the 
judgment call that that needed to be made in terms of their 
duties.   Mr Freund, you may continue. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 59 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I know that 
on our video conference facilities, sometimes one cannot 
clearly hear every word.  So I just want to check with Ms 
Magadzi that I heard her correctly because I understood 
her when you asked her the question previously, about 
whether she accepted that the committee had a duty to 
have acted in those circumstances.  
I thought I heard her to say that she accepts that 
the committee should have done something, which seems 
to me to be agreeing that there was a duty.  So I just want 
10 
to check with the witness whether I heard her correctly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct, sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think I did hear that as well and it 
may be that Mr Freund is correct.  That when you say the 
committee should have done something, it may be that that 
is another way of saying it had a duty.  But what I did 
notice is that when for some time, I continued to say, to 
ask you the question whether there was a duty, you did not 
20 
say – know when I said it should have acted I meant it did 
have a duty.  
But I think Mr Freund is right, we should give you 
an opportunity to say whether when you said it should have 
acted, you meant it did, you accepted that I had a duty or 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 60 of 235 
 
the position is this different.  We need to - so that we are 
fair to you and your committee. 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I think that is correct.  We 
should – when I said at hindsight, we should have done 
something Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   If I say by saying the committee should 
have done something, you are accepting that it had a duty 
to say, to do something.  Am I showing a correct 
understanding of your evidence? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  So that, therefore the 
committee's conduct in not doing something would be a 
dereliction of duty, is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Now, I must thank Mr 
Freund to correct this because I certainly thought that you 
were not accepting that the committee had a duty.  Of 
course, I think both you and I should accept responsibility 
for that misunderstanding because you also did not say no, 
no when I say it should have acted I may now accept that it 
20 
had a duty but I think now it has been clarified.  Thank you 
very much.  Okay, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you for that Chair.  Thank you 
Ms Magadzi now I think it is still the same issue in a 
slightly different context.  Ms Mazzone gave evidence, now 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 61 of 235 
 
a motion that was put on the floor of the National Assembly 
on the 8 t h of September 2016 and that was yet another 
attempt of an opposition party to persuade those with the 
power to make a decision, which is to say the MP 
representing the majority party to cause an investigation to 
take place into serious allegations of State Capture and of 
alleged corruption.  
And she told the Chair about a motion that was put 
on the floor a draft resolution to establish an ad hoc 
Committee to investigate the alleged Capture of State 
10 
resources and undue influence over the government.  And 
she said that it had widespread support from the opposition 
parties but all the representatives of the majority party 
voted against that.  
And I will refer the Chair to a document you do not 
have Ms Magadzi, but when I look at Bundle 2, page 361, 
which is an extract from Hansard I see that amongst the 
very many ANC MP’s who voted against that proposal, that 
motion was yourself.  Am I correct you voted against that? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I want to understand why you 
voted against that, when you voted against were you acting 
on an instruction on the Whip that this was the position to 
be adopted by all ANC MP’s? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, first of all let me indicate 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 62 of 235 
 
that when we are in Parliament, are not in Parliament as 
myself I have been. I am representing the African National 
Congress and therefore will always and every time ensure 
that I tow the party line and that is just exactly what I did. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what was the party line on 
requests 
for 
investigations 
into 
allegations 
of 
State 
Capture involving the Gupta’s, the Zuma’s and others? 
MS MAGADZI:   The motion which was put before 
Parliament, which was proposing the ad hoc Committee, 
the ANC said we are not going to support that motion. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And can you tell me why not? 
MS MAGADZI:   I do not necessarily would be able to say I 
can speak my own thinking but I will not say this is the 
reason why the ANC said that.  But when - if parties say 
this is the route that you are going to take, you cannot 
deviate from the route that the party has indicated that you 
must fill.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, let us move on.  I want to take 
you to the events…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund before you move 
20 
on. But Ms Magadzi you are not telling me are you that as 
a member of Parliament, if there is a motion that must be 
voted upon and your party says vote this way and not that 
way. You do not even ask, why, you are not telling me that, 
are you? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 63 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I am not telling you that the 
party would give it - would give a reason as to why but - or 
rather let me say I did not ask the reason why, I just 
believed that my party say we are not going to support the 
motion and I did exactly just that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to tell me whether before 
your party told you which way to vote, whether you had 
come to your own view as to whether this was the motion 
that you would otherwise want to support or not support, or 
you had not come to any view by the time the party told 
10 
you when and once the party told you it was irrelevant 
what your view was. 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson like I indicated, I did not go 
to Parliament out of my own accord.  I went to Parliament 
representing the African National Congress and once there 
has been an indication from my party, I therefore would be 
able to follow what has been indicated by my party and I 
would say in this instance, the motion put forward by Ms 
Mazzone the ANC said, we are not going to support and 
definitely I did that, I did not support. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But at this stage, you are not able to 
share with me what reasons your party gave, so that I can 
assess whether it had valid reasons for saying this motion 
should not be supported or whether it had no valid 
reasons, you are not able to share with me what reasons 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 64 of 235 
 
the party gave. 
MS MAGADZI:   I cannot recall Chairperson as to what 
were the reasons why the party said we should not support; 
I really cannot recall.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But sitting here now, knowing what you 
know and what has happened over the years.  Do you have 
a view whether if you knew then what you know now, 
whether you would have - within the party has spoken in 
favour of saying let us support this and obviously you 
would, I think on your approach you would accept that if 
10 
the party did not agree with you, then you would go along 
with whatever the party decided.   
But internally, knowing what you know now, do you 
think that if you had known what you know now you would 
have said we must support this? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me say knowing what I 
know now, I still believe that what the party had instructed 
us to do for me was correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if the same thing were to happen, if 
we were to find ourselves in 2021 with a similar situation 
20 
and a similar proposal, motion and the party said vote 
against this, you would still be comfortable with voting 
against the proposal. 
MS MAGADZI:   Definitely I will be following my party line. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Freund. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 65 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Magadzi I want 
to move on with some different issues and I want to refer 
you in particular to a two-day meeting.  I am sure it must 
have been a very memorable meeting that took place on 
the 7 t h and 8th of March 2017 at which your committee 
gave consideration to the ongoing crisis within PRASA.  
Chair this was dealt with in the evidence of Mr de Freitas, 
in volumes 3 from page 387 through to page 391.  And I 
think we can deal with this meeting fairly briefly I hope Ms 
Magadzi.  
10 
In the course of that meeting, it is correct is it not 
that your committee unanimously decided, or be it that 
people might have had different reasons for making the 
same decision.  Your committee unanimously decided that 
it was necessary for your committee to commence an 
inquiry into the affairs of PRASA, is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what divided the committee was 
what would be the important issues to be investigated in an 
inquiry.  On the one hand, I was completely in your 
20 
comment at least the representatives of the DA were of the 
view that there were allegations of corruption and the like, 
particularly flowing out of what was understood to be the 
content of the Werksmans Report, and they felt that that 
justifies an inquiry.  So you agree with me so far?  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 66 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And on the other hand, there were a 
number of members of the majority party who supported an 
inquiry but whose motives were a little different, the issues 
that more concerned them were a little different.  And I 
want to put to you that two of those key issues that led the 
majority party MP’s to want to support such an inquiry was 
firstly, this.   
There was anger on the part of ANC MP’s about 
what was said to be allegations made by Mr Popo Molefe 
10 
that 
the 
African 
National 
Congress 
had 
been 
the 
beneficiary of monies through a contractor with PRASA that 
had really come from PRASA and there was a feeling that 
this allegation was unjustified and unsubstantiated.  That 
was one of the concerns, am I correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson that is not correct.  What the 
members of the African National Congress did was to - in a 
meeting which was scheduled amongst other things, which 
were, we wanted to raise was for Mr Molefe to come and 
tell us and give us evidence of the money that was paid to 
20 
the African National Congress because that money, the 
monies, which were indicated, were in the court papers 
that the African National Congress has received money. 
I need to indicate that members of the Portfolio 
Committee, all of us we were in agreement that we need to 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 67 of 235 
 
investigate the malfeasance, which were had happening, 
the corruption which was happening, criminal activities that 
we felt is happening in PRASA and that we all agreed to 
say we need - as we were talking, we were indicating that 
the issues that we were raising must form part of the terms 
of reference for the investigation.  We also need to raise 
the issues that have been raised by the Auditor General, 
particularly on irregular wasteful expenditure.  We also 
need to factor in a number of things which actually were 
happening in PRASA and there was no single party which 
10 
was saying this is what we want to do. 
All of us as the member of the Portfolio Committee, 
were agreeing on the issues which were raised by members 
to be put in that, the question of the money that went to 
the ANC was a separate thing altogether from what we 
wanted to investigate. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright now, I want to be clear because 
I do not want there to be any misunderstanding between 
us. The question that I have just asked and that you have 
just answered relates to the events on the 17 t h of March 
20 
2017. That was an occasion on which you agreed with me, 
there was unanimity that there should be an inquiry.  
But I just want to remind you in perhaps you had been all 
confused that there was a later event, on the 20 t h of 
February 2018.  So almost a year later, where there was 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 68 of 235 
 
also a decision by your committee to convene an inquiry 
and I am sure you would know that.  So I just want to 
check when you told the Chair that all the issues you have 
mentioned, the allegations and so forth were amongst the 
reasons why all members wanted this inquiry in March 2017.  
You clearly had in mind March 2017 you are not getting 
confused with February of 2018? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct Chairperson.  Those were the 
issues amongst other issues which were raised by the 
members of the committee in March of 2017. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Now what I was putting to you 
was that there were two issues as I saw them that motivated 
ANC MP’s I am just going to get this right.  I put to you the 
one that you dealt with which is about allegations of monies 
finding their way PRASA ultimately into the ANC coffers. But 
the other issue that seemed to concern many of the ANC on 
this committee very considerably was the fact that the Popo 
Molefe board had mandated a private sector firm of attorneys 
Werksmans to conduct investigations and there was a strong 
feeling on the [?] that was quite inappropriate it should not 
20 
have been done.  Am I right that that was another part of the 
sentiment? 
MS MAGADZI:  Mr Freund you are correct the – we had 
concerns on the appointment of the – the investigators in 
PRASA and our concerns emanated from the fact that  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 69 of 235 
 
1. The 
Werksmans 
company 
was 
not 
part 
of 
the 
contracted legal firms which were there in PRASA.  And 
be that as it may we said it should have been appointed 
correctly.  Whether they go out in a bidding or whatever 
was done it was irregularly appointed and those were 
the issues that we were raising and wanting to get the 
reasons why and the irregular appointment because we 
raised it several times in the meeting that there is a 
need to regularise the appointment of that month.  
We were not speaking the fact that they are doing the job but 
10 
we wanted them to be regularised. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright and that issue itself had quite a 
long history.  I just want to mention I do not know if you 
recall that in March of 2016 quite some time before we 
talking about in March of 2017 is it had already been 
confirmed by the Minister in answer to a question in 
Parliament that Werksmans Attorneys had been appointed to 
lead this investigation – the forensic investigation and they 
had done that at the request of the board chaired by Mr Popo 
Molefe.  This had long been common knowledge, do you 
20 
agree? 
MS MAGADZI:  Chairperson in several meetings that we held 
as Portfolio Committee we – we raised the issue that 
Werksmans has been irregularly appointed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I do not want to get engaged in a – 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 70 of 235 
 
in addressing whether you are right or wrong on that.  You 
may be right; you may be wrong but let us just assume that 
that was an issue that was in dispute or an issue on which 
the committee wanted some – some clarity. 
 
The fact of the matter is and I think you have already 
confirmed this that by the end of this two day marathon 
meeting there is complete unanimity on your committee for 
the reasons you have already told the Chair that there was 
need now for an inquiry into the affairs of PRASA. 
 
I think you agree with that; am I right? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then something dramatic happened.  
What 00:04:19 at the meeting on the 8 of March the acting 
Director 
General 
of 
the 
Department 
of 
Transport 
Mr 
Mokonyama I believe read out a letter that had been sent to 
the committee from the then Minister Dipuo Peters in which 
she said that she had dissolved the board; the board headed 
by Mr Molefe.  Is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But as you have told the Chair the 
20 
reasons for the need for the investigation into PRASA were 
widespread; they related to a lot of financial irregularities 
and a lot of alleged misconduct, alleged corruption and 
00:05:15 you agree?  I see you nod I just want to clear this 
up. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 71 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:  I do agree Chairperson.  Agree. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now what puzzles me if it is factually 
correct as I think it may be is that a week later on the 14 
March the ANC members of this Portfolio Committee did a 
complete turnaround and they said there is no longer any 
need for any investigation into PRASA by this committee. Do 
you agree that that is factually correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  Chairperson that is not correct.  What we 
had agreed upon in the Portfolio Committee we still believe 
that we needed to continue with it.  But I hasten to indicate 
10 
that before the committee we had three very – three 
legislations which actually demanded the attention of the 
committee and hence the – the investigation was put kind of 
on hold because we were dealing with the National Transport 
– 
the 
amendment 
of 
the 
National 
Transport Act 
the 
amendment of the Adjudication of Administrative Road Traffic 
Offices and lastly the Road Accident Benefit Scheme Bill 
which were in front of the Portfolio Committee and hence 
there was no turnaround by the members of the African 
National Congress instead our focus was to make sure that 
20 
we deal with this legislation to finality. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I want to put to you that your 
memory on this which you are simply not correct and that 
there was a very clear and deliberate decision by your 
committee at that time not to proceed with the inquiry that 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 72 of 235 
 
you had decided the week before to commence.  And I want 
to put to you that if one reads the report prepared by the 
Parliamentary Monitoring Group of that meeting and follow 
up meetings the – the discussion makes clear that many of 
the – or at least several of the members of the ANC in 
justifying not proceeding with the inquiry used as their 
reason the fact that the board had been dismissed and said 
having been dismissed there was now no longer any need for 
this inquiry.  Do you dispute all of that? 
MS MAGADZI:  Chairperson the investigation was not about 
10 
the board of PRASA but the investigation was about the 
happenings in PRASA and therefore it was not going to be 
possible that now that the board of PRASA has been 
dismissed it means that there are challenges and the 
activities which warrant that to be investigated were gone 
with the going out of the board and that cannot be the issue. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Sorry I am not clear that I understand 
your evidence.  I – I think I understand you to be saying this.  
That you agree that the mere fact that the board had been 
removed was not in itself an adequate reason not to continue 
20 
with the investigation.  Do you agree with that? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So are you saying that you stand by your 
evidence that the committee did not reverse its decision 
previously to conduct – to conduct the inquiry it proceeded 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 73 of 235 
 
with that decision. 
MS MAGADZI:  The committee did not reverse the decision 
to make enquiries into PRASA. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Did it implement the decision? 
MS 
MAGADZI: 
 
The 
decision 
was 
not 
implemented 
Chairperson like I have indicated we were under pressure to 
deal with the legislation which was before the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So it did not reverse the decision but it 
did not implement the decision.  How does it come about that 
you do not implement a decision if you have just taken it? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:  Chairperson like I indicated Mr Freund 
through you Chairperson we had legislations before the 
committee which we were supposed to deal with and see 
them 
through 
and 
that 
is 
why 
we 
put 
on 
hold 
the 
investigation. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Just so that we are – there is no 
misunderstanding between us what Mr De Freitas said in his 
evidence was the following and I am reading from Bundle 3 
at page 390.  He said: 
“At the end of the second day of hearings the 
20 
committee unanimously agreed that it had 
undertaken investigation into PRASA and the 
problems that it was currently confronting.  
The Terms of Reference and other details 
would be discussed in subsequent meetings.  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 74 of 235 
 
The motion to initiate an inquiry into PRASA 
was 
reconfirmed 
by 
myself 
at 
the 
same 
meeting.  The Parliamentary Communication 
Service released a statement echoing this.” 
From what I hear I do not think you dispute any of that.   
MS MAGADZI:  No that is why I am saying that we agreed on 
the investigation. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But of course in order to have an 
investigation the next step was to agree on the Terms of 
Reference.  You never met in the next eleven months to 
10 
agree on the Terms of Reference did you? 
MS MAGADZI:  Chairperson we did not meet to deal with the 
Terms of Reference we – my recollection is to the effect that 
we were even supposed to have some amongst us as 
members of the Portfolio Committee to go into that particular 
investigation but that never happened. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You see I hear what you say but I must 
put to you what Mr De Freitas says so that you can comment 
on it.  He says that at this next meeting which is one week 
after the decision that was taken to – to have this inquiry he 
20 
says that – well let me go back at – the top of page at 292 
he refers … 
MS MAGADZI:  Just hold it. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Can I proceed? 
MS MAGADZI:  Yes please. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 75 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  At the top of page 292 of Bundle 3 he 
says this: 
“Mr Sabande said the committee had agreed 
on an inquiry initially however committee had 
not anticipated that the Minister would be so 
quick to respond about PRASA an inquiry 
was not necessary as the PRASA board had 
already been expelled.” 
Then it continues. 
“Mr Maswangane who later became Minister 
10 
suggested that the Minister be requested to 
appear before the committee afterwards the 
committee should decide whether to pursue 
the inquiry or not.” 
And then he says: 
“I stated that since the 8 March meeting it 
appears 
that 
ANC 
members 
had 
been 
instructed to tow the line and keep quiet.  I 
expressed concern that the PC allowed the 
Minister to tell us how to conduct oversight.  
20 
I could not support the proposal to abandon 
the inquiry.” 
Now what Mr De Freitas is doing here is he is lifting out of 
the PMG minutes of this very meeting and I want to put to 
you again that the sentiment (audio distorted) of this meeting 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 76 of 235 
 
was that because the board had been removed the feeling of 
the ANC members was that there was no need to continue 
with the meeting.  I think you disagree with that am I right? 
MS MAGADZI:  I disagree with that if you – you would read 
again what Mr Maswangane said.  That was part of how we 
wanted to proceed with the investigation because we wanted 
the Minister to come so that we can be able say to the 
Minister this is what we are going to be doing with respect to 
the investigation into PRASA.  And the – unfortunately I 
cannot recall whether the Minister did come to the meeting 
10 
or not but it was not to say for the fact that the committee 
has been dismissed therefore we need to dismiss the 
investigation. 
 
The 
investigation 
was 
not 
about 
the 
committee but the investigations was about the happenings 
in PRASA. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  And it appears from what I have 
just read to you that was attributed to Mr Maswangane that 
the suggestion was that after 00:14:58 the Minister the 
committee should decide whether to pursue the inquiry or 
not.  And I want to put to you that quite clearly what must 
20 
have happened is that a decision was taken not to pursue 
the inquiry.  Do you stand by that? 
MS MAGADZI:  There is nowhere in the minutes of the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
where 
they 
are 
saying 
we 
are 
discontinuing with the investigation.  And let me also indicate 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 77 of 235 
 
that subsequent to that we – there is a report that we wrote 
as the Portfolio Committee and submitted that report to the 
Chair of Chairs.  Our indication was that we wanted that 
report to be tabled in Parliament so that it can be within the 
records of Parliament but it never went to Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well I am going to come back to where 
we are for the moment just so that we can all get our 
bearings about time.  You are aware are you not that on the 
20 February 2018 which is eleven months after the time we 
are talking about (audio distorted 00:16:15) again to conduct 
10 
an inquiry.  Am I right?  It is a fair decision for the committee 
to conduct an inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Freund.  I am sorry Mr 
Freund.  I could not hear. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A number of parts of your question.  It may 
that the transcribers could hear you but I think there were 
technical problems.  Maybe just repeat the question and we 
will see whether the problems will – are still there or not. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes with pleasure Chair.  I am just 
20 
endeavouring to get confirmation from Ms Magadzi that 
eleven months after these March 2017 meetings we have 
been talking about there was another set of meetings that 
really commenced on the 20 February 2018 that another 
decision was taken to conduct an inquiry into the affairs of 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 78 of 235 
 
PRASA.  I just wanted to check with the – with Ms Magadzi 
that you call that and can confirm it? 
MS MAGADZI:  I cannot hear clearly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me check with the transcribers whether 
they can hear … 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair can you just enquire from the 
technicians. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Freund.  The transcribers 
are they able to hear Mr Freund?  They cannot hear him.  Do 
they need some time to attend to the problems or is – he can 
10 
try again.  Okay Mr Freund the transcribers or the people 
recording the proceedings could not hear you.  Let us try 
again and see whether it will be better now. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair let me – let me try again.  What I 
am asking you Ms Magadzi is whether you can just confirm 
that about eleven months later from March of 2017 in 
February of 2018 there was another formal decision adopted 
by 
your 
committee 
to 
commence 
an 
inquiry 
of 
maladministration within PRASA.  Is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I know that we are jumping the gun a 
bit but that too did not result in fact in an inquiry; that inquiry 
never in fact happened, is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And we will come back to that later.  I 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 79 of 235 
 
want to just finish off on where we were – it was all about 
March 2017.  And I just want to understand more clearly from 
you what happened to this inquiry?  Because in – on the 8 
March 2017 you formally resolve to commence an inquiry.  
You formally resolve that you will meet to consider the Terms 
of Reference.  But as you say it was never implemented and 
the Terms of Reference were never discussed or agreed. 
 
Now is it your evidence that the sole explanation for 
that is that your committee got too busy with other work? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct Mr Freund.  We – we were 
10 
very busy with the legislations that were before the Portfolio 
Committee and every time at the slightest moment then we 
would revert – remember it is not only PRASA that we were 
overseeing we trying to balance the whole equation and that 
is why I said the most crucial thing that held us to be unable 
to continue with the investigation was the legislations which 
were before the Portfolio Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright we will come back to that later.  I 
want to move on to another letter that Mr De Freitas told the 
Chair that he sent to you.  It is a letter dated the 8 June 
20 
2017 and it is dealt with in – in his report and at page 394 
and he says that on that occasion he wrote a letter to you 
requesting that the committee summon the directorate of 
Priority 
Crime 
Investigations 
or 
Hawks 
to 
provide 
a 
comprehensive and detailed report to the progress of the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 80 of 235 
 
investigation into PRASA.  He says he requested a response 
be sent to him by the 14 June 2017 and he says again no 
response was received.  Do you recall that letter and can 
you confirm that you gave him no response? 
MS MAGADZI:  Let me indicate once more that any other 
correspondence that would come to the Chairperson will be 
dealt with in the committee and the outcomes with Mr De 
Freitas was part of that particular committee.  Unlike 
external people he would be able to get the outcomes in the 
committee.  And in this instance I would not say that I never 
10 
responded to that correspondence but it was dealt with 
within the Portfolio Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And what was the decision of the 
Portfolio Committee to Mr De Freitas’ request that the Hawks 
be asked to provide a comprehensive and detailed report 
into the progress of the investigation into PRASA? 
MS MAGADZI:  I cannot recollect as to what was the 
decision of the Portfolio Committee in this matter. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You were aware were you not that at 
least Mr Molefe was alleging that the Hawks were not 
20 
adequately investigating the many issues that he had 
referred to the Hawks for investigation.  You knew that that 
was his claim am I correct? 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And fair to say that your committee never 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 81 of 235 
 
put pressure on the Hawks to disclose to your committee 
what progress if any they were making in respect of what 
had been referred to them by Mr Molefe and his board. 
MS MAGADZI:  That is correct the Hawks was never invited 
to the Portfolio Committee and therefore we could not get 
information as to progress with respect to issues as raised in 
PRASA – for PRASA. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  I want to move onto a different 
topic.  Chair if I could refer you to 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I think Mr Freund. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC: Bundle 2 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Page 408. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Freund.  I think… 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it is the convenient time to take the 
lunch break. 
ADV FREUND SC:  As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will adjourn for lunch and resume at 
two.  We adjourn. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES    
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Magadzi, can 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 82 of 235 
 
you hear me clearly 
MS MAGADZI:   Yes, Chair I can hear you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Ms Magadzi, I want to turn 
to a different issue which is the set of letters that were 
sent out by Mr Frolic, the Chair of Chairs to the chairs of a 
number of portfolio committees including your Portfolio 
Committee 
which 
he 
sent 
on 
or 
about 
the 
15 t h of June 2017.   
 
And in that letter – and Chair that letter is in 
Bundle 2, page 488 and we have endeavoured over the 
10 
lunch to send a copy to Ms Magadzi.   
 
I am not sure whether she had a chance to see it.  
It should be in her inbox in her email.  In that letter Chair 
at Bundle 2, page 488 - it is only a two paragraph letter.  
And with your leave and if you ready I propose just to read 
it into the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is fine.  You can read it.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  It is dated the 
15 t h of June 2017.  It is address to you Ms Magadzi in your 
capacity as Portfolio Committee, as the Chairperson of the 
20 
Portfolio 
Committee 
of 
Transport. 
 
It 
is 
headed:  
Allegations of State Capture in Organs of State.   
 
And it says: 
“I 
am 
sure 
you 
are 
aware 
of 
numerous 
allegations of State Capture that had appeared 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 83 of 235 
 
in the media in recent weeks. 
Some of these allegations involve members of 
the board of the Passenger Rail Agency of 
South Africa, PRASA. 
I would like to request that your committee 
investigate 
the 
allegations 
within 
the 
parameters of the rules and report any findings 
where applicable to the National Assembly as 
a matter of urgency. 
Yours sincerely, Mr Frolic, House Chairperson 
10 
of the Committee.” 
 
Do you recall this letter? 
MS MAGADZI:   Yes, I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now Mr De Freitas dealt with this in 
his evidence.  It is at page – in Bundle 3 – in Bundle 7.  
And he says that we see in this letter that he was alerted 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Freund...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   ...to the fact of a similar letter 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   ...that had been sent ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, Mr Freund.  Did you say Bundle 
3? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 84 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say Bundle 3? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Bundle 3, page 397.  It is where Mr De 
Freitas’ evidence on the point appears. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  I had sent that bundle away 
because I do not have much space here.  So now.  What is 
the page? 
ADV FREUND SC:   397 in Bundle 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   397? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Black letter, 397. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Bundle 3, page 397 is on my bundle not 
10 
...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Under the heading ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the letter but ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Under the heading ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, where it says letter received from 
the House Chair regarding investigations ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now Mr De Freitas testified to this 
orally and his version in short Ms Magadzi is the following.  
From his Chief Whip at the time, Mr Steenhuysen, had it 
been drawn to is attention that the letter similar to the 
letter I have just read to you, had been sent to the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 85 of 235 
 
Chairperson of the Mineral Sources Portfolio Committee.   
 
And he was led to understand by Mr Steenhuysen 
that a similar letter had been sent to you.  But he says you 
never tabled that letter at the Portfolio Committee on 
Transport.  And he says he was not officially aware that 
there was such a letter.   
 
So 
he 
raised 
the 
subject 
and 
he 
says 
as 
diplomatically as possible and he explained to you that he 
had heard of the letter requesting us as the PC, initiating 
an inquiry into PRASA.   
10 
 
And then he says that you as the chairperson of 
the committee explained to him that PRASA itself was 
undertaking their own inquiry and that other agencies such 
as the Hawks were involved.  And he says that your 
argument was that essentially this precluded us, the 
committee, from lodging an inquiry.   
 
And he says that he argued that this was not the 
case and that your committee was at liberty to investigate 
PRASA as Parliament had oversight on government.  Now I 
have a number of questions arising from his version.   
20 
 
My first question is.  Can you confirm that you did 
not, as a matter of fact, tabled before your committee the 
letter that I have read to you of the 15 t h of June 2017 from 
Mr Frolick? 
MS MAGADZI:   Mr Freund, I did table the letter in front of 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 86 of 235 
 
the Portfolio Committee, but I will go back again to say as 
late in the course.  In 2017, we had a number of 
legislations before us and we had already – we had a 
report which we submitted to The House Chair to say this 
will be the founding document towards the investigations to 
PRASA.   
 
And also wanting to check with himself to say:  
How do we deal with the situation where we have these 
legislations?  By then there were five bulls before us.  How 
do we deal with a pack of a situation?   
10 
 
And 
we 
had 
to 
prioritise, 
dealing 
with 
the 
legislation but we never said we are not going to do the 
investigation.  And subsequent to that, as we were dealing 
with the matter, we went into a situation where we 
developed terms of reference.   
 
I think it was somewhere in 2018.  We developed 
some terms of reference responding to this letter because 
at least a few of the legislations were out of the way.   
 
We were left with the Road Accident Benefit Skill 
Bill before us.  We were left with a specific litigation 
20 
services brought before us.  We were left with Airports 
Company Bill before us but we had already been able 
through Parliament passed the National for amendment.  
We have already passed the adjudication of administrative, 
road and fences through Parliament.   
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 87 of 235 
 
 
So that is why we were able at that particular time 
to say now we can be able to deal with the terms of 
reference wherein two members of the Portfolio Committee 
were assigned to deal with the terms of reference in 
response to this – in response to the letter but Mr Frolick 
was able – what was sent to us.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Now could you tell me the 
date on which you tabled this?  Because I have to tell you 
that 
a 
very 
diligent 
search 
had 
been 
performed 
in 
particular about the Parliamentary Monitoring Group who 
10 
attend every meeting of you.   
 
And as far as they have seen and so far as I am 
aware and as far as Mr De Freitas is concerned, it was not.  
So are you able to give us any details as to when it was 
tabled? 
MS MAGADZI:   I cannot give you the exact date but it was 
somewhere in July of 2017 when we were discussing this 
matter.   
ADV FREUND SC:   July 2017.  Well, Ms Magadzi if in the 
course, after you have testified, you come across any 
20 
evidence to support that, then I would suggest that your 
legal representative make that available to the Commission 
and we will investigate that further. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   And ...[intervenes]  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 88 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund.  I think you 
understood that she was saying it was July 2017 but I 
thought she said July 2018.  Is that – which year is it 
Ms Magadzi when the committee discussed the letter? 
MS MAGADZI:   We received the letter in June of 2017 and 
in our committee meeting sometime in July of the very year 
we were able to look into how can we able to respond to 
the question that was put, the request that was put by The 
House Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so it was July 2017 when the letter 
10 
was discussed?  But you – the committee ...[intervenes]  
MS MAGADZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...began to look at terms of reference 
only in 2018.  Is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Yes, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And when your 
committee 
discussed 
this 
issue 
in 
July 
of 
2017, 
approximately, what decision, if any, did your committee 
make or what instructions, if any, did they give you on how 
20 
to deal with this issue? 
MS MAGADZI:   We agreed with what Mr Frolic was saying 
to say we need to investigate.  And that was the decision 
that we took that we need to investigate as per the 
instruction from The House Chairperson. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 89 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I presume it would be a matter of 
priority because it is alleged to relate to numerous 
allegations of State Capture and you have been requested 
to report back to The House as a matter of urgency.  So I 
presume this must have been a matter of some priority to 
your committee? 
MS 
MAGADZI: 
 
 
Chairperson, 
let 
me 
indicate 
that 
everything that we were doing in the Portfolio Committee 
was important and therefore we have to take everything as 
important as it is presented before the Portfolio Committee.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But Ms Magadzi, various matters may all 
be important but the level of urgency would differ.  So you 
may say, all of these tasks need to be done because they 
are important but some are more urgent than others.   
 
It is difficult to think that they would all be 
enjoying exactly the same level of urgency.   
 
I mean, there may be a task which if not done 
within the next three months could lead to some disaster 
but there could be another task which is quite important 
but it can be done in six-months’ time and there will not be 
20 
much of a disaster.   
 
Would you not accept that proposition that even 
though different matters may be important, the level of 
urgency would differ? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, indeed the level of urgency 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 90 of 235 
 
from time to time would differ but I have already indicated 
that before us there were legislations which needed to be 
dealt with before Parliament rise as we were moving 
towards the elections.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   You are talking about in the middle of 
2017? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that was after the Local Government 
Elections and two years away from the General Elections 
of 2019? 
10 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, between 2016 and 2018 we 
had several legislations which were before Parliament.  
And we were dealing with those legislations besides the 
fact that as the Portfolio Committee you were going into 
other things that are brought before the Committee.   
 
And hence, when we were discussing – in the 
ultimate end when the bills – we were now easing out of 
the bills, we had to go into ways to put the terms of 
reference which was in 2018 so that we can be able to 
investigate as requested by The House Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would – it would not be right that I do 
not mention to you that I am concerned that your – from 
2016, I think about June, when mister – was it Mr De 
Freitas?  I think it was.  Made the request for an inquiry 
into allegations of State Capture by the Gupta family, I 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 91 of 235 
 
think, or when he asked that your committee should 
summon the Gupta’s and other people in relation to the 
R 51 billion tender.  Your committee did not see this as a 
matter that needed urgent attention.   
 
It decided not to do anything at that stage.  Or, 
also when other terms were made to get your committee to 
look into these allegations of corruption and State Capture 
involving the Gupta’s, your committee thought well we have 
– what is more urgent is this legislation.  It was 2016.   
 
In 2017, a letter comes from the Chair of Chairs 
10 
within Parliament.  In effect, his saying this is urgent.  
Would your committee please investigate and report back 
to the National Assembly?   
 
Your committee, once again, takes the attitude that 
this can wait for another – I do not know whether it is 
seven months or nine months or a year.  We are busy with 
legislation.   
 
And yet, we are dealing here with, in terms of what 
Mr Frolick said in his letter to you, allegations of State 
Capture.   
20 
 
I am very concerned that your committee, despite 
what 
was 
known 
in 
the 
public 
domain 
in 
terms 
of 
allegations involving the Gupta’s and despite what Mr De 
Freitas proposed, despite what Mr Frolick proposes, your 
committee does not see this issue as requiring their urgent 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 92 of 235 
 
attention.  I am very concerned about that.   
 
You may be able to say something to lay my 
concern or – but I am quite concerned.  You do not at any 
stage in 2016 and 2017 say as a committee:  Hang on.  
These allegations have been made.  They keep on coming 
up.  Now they come from, we are being asked to 
investigate.  Let us give this matter some urgent attention.   
 
Your committee does not seem to think this matter 
is urgent.  You might not be able to say anything but I am 
just saying I need to be fair to you say that this is what is 
10 
going on in my mind about your committee.   
 
You might say:  No, Chair you should not be 
concerned because of A, B, C, D.  Or maybe because 
rightly or wrongly we took the view that the legislation was 
more urgent than the allegations of State Capture. 
MS MAGADZI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not want to say anything or you 
want to say something? 
MS MAGADZI:   No, thank you Chairperson.  You have said 
it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
okay 
alright. 
 
Thank 
you.  
Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Magadzi and 
Chair, there was a follow-up letter from Mr Frolick and 
Chair that is to be found in Bundle 2 pages 486 and 487.  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 93 of 235 
 
And it reflects the fact in the first paragraph that you had 
met with Mr Frolic to discuss his requests and that 
according to him, the two of you had agreed on an 
approach in dealing with the matter at hand.   
 
And the matter at hand is the letter date the 
15 t h of June 2017 on allegations of State Capture.  It is two 
page letter.  I am not going to read it all into the record but 
the gist of it is that Mr Frolick was still of the view that the 
relevant member of the Executive should be called to 
clarify the allegations in the public domain and that should 
10 
be the point of departure before the committee determines 
its next course of action.   
 
And then the letter reads as follows: 
“Finally, the committee must determine the 
resources 
required 
and 
communicate 
the 
needs to my office.’ 
 
Now I take it you received such a letter at or about 
this time, on the 25 t h of August 2017? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   But you keep on going back to 
20 
Mr Frolic and say:  Well, the reports has been required of 
the following and yes we will proceed as you have 
requested or how did you respond? 
MS MAGADZI:   We did go back to Parliament, to Mr Frolic 
to indicate after the discussion in the Portfolio Committee 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 94 of 235 
 
how we would like to execute the task.  And subsequent to 
that, I need to indicate that we had the public hearings on 
the bill – one of the bills that was before us.   
 
I had indicated as to, for us to can be able to deal 
with what we had discussed with Mr Frolic, the Portfolio 
Committee will need, amongst other things that we had 
requested because the committee sits once a week, was to 
the effect that we need to be given extra days of sitting so 
that we can be able to deal with what was before the 
Portfolio Committee besides looking at the other resources 
10 
which actually the committee was going to need. 
ADV FREUND SC:   An did you ever pursue that and ever 
even commence this urgent inquiry? 
MS MAGADZI:   We did not commence with the urgent 
inquiry because when we finalised the terms of reference 
and 
wanted 
to 
start 
with 
the 
inquiry, 
that 
is 
when 
Parliament rose to go to take for the elections. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And am I correct that you finalised the 
terms of reference in February 2018? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.   
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now Mr Frolick has submitted an 
affidavit as part of the same set of affidavits that you have 
submitted.  And he says – and Chair in Volume 1, page 54.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   It says: 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 95 of 235 
 
“However, 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Transport (which is of course a reference to 
your committee) and Minerals (a different 
committee) 
sighted 
reasons 
with 
the 
administrative programme and lack of clarity 
on how to proceed with the implementation of 
the decision for not doing so.” 
 
He says: 
“This was raised a few times in meetings of 
the Chief Whip’s Forum and the National 
10 
Assembly Programming Committee to discuss 
with the Speaker and the ANC Chief Whip. 
I had several meetings (says Mr Frolick) with 
the chairpersons to provide the necessary 
guidance and support to deal with the matter.” 
 
And then he says in the final paragraph of his 
affidavit: 
“The end result was that both these Portfolio 
Committees, Transport and Minerals, failed to 
implement the decision.” 
20 
 
Do you think what Mr Frolic there says is truthful 
and a fair summary on how the events unfolded? 
MS MAGADZI:   It is truthful because we could not 
implement what he had requested from us on time but we 
were able to have the terms of the reference and the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 96 of 235 
 
people who were supposed to deal with the inquiry five 
months later in February of 2018. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I want to go back to something I 
put to you earlier.  I put to you Mr De Freitas’ version.  You 
remember he said you never even tabled this letter to the 
committee and he says that he had a discussion with you, 
one on one, informally.   
 
And that you argued to him that it was – that 
PRASA itself was undertaking their own inquiry and that 
other agencies, such as the Hawks were also involved and 
10 
for that reason there was no need for your committee to 
pursue an inquiry.   
 
I want to give you an opportunity to comment on 
that because it may be that the Chair is forced to make a 
credibility finding as to whether he believes that Mr De 
Freitas said or whether he believes that you say. 
 
So here is your chance to answer on what Mr De 
Freitas said. 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me indicate that as 
members of Parliament, I cannot say that because the 
20 
Executive is doing this, I cannot do it as Parliament or as a 
Portfolio Committee. 
 
And I want to dispute the fact that – for the fact 
that if PRASA was doing the investigation or the Hawks 
were doing investigation, it did not stop us from doing our 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 97 of 235 
 
own investigation as the Portfolio Committee. 
 
And therefore, that for me, I dispute because if 
that was the truth, we would not have gone into a situation 
of having the terms of reference or even having people 
who will be able to deal within the Portfolio Committee deal 
with the request that came from Mr Frolick. 
 
And I think that for me is not a true reflection of 
what I believe you need to do as the Portfolio Committee.  
And let me indicate that it is not correct what Mr De Freitas 
said. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, I want to put to you that the 
report prepared by the Parliamentary Monitoring Group 
which went through your own reports on your committee 
and looked at the instances of engagements in your 
committee and anybody on the issue of PRASA. 
 
Nowhere in that report, so far as I am aware, is 
there anything to corroborate what you have just said.  
There is no indication that letter was tabled.  There is no 
indication that letter was discussed.  There is no indication 
that there was a decision to defer an investigation. 
20 
 
In fact, the impression it creates is that you 
colluded in withholding that letter from the committee 
because – and I want to put it to you for your comment, 
you did not want this to be done. 
MS MAGADZI:   Mr Freund, let me indicate that every time 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 98 of 235 
 
there was a correspondence that comes to my attention, I 
will put to it to the attention of the Portfolio Committee.   
 
And who am I as an individual to choose to want to 
do certain things as and when they become before the 
Portfolio Committee? 
 
I have never worked as an individual.  I was 
working within the collective of the Portfolio Committee.  
And therefore, any other issues that would come before me 
it will always go to the Portfolio Committee. 
 
And I really would not – I do not have better words 
10 
to be able to say I definitely not individualistic in how I 
deal with issues. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now Chair, if you can just 
give me a minute?  I have misplaced a piece of paper. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, while you are looking at 
that, let me say something to Ms Magadzi. Ms Magadzi, 
you have said that, I think in 2016 and 2017, there were 
urgent pieces of legislation that the committee needed to 
deal with. 
 
I would like you, if you can, after today to deposed 
20 
to a supplementary affidavit where you can give me more 
details, one about what pieces of legislation you are 
referring that you were – the committee was busy with in 
2016.  When had the piece of legislation been brought to 
the committee to work with, what meetings they or the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 99 of 235 
 
committee had to deal with them and when did it finalise, 
also in 2017.  But I accept that because we are talking a 
few years ago, that might not be easy.  If it is not easy you 
can indicate so but if you can, it would help just so that I 
can have a good picture of the reasons that you give for 
saying the committee could not deal with the investigation 
of inquiry or could not  - ja, in 2016 as well as 2017.  So I 
would like you to give me more information that will assist 
me to have a clear view of what you were dealing with in 
terms of pieces of legislation and so on.  Is that something 
10 
that you think you could do? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I think it is doable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, no, thank – how much time do 
you think you might need to be able to furnish such an 
affidavit to the Commission?  What deadline would you 
give yourself? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I can give myself two weeks 
going into the archives and looking for that information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MAGADZI:   If it is fine with yourself. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, that would be fine.  So we 
would be – today is the – what is the date today?  I cannot 
remember.  But two weeks from now.  Okay, that is fine, let 
us work on that basis.  Thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair.  I want to take 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 100 of 235 
 
you to another issue now, Ms Magadzi. And here a 
reference for you, at bundle 4, page 420.  That is the 
actual source document.  Mr de Freitas’ evidence on this 
one is bundle 3 page 408 and I want to tell you, Ms 
Magadzi, that Mr de Freitas has produced a letter dated 
the 12 January 2018, January 2018, and it contains a letter 
he wrote to you and it deals in large measure, firstly, with 
problems of rail safety and as important as that is, I am not 
focusing on that for present purposes. 
 
But he also deals in that letter on page 421 to 422 
10 
with the second issue.  He says: 
“The committee should also scrutinise the recent 
appointments at PRASA.  Both the Acting Group 
CEO Cromet Molepo and the Acting CEO of Rail, 
Nthuthuzeli Swartz have multiple allegations of 
corruption and maladministration that has been 
lodged against these officials.” 
And he goes on in some length to describe what those 
allegations are and then he says towards the end of his 
letter: 
20 
“This committee has the express duty to hold the 
executive accountable as well as ensuring the 
effective management of the department, its entities 
and its mandate to fulfil these duties.” 
And he says this in bold: 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 101 of 235 
 
“I 
here 
request 
the 
Transport 
Minister, 
Joe 
Maswanganyi and executives of PRASA be formally 
summoned to appear before the committee to 
account for the abovementioned concerns.  Given 
the gravity of the matters raised above, I trust you 
will also view these matters in a serious light and 
proceed to address these requests with the urgency 
they warrant.” 
Can you confirm that you received that letter? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me indicate in this 
10 
instance I do not recall and appreciate – I do not recall, 
maybe I need to also go into my archives and check if I did 
receive that letter. I do not recall. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, from our side we have no 
difficulty if the witness wishes to deal with this in a 
supplementary affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, that is fine.  So you can 
have a look at your archives and then in the affidavit that 
you talked about you could then deal with the issue of 
whether you received this letter and, if so, what you did 
20 
arising from after you had read it.  Thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   And while you can consider that – 
thank you, Chair, while you consider that, Ms Magadzi, I 
want to put to you clearly what Mr de Freitas alleges.  Mr 
de Freitas alleges that your office confirmed receipt of his 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 102 of 235 
 
letter but he received no response to it and he says when 
he attempted to discuss the letter with you, with the PC 
Chairlady, 
he 
was 
fobbed 
off. 
 
Do 
you 
have 
any 
recollection  or comment on that? 
MS MAGADZI:   I have indicated that I do not recall this 
letter.  Most of the letters that you spoke to sent by Mr de 
Freitas I was able to say yes, I remember this letter but in 
this one, I do not recall and therefore even quotes that so-
called I rebuffed him, it is something that I will not 
comment on. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is fine and we wish to do so in a 
supplementary affidavit please feel free to do so.  Now 
what I also want to put to you is that there is a constant 
refrain in Mr de Freitas’ evidence, not only that the 
committee did not do what it should do but that you 
personally both failed to respond to correspondence, 
important 
correspondence, 
and 
failed 
to 
put 
to 
the 
committee, as you say you did, these letters.  The 
impression he creates is completely different to the 
impression that I understand you to be conveying, he is 
20 
saying on multiple occasions – and I have referred to a 
number of them today with you, those letters were not 
tabled, really suggesting you were concealing from the 
committee correspondence of importance.  Do you wish to 
comment on that? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 103 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me indicate once more 
that any other correspondence that was coming to me was 
tabled before the committee but I must also indicate that 
he feels I was concealing things from the committee but at 
no stage was Mr de Freitas arriving on time when we were 
dealing with correspondence in the portfolio committee and 
therefore that is why there is a reason to say that I was 
concealing some of things from the portfolio committee.  
And let me indicate that as far as I recollect, any other 
correspondence to my attention would be brought before 
10 
the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now let us move on to 
something we have referred to several times but we have 
now finally reached it which is the events of February 
2018.  This is what Mr de Freitas calls a third attempt into 
a parliamentary inquiry and he refers to a meeting of your 
committee that took place on the 20 February 2018 and he 
says the following: 
“Mr Ramatlakane of the ANC recalled that the 
committee had wanted to initiate an investigation 
20 
into the previous PRASA board.  However, the 
investigation had been suspended.  He suggested 
that due to the concerns of #UniteBehind and 
United 
Consumers 
Voice, 
outstanding 
issues 
identified 
by 
portfolio 
committee 
members 
of 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 104 of 235 
 
various 
meetings 
and 
investigation 
should 
be 
instituted against PRASA based on Rule 227(c).” 
And then he says that you then said that the portfolio 
committee had wanted to investigate the previous board 
under the Chairmanship of Dr Popo Molefe that you 
claimed that the investigation had been stopped because 
he had been suspended by the Minister of Transport and 
due to the latest allegations and outstanding items from 
the PRASA interim report the portfolio committee need to 
investigate PRASA and then he goes on to say that the 
10 
committee as a whole agreed that there should be an 
investigation. 
 
Now how much of that do accept?  How of that, if 
any, do you dispute? 
MS MAGADZI:   Mr Freund, let me indicate that to my 
recollection we were not investigating the PRASA board 
but wanted to investigate the malfeasance which were 
happening in PRASA as an organisation.  Indeed some of 
the things that he has mentioned there are true but I need 
to indicate that we were not investigating PRASA board in 
20 
this instance and therefore we all agreed that there is an 
need for us to be able to go into the investigation, as 
requested by the house chair but also the committee saw 
that there is not as much work which was before the 
committee but we can able to deal with the issues. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 105 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And by this time, of course, the 
Zondo Commission had been appointed, that is correct, is 
it not?  They were appointed – this Commission was 
appointed in January and we are now talking about in 
February so you were not concerned that the work of the 
Zondo Commission should in any way get in the way of 
your inquiry, you thought you should proceed with your own 
inquiry. 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me indicate that we felt 
as a committee that we have to do what we have to do as 
10 
members of parliament and even if eventuality, what we 
would have done can form the basis of the investigation 
through the Commission we will be able to submit that to 
the Commission. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And what we also agreed 
according to this report and I should indicate to you that 
Mr de Freitas’ report is drawn almost verbatim on these 
issues from the reports of the parliamentary monitoring 
group: 
The committee agreed that the investigation should 
20 
be launched in terms of Rule 227(1)(c) and they 
said it was important to conduct an investigation 
into PRASA before the 1 April 2018.” 
This was regarded as a matter of priority and urgency, is 
that correct? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 106 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   “And it was agreed that a sub- 
committee comprising Mr Ramatlakane of the ANC 
and Mr Hassinger(?) of the DA and certain relevant 
officials to draw up the terms of reference by the 22 
February 2018.” 
I take it that is correct. 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And indeed …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Freund?  Of course, Ms 
10 
Magadzi, in 2016 and 2017 the President of your party as 
well as the President of the country was President Zuma.  
In February 2018, I cannot remember from what date, but 
from a certain date in February the President of the 
country as a new President, president Ramaphosa and of 
course from sometime in December 2017 your party had a 
new President also, President Ramaphosa, those events 
had happened in the meantime, is that correct?. 
MS MAGADZI:   I beg your pardon, Chairperson, I did not 
hear you clearly. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Is it correct that in 2016 and 2017 
the President of your party and the President of the 
country was President Zuma and that from …[intervenes]  
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that from sometime in December 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 107 of 235 
 
2017 he ceased to be President of your party and Mr 
Ramaphosa became President of your party, is that 
correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I do not know what date your 
committee’s meeting was in February 2018, but I think from 
sometime in 
February 2018 
Mr Zuma 
ceased to be 
President of the country and Mr Ramaphosa became 
President of the country, is that correct?  Those events 
had happened [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
10 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Freund? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And is it correct 
that terms of reference were subsequently proposed to the 
committee at its meeting on the 13 March 2018 and were 
adopted by the committee and Chair, you will find this at 
bundle 3, pages 419 to 420.  I want to read to you, Ms 
Magadzi, just extracts of the official portfolio committee 
20 
minutes.  This is what was agreed: 
“The 
inquiry 
will 
investigate 
governance, 
procurement 
and 
the 
financial 
sustainability 
of 
PRASA.  The inquiry will look into, amongst others: 
1. Appointment of permanent board members and 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 108 of 235 
 
executive management. 
2. Alleged procurement irregularities as indicated in 
the Public Protector report Derailed.” 
That of course went back to 2015. 
 As well as the allegations made of procurement 
irregularities with regard to the modernisation as 
well rolling stock projects dated back to 2012. 
3. Allegations of impropriety regarding PRASA’s 
current Acting Group CEO as well as past Group 
CEOs dating back to 2012.” 
10 
And then a number of other issues one of which is: 
“Consider 
Werksmans’ 
(indistinct 
– 
recording 
distorted) process and scope legality.” 
Do you confirm that those were amongst the issues that 
your committee decided in March would be the terms of 
reference for the investigation it was going to carry out? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remember – I am sorry, Mr 
Freund, 
do 
you 
remember, 
Ms 
Magadzi, 
whether 
in 
February 2018 your committee did not have any urgent 
20 
legislation that needed to be attended to? 
MS MAGADZI:   In 2018 we had to, if I recall, bills before 
the portfolio committee and that is why we had to look into 
the other things that we can be able to handle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in February 2018 there were two bills 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 109 of 235 
 
that needed your attention? 
MS MAGADZI:   Yes, yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but you cannot remember whether 
they were urgent or not? 
MS MAGADZI:   Let me say that in terms of parliamentary 
organisation, once the bill comes before you have to deal 
with that bill and be able to see it through and we were 
under duress and under pressure precisely because we 
knew 2018 we were going to rise for elections and 
therefore we should not leave work – the bills which were 
10 
hanging so that they do not lapse in parliament but we are 
able to see them through so that we would have done our 
work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The committee – your committee still 
consisted of the same members who served in 2016 and 
2017, is that right?  There had been no substantial 
changes in the composition. 
MS MAGADZI:   There has been changes, Chairperson, in 
the portfolio committee.  We lost one member of the 
portfolio committee in a tragic death, we lost Honourable 
20 
Masonganye who went into the executive and I think from 
the EFF we were – there was an introduction of a new 
member, the member that we started with from 2014 was 
taken to another portfolio.  That is what I can recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am just wondering what it is that 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 110 of 235 
 
convinced this committee in February 2018 to agree to 
these investigations and to even say by some date in April 
they must have completed them and yet it is the same – 
substantially the same people who in 2016 and 2017 
seemed not really to be in on investigating these things.  
Are you able to enlighten me on what it is that suddenly 
persuaded them that this was the right thing when for two 
years at least they seemed not to – maybe it is one and a 
half years, they seemed not to be keen. 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, I would say to yourself that I 
10 
indicated that we had several legislations which were 
before the portfolio committee which actually made us to 
delay 
with 
respect 
to 
the 
investigation 
but 
also, 
Chairperson, besides that, I need to indicate that on an 
annual basis the Portfolio Committee would have and 
annual plan that we are supposed to execute and follow 
and the investigation, as it came to the fore, it was not 
because we are following our annual plan to the letter but 
it was precisely because we had legislation that we had to 
see through in the main, that is what I can be able to say 
20 
delayed us from going into as speedily as is possible the 
investigation with the terms of reference as has been 
indicated during February of 2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Magadzi, as I 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 111 of 235 
 
understand evidence, you say Mr Frolick’s letter called for 
urgent action, the committee was willing to deal with it but 
because of the pressure of other legislation it could not 
manage to deal with it until finally it adopted decision on 
the 20 February 2018 that now we are going to commence 
such an inquiry, have I got that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct, sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then on the 13 March, which is a 
few weeks later, the committee firstly adopts the terms of 
reference with what he discussed but secondly, and this is 
10 
what I want to put to you – and Chair, this is at bundle at 
page 421. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page in bundle 3? 
ADV FREUND SC:  It is minuted as follows: 
“An inquiry …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, what page in bundle 3?  I 
have got bundle 3, I just want the page. 
ADV FREUND SC:   421. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, I am on the right page, you 
may continue. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  In the middle of that page, 
Chair, you will see immediately before the coloured 
diagram there is a paragraph that reads as follows: 
“An 
inquiry 
planner 
schedule 
was 
agreed 
to 
unanimously.  The inquiry planner divided the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 112 of 235 
 
inquiry for investigation into five phases starting 
with phase 1 on the 16 May 2018 and concluding 
with phase 5 on the 26 October 2018 as follows.” 
And it then sets out in quite minute detail exactly how this 
is going to be planned and scheduled.  Do you accept that? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So as at the 13 March 2018 nobody in 
the committee thought that there existed any good reason 
why they could not get on with this inquiry and complete it 
– they should commence it in May and complete in October 
10 
of 2018.  You would agree with that? 
MS MAGADZI:   I beg your pardon. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You would agree that as at the 13 
March 2018, the date of this meeting, nobody on the 
committee was aware of any good reason at that time why 
they could not get on with this inquiry in May and finish it 
in October of the same year.  They all agreed unanimously 
on a schedule that provided for that.  
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct.. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in the interest of time I do not 
20 
want to go through every minute detail of what happened 
after that.  The bottom line is this, you never ever started 
the inquiry, did you? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And am I correct in understanding that 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 113 of 235 
 
you justify that on the basis of a allegedly urgent 
legislation …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Freund.  Please do not 
forget your question, Mr Freund.  The meeting at which the 
committee decided to conduct the investigation did you say 
was the 18 March, Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I will be more clear and maybe 
it might help you, Chair, if you have regard actually to Mr 
de Freitas’ evidence in bundle 3, you will see that he deal 
with …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   At page? 
ADV FREUND SC:   He deals with this firstly at page 415. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Dealing with the 20 February 2018 and 
then you will see, Chair, that at page 419 and following he 
deals with the 13 March 2018.  So the dates that is the 
direct answer to your question is 13 March 2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And on that occasion you will see at 
page 421 that the unanimous agreement is that this inquiry 
20 
will comprise five phases.  The first phase to start on the 
16 May 2018 and the fifth phase on the 26 October 2018.  
That was the unanimous view taken by the committee on 
that occasion.  I think you accept all of that, Ms Magadzi? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 114 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just want to …[intervenes] 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then, Chair, if I move on with the 
question? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, I just wanted to say my 
registrar has checked and she tells me that the 14 
February 2018 is the date when Mr Zuma resigned as 
President of the country.  Okay, you may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I note that and that may or may 
not have a bearing on… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   As to the explanation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it might not. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The next question that I had put, 
Chair, that you said I should not forget and I think you may 
not have heard the witness’ answer was this.  I asked you, 
Ms Magadzi, am I correct in understanding – I first asked 
you am I correct that this inquiry never started and you 
said yes, that is correct. 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then I asked you the following, am 
20 
I correct in understanding that the reason that you rely on 
for never having started is allegedly urgent legislation and 
I think you obviously said that is correct. 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So all of a sudden you could still not 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 115 of 235 
 
inquire into this which you had been asked in July of 2017 
to inquire into as a matter of urgency and all because of 
urgent legislation.  What was that urgent legislation? 
MS MAGADZI:   I indicated that we had several legislation 
from LLTA, amendment after amendment, a RAPS bill, 
ATNS bill, ACCSA amendment bill.  These were the bills 
were before parliament and let me indicate, Chairperson, 
that much as we did not commence with the investigation, 
the committee agreed that there will be people who must 
start with the – who must deal with the investigations,  
10 
they 
never 
had 
an 
opportunity 
to 
deal 
with 
the 
investigation, but we have agreed that there should be 
people who would be able to go into the investigation. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So, do I understand you correctly that 
the pressure of the ...[indistinct - distortion] programme 
prevented the members of the committee themselves from 
proceeding 
but 
nonetheless 
your 
intention 
and 
communicated desire was that certain staff working on 
investigating this as it were in your absence? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And did that ever happen? 
MS MAGADZI:   No Chairperson it did not happen. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Why did it not happen? 
MS MAGADZI:   If I may recall, we - the file that we had 
put that we will be able to investigate was when we were 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 116 of 235 
 
dealing with finalisation of other legislation but also 
dealing with the public hearings of the RABS Bill. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So, Mr de Freitas testified that the 
excuse given at the time was the need to deal with the 
RABS Bill and Mr de Freitas also testified that it wasn’t so 
urgent, and in fact, that a decision has since been taken to 
scrap the entire bill, is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   The bill was urgent because if you would 
know what the challenges that …[indistinct] is faced with 
that bill is still urgent, even today and I am of the belief 
10 
that, that bill still has to go to Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But it’s so urgent – and it was so 
urgent at the time that it took you away from any 
investigation into an allegation of State Capture, an 
allegation of serious corruption, your priorities – you paid 
no heed to those as priorities, am I correct? 
MS 
MAGADZI: 
 
 
Chairperson 
let 
me 
indicate 
that 
…[indistinct] and therefore, whatever legislation comes 
before you, you should be able to prioritise because we are 
in Parliament to make laws. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are also in Parliament in terms 
of our constitution to perform oversight over the Executive, 
that’s a very important constitutional obligation on you as 
members of Parliament, isn’t it? 
MS MAGADZI:   That is correct Chairperson but – you’re 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 117 of 235 
 
very correct and for me, let me indicate that, for the fact 
that we had legislation which was very, very urgent in 
terms of what has been indicated to us, we had to deal 
with those legislation, we had to deal with other issues and 
– including the investigation and oversight over the 
Executive and therefore, that is why I said earlier on, it is 
important that – it was important that we should be able to 
balance how we’re doing our work in Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now the problems – sorry Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The problems of irregular expenditure 
mushrooming, of rampant …[indistinct - distortion] from 
procurement laws continued to be pointed to by, amongst 
others, the Auditor General, here I will refer you to Bundle 
3 at page 446 where Mr de Freitas deals with this and the 
Auditor General, as had become customary, had revealed 
serious financial irregularities, suggested that PRASA was 
on the verge of financial collapse and that the systems 
were inadequate and Mr – that would have come to your 
20 
attention at the time, and would, presumably, have been a 
matter of serious concern to you, is that correct? 
MS MAGADZI:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, Mr de Freitas refers to yet 
another letter that he says he wrote to you, this is at page 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 118 of 235 
 
450 of Bundle 3, he says, 
“On the 28 t h of August 2014 – 24 t h of August 2018, 
that was my error, I wrote to the Chair of the 
Transport Portfolio Committee, Ms Magadzi, he 
gives the Annexure number, it’s Annexure C39, 
requesting that the agreed upon inquiry into PRASA 
be initiated, he says he found it interesting that 
despite having received a letter from the House 
Chairperson, Cedrick Frolick, Magadzi said nothing 
about it to the Committee and then he says, he 
10 
referred in his letter to you, to this information from 
the Auditor General was actually had been leaked 
information that had appeared in the press and he 
says again, as was the case, all correspondence to 
Magadzi, I received no response to my letter”, 
 
Do you remember that letter, and if you do, did you 
respond to it? 
MS MAGADZI:  Chairperson I indicated earlier on that all 
the response were put forward in a meeting of the 
Committee and – for external persons I would respond for 
20 
the letter as put forward by Mr de Freitas, the Committee – 
and when I respond to the external persons I would be 
taking 
the 
discussion 
from 
the 
Committee 
an 
email 
instances we would even go to an extent of calling those 
people 
who 
have 
written 
to 
the 
Chairperson 
of the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 119 of 235 
 
Committee into a Committee meeting but letters that came 
from Mr de Freitas would be dealt with in the Portfolio 
Committee and then, that’s how we would be able to get a 
response.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, you will recall that in an earlier 
stage in your evidence today, I indicated to you that your 
Committee received a certain measure of praise from the 
Auditor General – the former Auditor General, Mr Makwetu, 
he says you did call the Auditor General’s team to your 
Committee, you did call the Minister to your Committee, 
10 
you did listen, but he says you were ineffective, you didn’t 
manage to achieve what should have been achieved.  I 
want to put it to you that that is unduly kind to you, you 
were not only ineffective, you were unwilling.  You were 
unwilling, as a Committee to discharge your obligation to 
exercise oversight over the Executive and in particular, you 
were unwilling to investigate allegations of State Capture 
or corruption, particularly with those involved with the 
President and persons perceived to be close to the 
President, would you agree, and if you disagree would you 
20 
tell us why please? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, we may not have succeeded 
to do the investigations, but it did not mean that we did not 
want to investigate those who were closer to the President 
or the President himself.  Let me indicate that from where 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 120 of 235 
 
you are starting to talk about honourable de Freitas, 
there’s an indication as if the Committee never had any 
work to do but to do what de Freitas wanted the Committee 
to do.  Remember, I indicated that, we’ve got an annual 
plan, there will be legislation that will be coming and other 
things that will be coming but here in this instance, 
Chairperson, Mr Freund, you’re indicating – it is like, every 
time Mr de Freitas comes with something, we have to jump 
and do it, and that is not how the Committee should be 
able to work and let me indicate that there were discussion 
10 
and debate in the Committee on every other thing that Mr 
de Freitas would bring to the Committee and today here, 
the Committee – I, representing the Committee should  say 
that the Committee was wrong in taking the decisions that 
we took, it can’t be right because those decisions will be 
taken in the Committee and once the Committee takes a 
decision there is no how I can be able to, as a Chairperson 
divert from the decision that was taken by the Committee 
and let me indicate that I take serious objections to – and 
let me also indicate that Mr de Freitas, these things were 
20 
raised in the Committee, today he should be – he wants to 
be seen as if he was …[indistinct] to the Committee 
whereas the Committee rejected most of the things that he 
was raising.  It can’t be right that, now, I should be able to 
say the Committee was wrong, decisions of the Committee 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 121 of 235 
 
were decisions of the Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Let me make things clear to you, Ms 
Magadzi, firstly I accept that you as Chair speak for the 
Committee, but you can’t be personally blamed, solely for 
decisions that were made by the Committee, I understand 
that.  Secondly, I also want to make clear that my criticism 
that I put to you a moment ago was not based solely on 
what Mr de Freitas was saying.  My criticism was based on 
problems that are far more fundamental and go back far 
longer from the time of the publication of the derailed 
10 
report, I want to put to you, your Committee showed no 
enthusiasm for getting to grips with the true misconduct 
that was started to be revealed by that report and the proof 
is in the pudding in the way you dealt with the Werksmans 
reports because the Werksmans reports uncovered a trove 
of relevant information and I want to put to you that your 
Committee never showed any interest in examining the 
substance of the Werksmans reports instead it resorted to 
the device of trying to obscure the issues by focusing on 
the regularity of the process by which they had been 
20 
appointed as attorneys.  You had no desire whatsoever to 
get involved with the true unravelling of what was going on 
at PRASA, your comment please? 
MS MAGADZI:   Mr  Freund, let me indicate that if you can 
go into the archives of the Portfolio Committee you will see 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 122 of 235 
 
that we requested, on several occasions, to meet with the 
Board of PRASA so that they can be able to table.  There 
were 
several 
issues 
that 
we 
had 
raised 
from 
the 
…[indistinct] to Werksmans and other issues that we felt 
we were discontent about but, unfortunately, we were never 
appraised with the information to that effect and when we, 
eventually, the last Committee that was there, when we 
requested them to assist us with the information of the 
investigation by Werksmans there were boxes and boxes of 
information that came to the Portfolio Committee which 
10 
actually – we even went, again, back to the Portfolio 
Committee to say – to the Board to say, can we get an 
Executive summary so that we are able to know what – how 
we should be able to handle this matter.  Indeed, we were 
very keen and for sure going forward because the AG, 
also, had raised the irregularity of the appointment of 
Werksmans and we can’t shy away from that, that we 
believe that there was – Werksmans was irregularly 
appointed and in view of the fact that the AG had raised 
the irregular appointment we spoke to the Minister, we 
20 
spoke to the Board to say, we want this to be regularised. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Ms Magadzi, again let me make my 
myself clear, if you had any reason to suspect or to believe 
the appointment of Werksmans and the manner in which 
was done was irregular, will not criticise you in the least 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 123 of 235 
 
for drawing attention to that issue and requiring that issue 
to 
be 
properly 
investigated 
and 
appropriate 
to 
be 
regularised, I do not criticise you for that but the evidence 
of Mr de Freitas, at least, and I believe that the report 
prepared by the PMG will, to a considerable extent bear 
this out is to the effect that your Committee did not show 
genuine interest in the thrust of what Werksmans was able 
to reveal on the contrary it tried to look the other way.  
Now, if you say that’s not correct, you say you wanted – 
you asked for – you received a mass of material and you 
10 
asked for an Executive summary, could you tell me when 
that was? 
MS MAGADZI:   I cannot, vividly recall when that was but I 
know 
that 
we 
received 
quite 
a 
sizeable 
amount 
of 
information but let me also indicate that it is Mr de Freitas’ 
view that we were more interested in the investigation and 
not in the outcomes of what Werksmans did, it is his view, 
it’s not the Committee’s view, I would indicate it because if 
it was the Committee’s view we wouldn’t even ask for 
information because Mr Mulefedi did not come on several 
20 
occasions when we wanted that information and want to 
deal 
with 
the 
issues, 
he 
didn’t 
attend 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee’s because he was the only person who would 
come from the Board to the Portfolio Committee.  The 
Minister, also, when we requested this information could – 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 124 of 235 
 
referred us to the Board so that we can be able to get 
proper information from the Board and therefore, it can’t be 
correct that we were more interested in the investigation.  
We would not even have started to look for what could 
Werksmans – what Werksmans did in PRASA. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, the proof lies in the pudding, it’s 
your own evidence, it’s not me, that you never once, 
actually commenced your investigation, having decided, 
according to you, in June of 2017 that these important and 
serious 
allegations 
should 
be 
investigated, 
it’s 
your 
10 
evidence, not mine, that the Committee never started that. 
In the whole of 2017 and the whole of 2018.  If you were 
genuinely interested in what Werksmans had revealed, 
don’t you think you would have investigated? 
MS MAGADZI:   Chairperson, let me indicate that we want 
– our take was that we should be able to get information 
and be able to investigate based on the information, but it 
was correct that we never investigated but was at the 
centre of the Committee was that we need to get the report 
that comes from Werksmans so that we can be able to 
20 
know what we are dealing with in PRASA. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, thank you.  Ms Magadzi, finally, 
you have deposed to a written affidavit, some of that 
material I have taken you through, in the course of today 
and the Chair will have an opportunity to read this affidavit 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 125 of 235 
 
but if you feel that there are parts of this affidavit that 
raise issues of some importance, if you feel you haven’t 
been given a fair opportunity to deal with, then I’m now 
inviting you to raise whatever you feel you would want to 
add to your evidence. 
MS MAGADZI:   Thank you very much Mr Freund, let me 
indicate, that earlier on there was an indication from Mr de 
Freitas that there was a tender for R51billion, and I need 
to indicate to yourself that the budget of R51billion overall 
was the budget that was gazetted by the National Treasury 
10 
based on the programme of modernisation.  Meaning that 
PRASA was supposed to get money from that R51billion to 
deal with signalling, to deal with station improvement with 
the trains, with the security, with fairways and coaches and 
it was – there was never a tender which was R51billion, 
that was the R51billion that was ring fenced by Treasury so 
that the modernisation programme can be able to be 
executed and I also need to indicate that some of the 
issues that actually – some of the tenders which were 
made, like, the Braamfontein – the improvement of the 
20 
Braamfontein station, that tender was cancelled, if I’ve 
gone into my archives and as far as the trains are 
concerned, it’s a story that everybody knows that it went to 
Court for – it was executed by Court and that for me is 
history but I wanted to correct that it was not a tender of 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 126 of 235 
 
R51billion and the other thing that I want to indicate was 
the – as for the people who were involved, as indicated 
previously that, the Gupta and then Mr Zuma were to be 
given that tender …[indistinct] is it true because if you look 
into the service providers who were there it was nor – it 
was Alsom and not the group that was reported to be 
belonging to the Gupta’s that is one thing that I wanted to 
say but I also would want to say to the Commission that, 
having been given this opportunity, I think it is very 
important that when you look into the Committees of 
10 
Parliament there definitely is a challenge, I think I’ve also 
mentioned that in my affidavit.  An indication that there is 
very little financial resources that gets given to the 
Committee in such a way that sometimes you are even 
unable to do your oversight, specifically because when you 
want to go and do oversight you will be told that there is 
not sufficient funding for the Portfolio Committee and 
therefore it makes you to look like you – it’s like you – it’s 
like the …[indistinct] within the Portfolio Committee that 
you are unable to do your work, whereas there are 
20 
challenges 
that 
the 
Portfolio 
– 
the 
Parliament 
is 
experiencing in this regard but I also want to indicate that 
part of the things that one made as a observation in  
PRASA, which the Deputy Chief Justice had indicated is – 
of which, we also, as the Portfolio Committee saw as a 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 127 of 235 
 
predicament was the fact that people will be there at work 
but they will not be able to execute their tasks as is 
expected which became a serious challenge that, you 
request for information, you don’t get that information and 
therefore it makes you, as a Portfolio Committee and as 
legislators to really look like you have failed in the 
execution of you tasks and this, for me, are the things that 
I also need to bring to the fore but the other thing which 
actually, Mr Freund, we didn’t talk about is the allegation 
of the coal trains as we wanted to go into the investigation 
10 
when we called Rail Safety Regulator to the Portfolio 
Committee they impressed upon us that they have done the 
trials of the trains in most of the areas and the trains were 
fit to can be utilised in the Republic of South Africa and 
this, for us, were some of the things we felt that for the 
fact that the specialist in this regard had been able to say 
that the trains can be utilised, the Committee indicated 
that, while the trials – because they had been completed 
and the trains can be utilised and therefore for us, we feel 
quite happy that the trains can continue but we were happy 
20 
because there was, in Court, presented by Dr Molefe that 
they should be able to take further the matter, whether it’s 
corruption or …[indistinct] in Court and that is how we were 
able to look into this whole matter.  I think, Chairperson, 
Mr Freund let me leave it at that, and I’d like to thank the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 128 of 235 
 
opportunity, it was very hard, I must indicate, hard Deputy 
Chief Justice to sit in front of you and Mr Freund.  I 
thought at some stages I was going to lose it all but thank 
you very much for inviting me to the Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I have no further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Ms Magadzi for 
coming to assist the Commission, we appreciate it very 
much, there is just one or two questions that I want to ask, 
just for information. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, if I can just indicate, we are not 
10 
hearing you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can you hear me, Ms Magadzi. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Very poor, very weak. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, how is it now. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Only marginally better now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I don’t see you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, and – so probably Ms Magadzi can’t 
hear me at all.  Maybe I should…[intervenes]. 
MS MAGADZI:   Chief Justice is not audible from my side. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Freund also says the same 
thing. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Very poorly, I see a note that 
somebody says it sounds like a loose cable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m just looking at the technicians to see 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 129 of 235 
 
whether – they say it should be fine now. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I’ve just started to hear you now, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, okay, Ms Magadzi can you 
hear me…[intervenes]. 
MS MAGADZI:   I can hear you too Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, no thank you I just have 
one or two questions, I think one.  Section – where is this 
Section – the constitution makes provision for Ministers – I 
thought I had this Section of the constitution in front of me, 
10 
I can’t see it now.  Has a provision, Ms Magadzi which you 
might be aware of, to the effect that Ministers are 
supposed to provide Parliament with regular reports of 
what is happening in their departments, that is part of 
accountability.  Did the Ministers of Transport, while you 
were Chair of the Portfolio Committee of Transport, provide 
Parliament with regular reports in accordance with that 
Section and if they did what was the level of irregularity, 
how often did they provide reports of what was happening 
in their – under their portfolios. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   You’re on mute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I ...[intervenes]  
MS MAGADZI:   Thank you very much, can you hear me 
now DCJ? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes now I can hear you yes. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 130 of 235 
 
MS MAGADZI:   Sorry, I had muted, let me indicate maybe 
I should say two-pronged approach to what – how we were 
receiving the reports.  The first one would be that we would 
receive quarterly reports of the activities and operations in 
the department which actually will be coming from the 
entities plus the department on a quarterly basis which we 
...[indistinct – distortion].  The other one would be when 
there are other issues and activities that the Minister 
believed, 
that 
the 
Minister 
would 
have 
done 
in the 
Department 
the 
Minister 
would 
come 
and 
make 
a 
10 
presentation to the Portfolio Committee on those activities 
based on how it was not like a frequent thing of activities 
that would be in the Portfolio Committee coming directly 
from the Minister.   Most of the things the Minister will 
incorporate as part of the quarterly report that we will be 
receiving, but at the same we need to indicate that 
whenever we are meeting either with the MTT’s or with the 
department the Minister will be part of the engagement in 
the Portfolio Committee and that is where – how we were 
able to engage with the – complying with the provision of 
20 
the 
Constitution 
that 
the 
Ministers 
will 
provide 
a 
...[indistinct] to the Portfolio Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And would you recall whether with 
special reference to PRASA, during the years when the 
irregular expenditure was going up and so on, would you 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 131 of 235 
 
remember whether the Ministers dealt with that issue in 
their written quarterly reports to say they were aware of it 
and what steps they were taking to address it, or is it 
something you cannot remember 
MS MAGADZI:   I cannot remember vividly what the 
Ministers would raise but I know that Minister Dipuo Peters 
and Minister Masongwane and Minister Zimande they would 
frequent our meetings and that is why recalling a little bit 
of what Minister Peters at some stages when we were 
engaging with PRASA issues indicated that there will be a 
10 
follow through particularly on the lack of consequence 
management, on the lack of implementation of the Auditor 
General’s findings which actually were on an annual basis 
repeating themselves in that regard and that is my 
recollection that indeed the Ministers whenever we are 
sitting on any entity or the department they would always 
be there to make sure that whatever we are doing they are 
able to go into the department and be able to look into that 
or implement whatever decision that might have been taken 
by the Portfolio Committee. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you very much Ms Magadzi, 
once again thank you for coming to assist the Commission.   
You are now excused. 
MS MAGADZI:   Thank you very much DCJ, thank you very 
much Mr Freund, it was difficult. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 132 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair I have available two witnesses, I 
rather think that two is a bit optimistic.  Mr Vincent Smith 
is on standby, and has been on standby for quite some 
time, so in my submission perhaps we should take a short 
adjournment and then go as far as we possibly can through 
the evidence of Mr Smith. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is your estimate, I know that you 
might say well you don’t know how many questions the 
Chairperson will ask so you cannot estimate, but what is 
10 
your estimate of how long you need with Mr Smith? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair at a guess an hour but I am 
usually wrong.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well my recollection is that at least the 
first estimate you made last week I noticed that it was spot 
on, I haven’t noticed any other that has been wrong but 
with Professor Calland how much time do you think we 
need? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I would prefer to have about two 
hours, but Chair it is very much in your hands as to how 
20 
much detail you want to go into with him because a lot of 
his submission is in writing but if we could reach him and 
get through him that would be the first prize. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well I have read his submission, I 
don’t know that there is a need to take too long with him, 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 133 of 235 
 
he makes important points but some of the points that he 
makes are points that I am quite familiar with, so I am 
quite happy that we take a short adjournment of ten 
minutes and then when we come back then we – it may well 
be that with Mr – with Professor Calland, you said he is out 
of the country. 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, no Professor Calland is here, he is 
in Cape Town, it was Mr Johnston who was testifying from 
Edinburgh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, well it may well be that when 
10 
we come to him we could take maybe if we take an hour 
and we don’t finish it may well be that we could make a 
plan, subject to your available and his availability to 
continue tomorrow morning before I start with tomorrow’s 
witnesses or to make some other time in the evening, one 
of the evenings this week. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes Chair I would fully purport that we 
should make that effort and just see how far we get. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, no, no, we will make the effort.   
Okay, let us take a ten minute adjournment and then we 
20 
will be back, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Smith.  I think you 
might – you probably should unmute yourself or – because I 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 134 of 235 
 
could see you were speaking Mr Smith but I could not hear 
anything.  Can you hear me? 
MR SMITH:  I can hear you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Good afternoon. 
MR SMITH:  Good afternoon, good afternoon Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you very much.   Just in case we 
have not – the commission has not acknowledged receipt of 
you contribution in terms of the submission or affidavit 
relating to matters relating to oversight that I had asked you 
to do for the commission I just want to say I am aware that 
10 
we have received – the commission has received your 
submission or affidavit and we appreciate the trouble you 
took to give us that input.   
MR SMITH:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and thank you for coming back to 
assist the commission.  Registrar please administer the oath 
or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR SMITH:  Vincent George Smith. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
20 
prescribed oath? 
MR SMITH:  I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR SMITH:  I do. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 135 of 235 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence you 
will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing but the 
truth, if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
MR SMITH:  So help me God. 
VINCENT GEORGE SMITH  [duly sworn, states] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Mr Freund you may 
proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair you will recall as 
we have discussed previously that the African National 
10 
Congress submitted as Exhibit ZZ1 at the beginning of 
Bundle 1 a set of affidavits of which an affidavit by Mr Smith 
is one of them.  It is Exhibit ZZ1.6 and I am going to be 
working primarily from ZZ1.6 and I would like to ask you Mr 
Smith whether if you look at pages 66 through to 75 in 
Bundle 1 that is the numbering at the top left can you 
confirm that that is an affidavit that you have submitted to 
the commission? 
MR SMITH:  I confirm. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And that is your signature at page 75 I 
20 
take it? 
MR SMITH:  I confirm. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair to the extent necessary and to the 
extent that this has already been provisionally admitted I ask 
that this be admitted formally into the record. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 136 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Vincent George Smith 
starting at page 66 is here admitted finally as Exhibit ZZ1 .6. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now Mr Smith this 
affidavit and you have submitted several affidavits to the 
commission.  This affidavit is an affidavit that was prepared 
as I understand it in response to a request from the 
commission to the African National Congress that it through 
witnesses should make submissions and place evidence 
before the commission and yours was one the of the 
affidavits sought by the ANC in that context and that is the 
10 
context in which you have produced this particular affidavit.  
Is that correct? 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You have as the Chair has just alluded to 
after testifying on a previous occasion also submitted a 
separate document entitled submission by Mr V G Smith 
former member of Parliament and Chairperson of several 
committees of the National Assembly, is that correct? 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But if I have a look at the affidavit 
20 
submitted that to which we have just referred it seems to me 
to a large measure adopt and summarise what appears in 
that – in that other document.  Would that be a fair – a fair 
description? 
MR SMITH:  That is fair. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 137 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  So what I propose to do is to concentrate 
on the affidavit itself but of course you must feel at liberty 
where appropriate and if necessary to refer across to some 
point made perhaps in more detail in the other document.  
But I am going to lead you from the affidavit to which we 
have just referred.   
 
Now when I look at that affidavit I see in paragraph 3 
that you say you served as a member of Parliament from 
1999 to 2019 in other words for a full 20 years. 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  And in that time you were a member of 
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts known as 
SCOPA.  You were – you chaired the following committees.  
The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services which you 
chaired form 2009 to 2014 and that is the primary reason 
why you are sitting with us today, is that correct? 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But you have also chaired the Standing 
Committee on the Auditor General the Constitutional Review 
Committee, 
a 
Joint 
Standing 
Committee 
on 
Financial 
20 
Management at Parliament, the Ad-hoc Committee on the 
SABC inquiry and the Ad-hoc Committee on the Funding of 
Political Parties and you give the dates in your affidavit. 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You say you also served as an ordinary 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 138 of 235 
 
member of the Ad-hoc Committee on Police – on the Police 
Minister’s Report on Nkandla.  Did you subscribe to the – the 
report issued by that Ad-hoc Committee? 
MR SMITH:  If you could repeat the question. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Did you agree with or subscribe to or 
support the views expressed by that particular Ad-hoc 
Committee on the Police Minister’s Report on Nkandla? 
MR SMITH:  At the time I did yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Time you did.  Now I do not want to 
spend a lot of time talking about Nkandla but would it be fair 
10 
to say that that particular Ad-hoc Committee took the view 
that regardless of what was done by the Public Protector 
they preferred the view of the then police Minister that really 
there 
was 
nothing 
improper 
or 
irregular 
about 
the 
expenditure on Nkandla and there was nothing that needed 
to be repaid? 
MR SMITH:  I do not recall the recommendations because I 
mean I have got that in front of me but – but to a large 
extent I think –  I think yes we took that view but I would 
have to look at that report to see exactly what the 
20 
recommendations were Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well I am not going to dwell on that 
issue.  What – what I particularly want to focus on in your 
evidence today is the period during which you chaired the 
Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services during the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 139 of 235 
 
period 2009 to 2014 and I think you deal with that from 
paragraph 12 onwards of your affidavit. 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you make the point in paragraph 12 
that the committee which you chaired at the end of its tenure 
prepared a - what you refer to as a handover report.  I 
sometimes see that referred to by other as a legacy report in 
2014 save to say that that report was published and is 
publicly available.  Would it be fair to say that the purpose – 
or what – what would say is the purpose of that report? 
10 
MR SMITH:  Well the purpose of that report is to in the first 
instance report on what we agreed upon at the beginning of 
our term.  How we went about doing or achieving those 
objectives and as a report that can be used as a resource for 
– for whoever follows that committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And just as your committee and your 
chairmanship issued such a report when you assumed office 
as Chair of that Portfolio Committee you had the benefit did 
you not of a similar report from your predecessor committee 
which had been chaired by Mr Denis Bloem, is that correct? 
20 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now Mr James Selfe has deposed to an 
affidavit and testified before this commission last week.  I do 
not know if you had an opportunity to hear any or all of his 
evidence? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 140 of 235 
 
MR SMITH:  No I did not. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Well one of the things that he 
said and this is in paragraph 6.23 of his report and that is in 
Bundle 2 at page 732.  He says referring to Mr Bloem in due 
course he followed Mosiuoa Lekota into COPE but he says 
but before he did so he was largely responsible with the ever 
efficient 
committee 
secretary 
Cindy 
Bailey 
for 
the 
composition of a handover report of the PC’s CS that is the 
acronym we use for the Portfolio Committee on Correctional 
Services of the Third Parliament to the Committee of the 
10 
Fourth Parliament.  And he says: 
“This 
report 
chronicles 
issues 
that 
the 
committee had dealt with between 2004 and 
2009 and highlighted the issued that were 
on-going and or unresolved.” 
And the point that is of particular interest to me. 
“Many issues were highlighted in the report 
that the contracts to BOSASA, Pezulu and 
Sondolo IT featured prominently.” 
And I think Mr Smith you are now aware that Pezulu and 
20 
Sondolo IT were companies affiliated to or subsidiaries to 
the principle BOSASA company.  You are aware? 
MR SMITH:  I am – I am aware. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And he says: 
“The report referring to the previous legacy 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 141 of 235 
 
report emphasised that the committee was 
never fully informed about the way in which 
these 
contracts 
were 
awarded 
and 
particularly 
despite 
the 
committee’s 
misgivings 
was 
never 
informed 
why 
the 
catering contract was re-awarded to BOSASA 
early in 2009.” 
The report concluded that and he quotes: 
“The committee remains disturbed with the 
manner in which the matter was handled and 
10 
the incoming committee should treat it as a 
priority.” 
Now I assume that as the incoming Chair of the new 
committee of the next Parliament you would have read and 
been aware and noted what I have just put on record. 
MR SMITH:  I was. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Now you say in your affidavit in 
paragraph 19 I am going to quote and just read it into the 
record. 
“Early in our tenure that is as the new 
20 
committee the committee received an update 
by the Special Investigative Unit the SIU on 
investigations relating to the Department of 
Correctional Services which commences prior 
to the Fifth Parliament and were on-going. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 142 of 235 
 
And you say the committee was in full 
support 
of 
the 
investigations 
and 
look 
forward to their outcome.” 
You recall this? 
MR SMITH:  I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I would just like to look at that in a 
little more detail.  And I am going to start by if I can find it – 
and refer you to what appears in a report prepared by the 
Parliamentary Monitoring Group – Chair that is in Bundle 2 
ZZ8 and in particular at pages 788 to 789.  I am going to – I 
10 
am going to read you – it is a very short extract Mr Smith but 
just to see whether – whether you have any recollection of 
this.  So Chair I am reading from Bundle 2 page 788 which is 
part of the PMG’s BOSASA report and it says that: 
“Mr Hofmeyer made a presentation.” 
I think it was by means of slides or something of the like – of 
the type, do you recall that on this occasion? 
MR SMITH:  I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And after referring to a number of other 
issues he came finally to what he called Case Number 4 a 
20 
National Tender for high value contracts. 
And then according to both the PMG report and the slides 
that are available it says: 
“Matter referred to the SIU by the Auditor 
General in the Public Service Commission 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 143 of 235 
 
under the heading Allegations” 
A couple of bullet points. 
“Corruption and awarding the tenders to the 
Service Providers.  Bid Rigging, supply a 
draft and specifications.” 
And then it continues. 
“Investigation established.” 
And then a number of bullet points. 
“Evidence of corruption, irregular relationship 
between DCS officials and service provider, 
10 
evidence of bid rigging, supplier drafting 
specifications and then it says status or 
report 
with 
the 
department 
for 
review.  
Disciplinary action recommended and report 
referred to the MPA for decision regarding 
prosecution.” 
You recall this presentation? 
MR SMITH:  I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And do you recall as is recorded in the 
PMG 
records 
of 
that 
particular 
meeting 
that 
you 
as 
20 
Chairperson described the findings of the SIU as and I quote 
“Horrific” 
MR SMITH:  I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now both Mr Hofmeyer of the SIU and 
you personally as Chair of the Committee felt that it would 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 144 of 235 
 
not be appropriate to name in those particular proceedings 
the company or group of companies that was the subject 
matter of that presentation.  And I am not taking issue with 
your view on that I can understand there would be an 
argument in support of that but it is correct is it not that Mr 
James Selfe shortly thereafter in that meeting said well he 
was not going to abide by that stance and he – and he not 
only said it was the most shocking presentation he had ever 
in his fifteen years in Parliament but he also said that he 
was not going to be party to not naming names and he 
10 
started naming names including BOSASA Operations Pty 
Limited and – and he was – he was rightly or wrongly putting 
the record that he knew very well what was the company or 
group of companies being referred to.  Do you remember that 
incident? 
MR SMITH:  I do remember that. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And would you agree with me that 
whether it was prudent or not prudent to put it on record as 
to who was being referred to you for one and probably 
everybody else room knew very well that this was a 
20 
reference to the then widely published allegations in respect 
of the BOSASA Group of Companies. 
MR SMITH:  Yes we did. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And the minutes show and when I say 
the minutes I am really referring to the PMG records that you 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 145 of 235 
 
thanked the SIU for empowering the committee and that you 
would like to – you would like the follow up from this session 
to continue on the one hand by hearing about the continued 
work of the SIU and the legal action implemented by the NPA 
on the other hand by hearings from the department what it 
was going to do to implement the recommendations of the 
SIU and the quarterly interactions between the committee 
and the department and the committee would monitor these 
processes.  So you were concerned and you wanted to 
ensure that they would be properly followed up.  Is that a fair 
10 
summary? 
MR SMITH:  That is a fair summary without us unduly 
influencing the process as Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Now you say in your affidavit 
and I am referring to paragraph 20 that during the period    
2009 to 2014 no new tenders were awarded to BOSASA and 
no doubt you were intending to refer there to tenders 
awarded by the Department of Correctional Services, is that 
correct? 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  I would like to put it to you that that part 
of your affidavit is incorrect.  That there were several further 
tenders awarded to BOSASA and its affiliated companies 
during that period.  Are you in a position to dispute that? 
MR SMITH:  Let me explain what I was saying there.  I – I 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 146 of 235 
 
was specifically referring to the nutritional tender or the 
tender on the nutrition.  And I stand by my point that there 
were no new tenders awarded for nutrition.  No new tenders.  
There were extensions of a tender that had been awarded in 
2014.  I beg your pardon in 2004 that was what I was trying 
relay to the – to the – or in my affidavit. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well I understand that one can draw a 
technical distinction between new tenders and extensions of 
prior tenders without going to tender but what I do not 
understand is why you sought to make that point specifically 
10 
and in that particular language and format. 
MR SMITH:  Because Sir you asked me the question in your 
letter to me.  Were there any new tenders?  And I was 
responding directly to questions that were presented to me 
by our legal team.  That was one of those specific questions 
and I thought I was responding to that question Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well I understand you but there is clearly 
been a misunderstanding because I did not pose any 
questions to you.  I had a discussion with your legal 
representative about some of the issues that I was interested 
20 
in and presumably this question came from him because it 
certainly did not come from me.   
MR SMITH:  I do not recall.  I beg your pardon. 
ADV FREUND SC:  No it is not – I am not – I am not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh let Mr Smith say something.  He wants 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 147 of 235 
 
to say something about that.  Mr Smith. 
MR SMITH:  Chair I – I beg my pardon that I said it came 
from the evidence leader but I certainly received those 
questions from the legal team or the legal advisor from the 
ANC that said these are the questions that you must respond 
to and I responded to those questions as best I could.  I 
think there were about six or seven of those questions.  My 
understanding was that those were questions that were a 
product of a discussion between the evidence leader and the 
– the lawyers of the ANC so I apologise if I have 
10 
misunderstood it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Not at all.  Now what I do want to draw 
to your attention however is what appears both from the 
affidavit of Mr Smith and from the material produced and 
furnished to the commission by the Parliamentary Monitoring 
Group.  In Mr Smith’s case Chair at page 737 of Bundle 2 at 
paragraph 6.43. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got it. 
ADV FREUND SC:  What Mr Selfe says is the following:  
HK14/2008 which is the description of a particular contract 
and I think it is what Mr Smith is referring to.  It was a 
contract for catering in prisons and was due to expire on the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 148 of 235 
 
31 January 2012.  It was not possible according to Mr 
Monyane who was an official of the Department to in source 
catering before then owing to the lack of capacity. 
 
So Mr Selfe says: therefore the BOSASA contract 
was once more extended first to 31 July 2012 and then to 
January 2013.  And you will see there is a reference there 
footnote 29 and foot note 29 is a reference to the PMG 
report on BOSASA at page 39 and then again at page 44. 
 
And that report is part of Exhibit ZZ8 in Bundle 2 and 
if I am not mistaken I think the most useful reference is if I 
10 
can take you to Bundle 2 at page 806?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Got it. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you will see there Chair that at the – 
at the foot of the preceding page this is a reference to 
something discussed at a meeting of the Portfolio Committee 
on the 20 March 2013 and at the top of the page it says the 
following: 
“The Chairperson referred to the nutrition 
contract.” 
The Chairperson was you Mr Smith, is that correct? 
20 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   
“To the nutrition contract which had expired 
on 31 January 2013.  The committee had 
agreed that it could be extended to 31 May 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 149 of 235 
 
but it had to go through the Supply Chain 
process.” 
And then if we go down two paragraphs, three paragraphs 
we see a – a paragraph that starts: 
“The Chairperson reminded Mr Modise that it 
had been decided that the contract would not 
be extended automatically.  Whatever was 
done it had to adhere to Supply Chain 
Management principles and on it went.” 
Is – are what we are reading here a correct summary of the 
10 
discussion that took place on this issue on the 20 March 
2013? 
MR SMITH:  I believe it is Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So you as Chair of this committee with 
knowledge of the nature of the findings of the SIU were in 
favour of and supporting the extension of the nutrition 
contract to BOSASA without tender provided that on a later 
occasion it should go out to tender, is that a fair summary? 
MR SMITH:  That is a fair summary not me as Chairperson 
Mr Freund but the whole committee including what Mr Selfe 
20 
in his own affidavit that we felt after explanation from the 
committee – oh beg your pardon – from the department that 
we hear what they are saying but it cannot continue beyond 
that. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well let us just be clear when we talk 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 150 of 235 
 
about Mr Selfe.  Mr Selfe as you will recall and correct me if 
I am wrong.  Mr Selfe had expressed his personal disquiet 
with any repetition of any of the BOSASA contracts in the 
light of the allegations that had surfaced and had apparently 
be confirmed by the SIU report.  Would you agree with that? 
MR SMITH:  I would not dispute that but I do not think that 
those were matters that were debated and discussed in the 
committee but I certainly would not dispute what Mr Selfe 
said neither would I confirm it but it was the general view of 
most of the members of the committee that we though 
10 
outsourcing was a problem in the department. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well it is well and good to think that 
outsourcing is a problem and to be fair to you I accept that 
there are indications at certain meetings of this committee 
where reservations were expressed about the principle of 
outsourcing.  But nonetheless if we look at not what 
reservations were expressed but what decisions were taken 
both by the department and by the Portfolio Committee to 
your knowledge contracts continued to be awarded to 
BOSASA and its subsidiaries not only immediately preceding 
20 
your appointment as Chair a renewal in 2008 but in fact they 
continued right up until 2019 resulting in contracts from the 
DCS alone running to some R7 billion.  Do you agree? 
MR SMITH:  I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now at – in the same PMG BOSASA 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 151 of 235 
 
report I just want to put on record for your comment as to 
whether you can confirm or deny or do not know what this 
report records having picked this information up from the 
minutes of the meeting of the 27 February 2019 which I 
accept is sometime after you were on the committee.  But in 
that – in that meeting what was recorded is the following:  I 
will start back at page 816 just to put all in context.   
“The first nutrition services contract – this is 
a 
contract 
to 
BOSASA 
HK2/2004 
for 
nutritional services was awarded on 27 July 
10 
2004 for a period of three years ending on 31 
July 2017.  This contract was extended twice 
and ultimately ended on 31 January 2009.” 
Which as I understand it is shortly before you came onto and 
became Chair of the Portfolio Committee, is that correct/ 
MR SMITH:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then it says: 
“The second contract HK5/2006 on the 30 
August 2006 Correctional Services awarded 
the 
contract 
for 
nutritional 
services 
to 
20 
BOSASA 
for 
a 
period 
of 
five 
years 
commencing 
1 
October 
2006 
ending 
30 
September 2011 for Waterval Management 
area.” 
So it is a similar contract with a specific area. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 152 of 235 
 
“This 
contract 
was 
extended 
twice 
and 
ultimately ended on 31 July 2013.” 
Do you have any recollection or knowledge of that? 
MR SMITH:  I do – I think I do yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You think that is correct so far as you 
know? 
MR SMITH:  I think yes, ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  And then continuing at the top of 
the next page, page 817 of Bundle 2. 
“The third contract HK1/2008 was awarded 
10 
on the 8 December 2008 for a period of three 
years 
commencing 
on 
1 
February 
2009 
ending 31 January 2012.  This contract was 
extended twice and ended on 31 July 2013.” 
Now that as I understand it is really the contract about which 
we were talking a few minutes ago when your committee said 
well it can be extended and then again extended again but 
then it had to come to an end and it came to an end on the 
31 July 2013.  Does that sound right to you? 
MR SMITH:  It sounds right – my recollection is that we 
20 
were talking about all activities that related to outsourcing 
of the – efficient for offenders.  And that could be included 
in there.  There could be more than just the one area.  But 
yes, that sounds correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then what I want to put to you is – 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 153 of 235 
 
and this is where I finally coming to the point.  The fourth 
contract, 
HO 11/2012 
was 
awarded 
on 
the 
11 t h of June 2013 
for 
three 
years 
commencing 
on 
1 August 2013 until 31 July 2016. 
 
The scope of the contract was extended or was 
expanded 
to 
include 
Groenpunt 
and 
Bizzah 
Makhate 
management 
areas. 
 
Furthermore, 
the 
contract 
was 
extended for a period of six months which ended on 
31 January 0217. 
 
Now that contact, as I understand it and you can 
10 
correct me if I am wrong, was awarded yet again to a 
BOSASA 
entity 
and 
was 
awarded 
pursuant 
to 
what 
purported to be a tender process.  Is that correct? 
MR SMITH:   Please repeat the question and what 
paragraphs? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  So I will read you again.  All I 
want to know whether this is correct and whether it was a 
so-called tender.  The fourth contract, HO 11/2012 was 
awarded 
on 
the 
11 t h of June 2013 
for 
three 
years 
commencing on 1 August 2013 until 31 July 2016. 
20 
 
So that was a contract that went to tender and was 
awarded to a BOSASA entity in the period in which, as I 
understood your evidence before, no such thing ever 
happened. 
MR SMITH:   If you could help me by indicating what was 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 154 of 235 
 
that for?  You say HO11.  Was that an official tender or 
what was that tender for?  I do not have it before me. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I also do not have the actual contract 
before me.  It is my understanding it is an efficient contract 
but I do not have it before me.  So it is subject to 
verification but my understanding is, it is another efficient 
contract.  It was a – yes it is an efficient contract for 
specific areas.  Now but an efficient contract awarded to 
the BOSASA operations controlling company. 
MR SMITH:   My comment sir and I speak as I do not have 
10 
it.  I would imagine that prior to that date, when you 
efficient in those area that I am not saying you are 
necessarily talking about, were provided that company.   
 
And that is why when I started earlier on, I 
indicated that it would have been an extension of an 
existing contract and not a brand new contract but without 
the detail, it makes it very difficult for me to comment 
comprehensively about that.   
 
But my recollection would be that it was originally 
or prior to that date business that had been done by that 
20 
same company. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, I understand your difficulty.  I am 
not in the least critical of you for not carrying all of that 
information in your head but what I want to put to you is 
that if that information is correct.   
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 155 of 235 
 
 
This 
is 
information 
that 
would 
have 
been 
accessible to you during your period as chair of that 
committee and it would have been an instance of or shall I 
say a further instance of further contracts being awarded 
to BOSASA notwithstanding the allegations that have been 
published not only in the press but which had prima facie 
been found to have substance by the SIU.   
 
Do you agree? 
MR SMITH:   I do agree. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then just to complete the picture.  
10 
And I understand that in part it is irrelevant to you directly 
because you seized to be chair of this particular Portfolio 
Committee at the end of the fourth if I have that right   
 
The current contract, this is at 2019 that this 
discussion was taking place.  08/03/2016 was awarded on 
19 
December 
2016 
for 
three 
years 
commencing 
on 
1 February 2017 until 31 January 2020. 
 
In other words, at the time that Mr Agrizzi came to 
testify before the Commission, BOSASA had been receiving 
before, during and after with your tenure as chair of the 
20 
Portfolio Committee ongoing contract with some R 7 billion.  
And that I think you have already agreed with. 
MR SMITH:   I do agree with that.  So, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 156 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Attempts should be made to try and 
establish whether that was a nutritional contract and 
maybe if possible what areas?   
 
The one person who is likely to know quite well, I 
suspect, would be Mr Agrizzi.  So he is one source of 
information who might – I think it might be important for 
Mr Smith to know exactly what those details are so that if 
he jogs his memory in any way he could supplement his 
evidence. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I will endeavour to follow that 
through Chair and I hope that if I forget that somebody 
within the Commission will remind me. 
 
Now what I want to explore with you Mr Smith is 
this. 
 
The 
SIU 
report 
was 
regarded 
as 
sufficiently 
persuasive to your knowledge to have led the Department 
of Correctional Service to have suspended and taken 
disciplinary steps against the then Chief Financial Officer, 
Mr Gillingham who ultimately resigned in the face of a 
probable disciplinary sanction. 
20 
 
You were aware of that at the time of those 
developments, of the suspension of the fact that a 
disciplinary was taken and that it was based on what was 
revealed or confirmed by the SIU report.  Would you agree 
with that? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 157 of 235 
 
MR SMITH:   I can agree with that.  I am just not sure if 
those incidents happened during our tenure of power.  But 
yes, I am aware that there were disciplinary hearings 
against the CFO, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And what puzzles me is why if 
the...  Let us step back a little bit.  The SIU report itself 
was the product or the consequence of a series of detailed 
exposés in the press that prima facie seem to suggest that 
there have been serious irregularities in the several 
contracts to the benefit of BOSASA and its subsidiaries, 
10 
really in the period 2004 and 2006.   
 
They had been exposed in the press.  They had 
been all sort of public statements made.  Mr Selfe made all 
sorts of statements.  And ultimately, that led to the SIU 
investigation and report.  Is that a fair summary? 
MR SMITH:   That is a fair summary.  Yes, Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then the department continues to 
award, either by extension or by tender, further contracts 
to BOSASA and further nutrition contracts in particular to 
BOSASA and seems to do so with no apparent criticism 
20 
from yourself or no decision from your committee that this 
is being regarded as problematic.  Is that a fair point? 
MR SMITH:   No, it is not. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, then please tell me why it is not. 
MR SMITH:   Firstly sir, we received the report from the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 158 of 235 
 
SIU early in 2009 and at that occasion there was a 
unanimous decision by the committee that the SIU must 
continue with its investigations. 
 
Our understanding is that it had not concluded.  It 
was an update of an ongoing investigation.  And we made 
an undertaking that we would support whatever needs to 
be done from the SIU and another law enforcement agency 
in terms of that investigation and it would receive our 
support. 
 
So firstly, it was an ongoing investigation and we 
10 
supported it.  Secondly, you yourself sir referred to – and I 
do not have it before me – I think in 2013 where the 
committee took a decision that we would frown upon further 
extensions of that contract. 
 
So I do not think it is accurate to say we took no 
action or – ja, we took no action.  I think we did – we 
recognised and respected the ongoing investigations by 
the SIU and gave them our support. 
 
And that is where we thought we should leave it as 
Parliament unless we are accused of interfering in the work 
20 
of another department of government.   
ADV FREUND SC:   I want to follow up on various points 
you made there.  Firstly you say it was an SIU ongoing 
investigation but is it not correct to your knowledge that 
the Minister reported to Parliament in response to a 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 159 of 235 
 
question that the report had been referred by the SIU for 
prosecution or for the MPA to consider whether to whether 
to prosecute ...[intervenes]  
MR SMITH:   Yes, I recall that was the next process, that 
the SIU would have done its work and then taken to a 
sister department to continue the work.  So let me retract 
saying that it was an SIU ongoing investigation. 
 
Let us say it was an investigation of the law 
enforcement agencies, whether it was SIU or the MPA or 
whoever.  I withdraw that it was an SIU but I am saying it 
10 
was ongoing work. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I understand your point.  Then another 
point you made it that the committee was against what you 
called – you used the word – and I imagine must carefully 
it shows an extension of the contract.   
 
Now I, having read the various minutes, I think as 
you do, that it is appropriate to distinguish between 
extensions of an existing contract and putting out to tender 
the same contract in a competitive process. 
 
And what I want to put to you is this.  What your 
20 
committee said was:  We will tolerate not one but two 
extensions of the BOSASA Catering Contract but after that 
we will tolerate no more extensions.  If it is going to be re-
awarded it must be done through a tender process.   
 
Am I accurately putting your position or not? 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 160 of 235 
 
MR SMITH:   You are accurately putting our position sir.  
And maybe it is important that we locate it at the time that 
decision was taken.   
 
When that decision was taken the department said 
to us that they had done, if I can call it the capacity audit, 
and found that they did not have the necessary capacity at 
the time but that they would work towards capacitating 
themselves. 
 
So it was in that context that we said if indeed you 
are going to capacitate yourself, make sure that whenever 
10 
this thing is renewed you have the necessary capacity to 
do it, number one. 
 
And secondly, if you take it out for tender that 
even if the incumbent does not get it, it does not 
negatively affect the running of the operations. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now when you talk about the 
department developing capacity.  I think what you mean is 
this.  There was talk that really there was no need to 
outsource catering at all.  It frankly had before the 
BOSASA 
contract 
been 
handled 
internally 
within 
the 
20 
prisons department by staff and prisoners. 
 
And there was a view that that should continue, 
that should resume, that there should be no catering 
outsourcing at all.  And there was some debate on that 
principle. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 161 of 235 
 
 
So 
when 
you 
are 
talking 
about 
developing 
capacity, you mean the capacity to do the job yourself.  Am 
I right? 
MR SMITH:   Yes, not only capacity.  And by the way, that 
debate took place on our terms.  It is us that said that.  
When I say us, I am saying our committee had said that.  
 
And the capacity that you are talking about.  One 
was the Human Resource capacity but secondly was for the 
department to acquire the necessary financial resources to 
be able to purchase or acquire what was necessary to 
10 
furnish the kitchens for a want of a better word. 
 
So one was capacity and two the necessary 
equipment because at the time all the equipment that was 
there was equipment that belonged to BOSASA.  And we 
had said to them make sure your budget caters for new 
equipment but also make sure that inmates are able to 
cook for themselves.  That is what we decided as a 
committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you decided was, whilst that 
issue was under consideration, you had no objection to in 
20 
fact you expressly authorised that the contract should be 
extended not once but twice.  Am I correct? 
MR SMITH:   No, you are not correct sir.  Parliament has 
no capacity to authorise or to adjudicate any tender.  So 
when you say authorise, I am not sure what it is that you 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 162 of 235 
 
are talking about because as Parliament you have no 
authority or jurisdiction to award or authorise any tenders. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Just bear with me while I find the 
reference.   
MR SMITH:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I can give you a secondary 
reference.  I will find the primary reference shortly.  But at 
Bundle 2, pages 737 to 738 there is a paragraph that I 
have already referred to, paragraph 6.43 of Mr Selfe’s 
affidavit.   
10 
 
And in the last sentence of that subparagraph 
quoting the BOSASA report.  This is the BOSASA report by 
the PMG which is purporting to quote you Mr Smith.  It is 
alleged that on the 20 t h of March 2013 you personally said 
the following: 
“The committee would not allow the contract to 
be extended again having taken knowledge of 
a prior extension and the fact that there was 
now being muted a further extension.” 
 
By extension, I mean extension without going to 
20 
tender.  Do you dispute that you said that the committee 
would accept or indulge or commit or not object to these 
two extensions but would not allow the contract to be 
extended again? 
MR SMITH:   Again sir, I – as you said it is 2013 and I 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 163 of 235 
 
would not – the sentiment that we were raising and maybe 
the English or the wording was not appropriate. 
 
The sentiment that we were raising or that we 
would not as a committee accept an argument from the 
department that they have to extend it because they do not 
have capacity. 
 
Let me reiterate.  We do not have – or not we – 
Parliament does not have the ability or the authority to 
adjudicate or to award a tender.   
 
It might what was picked up and recorded by the 
10 
committee secretary and I will not dispute that but in 
hindsight 
maybe 
the 
word 
allow 
should 
have 
been 
substituted by another word that relays the sentiment that 
we do not think that we can sit and look and sit back when 
this happens. 
 
But certainly, whether we had the ability to allow 
or not allow, that is not the domain of Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, I understand your point.  There 
is a separation of powers point and there is a point about 
what is the proper function of the department, what is the 
20 
proper function of Parliament and I accept that there is 
something to the point you are trying to make. 
 
But would you accept that you as a chair of the 
Committee of Parliament had a duty to exercise oversight 
and to require accountability by the Executive and in that 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 164 of 235 
 
process you were fully entitled to express adverse views of 
conduct of which you disapproved? 
MR SMITH:   I agree sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you were fully entitled if you 
thought 
that 
there 
was 
something 
problematic 
about 
extending on several occasions or at least two occasions a 
contract awarded to a company where you were party to 
knowledge which suggested that in the view, at least of the 
SIU, that contract had been acquired by a process of 
bribery, corruption and tender rigging?  You were fully 
10 
entitled to express your opposition and your criticism. 
MR SMITH:   Yes, I agree sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you did not, did you? 
MR SMITH:   I do not recall the proceedings but I do know 
for a fact that the committee as a whole raised on 
numerous occasions our dissatisfaction with outsourcing 
generally. 
 
We might not have raised it with the specific 
service provider but on – to the end of our term we raise 
our dissatisfaction with the outsourcing of Correctional 
20 
Service. 
 
So if you are asking me if we relayed it specifically 
with that one, I suppose that we would have to go and look 
at the minutes but generally I could say we were never 
ever comfortable with outsourcing within the Department of 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 165 of 235 
 
Correctional Service as a committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But what you are talking about 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   One second Mr Freund.  One second.  
Mr Smith, why would your committee that I understand - 
certainly from other evidence that I have heard and it may 
include your own evidence previously.   
 
Why 
would 
your 
committee 
which 
had 
been 
horrified by the SIU reports about what was happening 
between BOSASA and the Department of Correctional 
10 
Service, why would your committee which had been 
horrified in 2009 as it commenced its work after the 
General Election not have said to the Department of 
Correctional Services but how can you continue with 
having any business relationship with a company where 
there is a report from the SIU that tells us horrific stories 
of corruption? 
 
Why would your committee not have said that to 
the Department of Correctional Services? 
MR SMITH:   Chair, I want to be careful.  I am sure that we 
20 
might not have said it outright but I do believe that the 
entire committee including all the members would have 
relayed that sentiments both to the department and the 
Minister but I do not recall us saying it upfront to the 
department why are you doing business with that particular 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 166 of 235 
 
service provider. 
 
In hindsight Chair maybe we should have said it as 
bluntly as you are putting it because that was the right 
thing to do at the time.   
CHAIRPERSON:   You see and I may have said this to you 
before, one of the things that I continue not to understand 
is how it was possible for BOSASA to continue to be 
allowed to do business with the state in general and with 
the Department of Correctional Services? 
 
In particular for as many years as it did, despite 
10 
these allegations of corruption, besides these findings by 
the SIU in their investigation in the SIU report?   
 
But government seems to have just allowed it to 
continue doing business.  The allegations, I understand, 
would have been in the media and so on. 
 
It just – it is one of those things that are difficult 
for me to understand to say – I mean, I think from what I 
have heard, BOSASA would have begun to do business 
with Department of Correctional Service not later than 
2007, not later than that year.  I may be mistaken but I 
20 
think not later than that year. 
 
And if I recall correctly they only stopped after this 
Commission had started and Mr Agrizzi had spilt the beans 
and only then did the government start doing something to 
stop this business. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 167 of 235 
 
 
I mean, that is – BOSASA doing business with the 
Department of Correctional Service and other organs of 
state.  So I say but how is it possible because people in 
Parliament knew about the SIU report. 
 
As I recall, the allegations were in the media about 
corruption involving BOSASA, allegations of corruption 
involving BOSASA and Department of Correctional Services 
but BOSASA and the Department of Correctional Services 
just continued as if these things were not known. 
 
Now your committee was specifically – specifically 
10 
had the mandate and the obligation to perform oversight 
over Department of Correctional Services. 
 
It starts its work in 2009 after the General 
Elections.  It gets given this report that tells it about 
horrific things.  They do not say but this cannot be allowed 
to continue Minister of Correctional Services, DG of 
Correctional Services or Commissioner.  This cannot be 
allowed. 
 
Not to speak about extending your contractual 
relations with this company.  It is – I just have difficulty to 
20 
understand that and I am offering you the opportunity if 
there is something that I am missing to say this is what you 
are missing.   
 
There is nothing that one should not understand 
about the conduct or attitude of the committee towards this 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 168 of 235 
 
or reaction or lack of reaction on the part of the committee.  
This is the situation. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Chair, I do not want 
what I am saying to appear as an excuse from Parliament’s 
point of view.  However, the reality Chairperson is that 
when it comes to work that is done by the Executive of 
Government or Departments who then offer what services 
they provide and so on.   
 
Ours as Parliament, as I understand it, is the 
power to persuade.  He did not have the power to micro-
10 
manage or the power to dictate.   
 
And I must repeat, I am not offering that as an 
excuse Chairperson.  All I am saying is that was the power 
relationship but I believe it is still the power relationship. 
 
That is why even up to 2019 or I do not recall 
Mr Freund when you said it was extended the last time, but 
that was the nature of the power relationship. 
 
I am not offering it as an excuse and I fully 
appreciate your frustration or your lack of understanding 
Chairperson but that was the power relationship at the 
20 
time.  And I was – as I understood it anyway, was our 
power was just to persuade and we could not dictate.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it may be that Parliament does not 
have the power to force a Minister or a Director-General or 
the President who is the Executive to adopt its own 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 169 of 235 
 
solution to a particular problem.   
 
That I can understand if somebody says when there 
is a problem that we as Parliament have identified, we 
have raised with the Executive, we had a particular 
solution and the Executive does not agree with our 
solution, we cannot force them to agree with our solution 
to the extent that the point is made, I can understand that 
point but I am not sure if I can understand – that says if, 
for example there is corruption in a department and let us 
say, for example – and I am not specifically going back to – 
10 
I am not saying that this was dealt with in the SIU report 
but let us say there are specific people, there were specific 
people within the Department of Correctional Services that 
were mentioned as having been involved in corruption with 
BOSASA in regard to these matters that the committee was 
looking at and you say, as a committee, Minister, in the 
light of the findings of the SIU report, disciplinary action 
should be taken against the Commissioner of Correctional 
Services.   
If the minister says to the committee I accept that 
20 
my DG or the Commissioner of Correctional Services 
appears to have been involved in acts of corruption with 
BOSASA but I am not going to do anything about it, I am 
not sure that the committee can leave it at that, parliament 
can leave it at that and say well, we leave it like that.  Do 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 170 of 235 
 
you think parliament should just leave it at that on your 
understanding of parliamentary oversight? 
MR SMITH:   Certainly not, Chairperson, certainly not.  I 
think – and I speak for myself, if any minister or any 
member came and said I am aware of it, I hear you warning 
me but I am going to continue regardless, certainly I think 
that there should be certain – there should be steps taken 
by parliament.  I do not recall any minister coming and 
saying I am aware of it and I am not going to take any 
action against – I think that is the distinction. But certainly, 
10 
yes, if we have warned the minister and he or she does not 
take any steps, I do think that we should – we should look 
at other measures to do it or to take forward.  So I agree 
with you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the example I was giving you was 
an extreme one because – it was an extreme one as I was 
giving it deliberately because sometimes extreme examples 
help us to test the principle and I think you and I are on 
the same page that in the example that I gave, really it 
looks like parliament should do something and should not 
20 
throw their hands up and say we can do nothing about it.  
But let us look at another example. 
 
It is the same facts.  The minister does not say I 
agree that it looks like my DG has been involved in acts of 
corruption but I will not do anything about it, it does not 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 171 of 235 
 
say that to you as parliament or committee of parliament 
but says I will see what I am going to do but never does 
anything.  Three months later he has not done anything.  
Six months later, he has not done anything, a year later, he 
has not done anything, you must conclude or you must, the 
committee, say to the minister but you said you would see 
what to do, what is happening?  And if he gives you or she 
gives you an explanation that is unconvincing, it seems to 
me on the face of it that even in that case parliament 
should say well, this is intolerable, this is unacceptable, 
10 
we 
should 
look 
at 
what 
we 
can 
do 
because 
it 
is 
unacceptable for a Minister, who is not able to defend this 
conduct and its criminal conduct in his department but who 
does nothing and cannot give us any justifiable reason for 
doing nothing, then as parliament, we must look at what we 
can do, we cannot just leave the situation like that.  Would 
you not agree with that proposition as well? 
MR 
SMITH:  
 I would agree with that proposition, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
MR SMITH:   Can I, can I…? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SMITH:   Without justifying can I just say something 
that is probably factual and what actually happens on the 
ground, Chair, is that – and if that is why there was one of 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 172 of 235 
 
the focus points for our committee when we took over was 
the 
stability 
of 
senior 
management. 
 
What 
happens 
frequently is that when these types of things happen, you 
find that senior managers then resign from one department 
and resurface in another department or another sphere of 
government.  So I do not recall in my time that there was 
any specific individual who was there for five years and 
was not dealt with and was given impunity, I am talking 
about an individual but the point that if this indeed does 
occur, there should be disciplinary hearings, disciplinary 
10 
action, I fully concur with you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, then you could have a situation 
where maybe they are not specific individuals mentioned 
but nevertheless the minister, you know, accepts that there 
is a lot of corruption that has been happening in the past 
and it seems to be continuing but he seems or she seems 
either unwilling or incapable of getting this situation 
arrested, you have given him or her enough time, maybe it 
is a year, maybe it is two years, the allegations of 
corruption keep on coming up and they are increasing, so 
20 
you may reach a conclusion to say he is either unwilling or 
not capable of making sure that his department or her 
department 
arrest 
this 
situation. 
 
Therefore, 
in 
that 
situation I would imagine that as part of your oversight you 
would look at what can be done.  If you must call for – 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 173 of 235 
 
must call upon the President to – as parliament call upon 
the President to fire the minister whether he accepts your 
recommendation but then at least that is what you should 
do.  Do you not think so?  
MR SMITH:   I think that is what should be done, 
Chairperson.  Let me indicate that in my time from 1999 
until the time I exited from parliament I recall only one 
occasion 
where 
parliament 
actually 
made 
that 
recommendation that look, Mr President, we think you 
should reconsider.  And again, Chairperson, I suppose we 
10 
learn as we go along.  I think in future what you say what 
in fact happened because there is a precedent that has 
been set but up to the point of the SABC inquiry, I do not 
recall that parliament was as brazen as you are suggesting 
we should be but I do believe we will be going – well, 
parliament would be going forward, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Mr Smith, the precedent 
you are talking about is the recommendations made by the 
SABC ad hoc committee. 
20 
MR SMITH:   I beg your pardon, I never heard you 
question, sir? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I just want to check that the precedent 
that you had in mind, the single instance where something 
like that had happened was the recommendations made by 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 174 of 235 
 
the ad hoc committee into the SABC, am I correct? 
MR SMITH:   That is the only occasion that I recall where 
such recommendation was made, Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I suppose, correct me if I am 
wrong, the report of the ad hoc committee would have been 
tabled before the house, before the National Assembly and 
the National Assembly would have adopted the report, is 
that correct, is that how it works? 
MR SMITH:   That is correct, sir, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now effectively the National Assembly 
10 
recommended to the President that the future tenure of a 
particular minister should be reconsidered. 
MR SMITH:   Correct, sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:   What you are saying, if I understand 
you correctly, is in future that should perhaps happen more 
frequently, a useful precedent has been set and it is a 
useful 
device 
for 
addressing 
the 
problem 
of 
the 
accountable executives. 
MR SMITH:   I believe that is most parliament – or the 
least parliament can do and beyond that, it then is the 
20 
prerogative of the President who appoints and dismisses 
cabinet but the most or the least we can do is to make that 
recommendation at parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:    I hear you.  Now I want to go back to 
what we were talking about before the Chair asked you 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 175 of 235 
 
some questions.  I was asking you questions about the 
stance taken by yourself and the committee which you 
chaired in relation to the further rewards, either by 
extension or tender of contracts to BOSASA and its 
subsidiaries and you said but well we can do is persuade, 
we cannot instruct and what I understood you to mean is 
this, ultimately your committee does not have the power to 
determine who is going to get contracts, that is for the 
executive to decide but I think you recognise that you did 
have the power and indeed the right to attempt to persuade 
10 
the executive to do what you thought was proper.  Do you 
agree with me? 
MR SMITH:   Yes, I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, you will recall how we started 
our engagement this afternoon; I took you to paragraph 
6.23 of the legacy report of the previous [indistinct] 10.55 
which said: 
“In respect of contracts to BOSASA, Phezulu and 
Sondolo IT that the committee remains disturbed 
with the manner in which the matter was handled 
20 
and the incoming committee should treat it as a 
priority.” 
And now I want to put to you what Mr Selfe says at 
paragraph 6.46 of his affidavit.  But now we come to the 
end of the cycle and he says: 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 176 of 235 
 
“What was perhaps worse was the fact that despite 
the controversy of an official contract and the way it 
which was awarded, extended and re-awarded and 
the very serious malpractices identified by the SIU 
in November of 2009, the matter did not feature at 
all.” 
And he emphasises those words. 
“…in the Legacy report of the PCCS drawn up in 
2014.” 
And he attributes a measure of fault to you personally in 
10 
that respect.  What is your comment?  
MR SMITH:   First of all, sir, I am not in the business of 
challenging people that are not before me.  But let me say 
this, Mr Selfe was a member of that committee when this 
report was drawn up.  He did not raise any objections or 
the fact that it should be emphasised.  That report went to 
parliament, Mr Selfe, like I and everybody else is a 
member of parliament, I do not recall Mr Selfe saying but 
you know what, guys, add that line to put it there.   
 
So for me it is difficult to understand why after 
20 
those opportunities to enrich the report a member of 
parliament does not enrich the report, as he or she has the 
right to do, and then 20 years after the fact come and say 
but this is it and I am not wanting to blame anybody, I am 
just saying it would be more helpful if when the opportunity 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 177 of 235 
 
arises to say but I am a member and I think this is how that 
report should be enriched.  I certainly – I certainly did not 
in my personal capacity, as is stated there, deliberately de-
emphasise.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Well …[intervenes] 
MR SMITH:   That is all what I want to say, sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I hear you and we can consider the 
position of Mr Selfe in due course, but let us consider your 
position.  You are the person who said to me this afternoon 
and to the Chair your committee does have the power at 
10 
least to seek to persuade the executive in relation to 
issues of concern to you and I want to put to you that 
whether there is any fault on the part of Mr Selfe or not, 
this is a highly significant omission from your legacy 
report.   
What you are told by your predecessor should be a 
matter of the highest priority has somehow dropped 
entirely off the radar screen to such an extent that far from 
seeking to persuade the executive to act differently, you 
make no mention of the issue at all both in this report and 
20 
frankly in the several years that preceded it. 
MR SMITH:   Are you asking for my comment, sir? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am asking for your comment please. 
MR SMITH:   Yes, I am saying, sir, that – and it is in the 
minutes.  There was a briefing by the SIU.  We understood 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 178 of 235 
 
that this was work that was ongoing and that the process 
will reach its logical conclusion via the SIU/NPA/the 
judiciary.  I am not sure – and again I am not justifying it, I 
am not sure that if that was the case and we believe that 
we have done what needs to be done as parliament that 
there was anything more that we should have done.  And if 
there was, I am the first one to say that we slipped up but I 
genuinely believed that once it was transferred to the body 
that is better capacitated to deal with it, ours was to 
support that body or those bodies to deal with it.   
10 
I make no excuse for the fact that our legacy report 
did not reflect it.  I make no excuse for that but I am 
saying that my personal understanding that this was work 
that was done somewhere else and I was confident that 
those bodies would take it to its logical conclusion. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But let us just look at the time factor 
here, Mr Smith, it was on the 16 November 2009, very 
early in your period as Chair that Mr Hofmeyer in a sense 
confirmed the reliability, as he saw it, of a series of serious 
allegations. 
20 
MR SMITH:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Five years later, almost five years 
later, to your knowledge no steps had been taken to 
prosecute and your committee sits silently by and makes 
no fuss about this.  I put it to you that was culpable.  You 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 179 of 235 
 
of course free to comment. 
MR SMITH:   I disagree with you, sir, and that is my 
opinion.  In, I think it is Mr Selfe’s report or something to 
that effect, I think there is reference to a member of the 
NPA who themselves said that what had been presented by 
the SIU at the time would not stand in court and it has to 
be reworked.  So I again am saying we are not lawyers or 
investigators as members of parliament, ours is to refer to 
the bodies that are best placed to do it and hope that they 
do what they need to do.  If the committee was expected to 
10 
do regular follow-ups - let me say we did not say we did 
not do regular follow-ups but it was not for any other 
reason other than, certainly from my point, we thought that 
it was in capable hands and I would have a different view 
to your view that says it is culpable, but that is my view, 
sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, Mr Smith, you know as well as I 
do that we have this debate against the context of some 
very serious allegations that have been made by Mr 
Agrizzi.  Mr Agrizzi says it was no coincidence that the 
20 
heat came off, it was the consequence of personal bribes 
to yourself.  Now I understand you deny that but you will 
understand that the failure of your committee and in 
particular you personally to persist and to follow through 
on what you originally described as a horrific finding to 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 180 of 235 
 
reach the point at which at the end of your term there is 
not mention at all, at the very least raises question marks, 
about whether perhaps Mr Agrizzi says is true.  Do you 
wish to comment? 
MR SMITH:   I totally disagree with that. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Mr Smith, I have no further 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Smith, just a few questions. 
MR SMITH:   Yes, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what is it that your committee did 
10 
between 2009 and 2014 or in that period of five years 
…[intervenes] 
MR SMITH:   I cannot hear, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, is that better? 
MR SMITH:   It is better now, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  What is it that your 
committee did about these horrific matters that the SIU 
report told you about over the five years that you were 
Chairperson of this committee?  What did your committee 
do about these horrific matters of corruption that the SIU 
20 
report told your committee about? 
MR SMITH:   Chair, I do not know that there was anything 
that – or I do not recall that there was anything that the 
committee did other than – I am almost convinced that in 
every engagement with the minister or even during our 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 181 of 235 
 
budget debates that this would have raised by various 
members of the committee but I have the benefit, Chair, of 
having served SCOPA and I do know, maybe not the 
Correctional 
Services 
committee 
but 
I 
do 
know 
that 
parliament in my life at SCOPA certainly looked at those 
type of things.   
So to answer you, Chair, in Correctional Services 
itself, I am not sure that there was anything, I do not know 
what you call it, physically or consciously that we did other 
than probably raising it in the debates at budget time 
10 
and/or in the engagements quarterly with the minister but I 
do think that it would have certainly been raised much 
more sharply.  I know that it was raised much more sharply 
at the level of SCOPA [indistinct] 22.02. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you cannot remember whether in the 
committee, in the portfolio committee on Correctional 
Services it was these issues that were covered by the SIU 
report 
were 
raised 
with 
the 
Minister 
of 
Correctional 
Services in the committee of - on Correctional Services.  
You cannot remember or you do remember? 
20 
MR SMITH:   Chair, I certainly cannot remember but I do 
know that if we went to the quarterly engagements that it 
would not be inconceivable that it was raised by members 
in the engagement with the minister and the accounting 
officers but I would not go on to say so now categorically 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 182 of 235 
 
because I just do not remember, Chair, but it would not be 
inconceivable that we would have raised it in our quarterly 
engagements with the minister and the department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would imagine that the purpose – and 
you must just tell me when you are struggling to hear me 
again, Mr Smith, tell me.  Okay?  I would imagine that the 
purpose or at least one of the purposes of the so-called 
legacy reports that committees when their terms of office 
end prepare and hand over to the next committee is to say 
to the next committee here are matters that need follow-up, 
10 
that need you to follow them up or that need you to keep 
an eye on or matters that you need to do something about.  
Is that a I misunderstanding on my part on the purpose of a 
legacy report? 
MR SMITH:   No, it is not a misunderstand, Chair.  My 
understanding – it is not a I misunderstanding, let me say 
that.  My understanding also is that it assists with 
institutional memory because certainly in my time the 
turnover of MPs every new term is about 60%, so you have 
very many new MPs.  So part of the legacy report, as I 
20 
understand, would be to assist in terms of institutional 
memory.   
But I also want to state, Chair, that I think it is Rule 
167 that says that committees are expected to draw up 
their own work method or their own focus areas and not 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 183 of 235 
 
necessarily bound by any previous parliament.  In fact that 
applies even to parliament but it does not necessarily – it 
does not mean that we should ignore what has come from 
the previous parliament.  So my understanding, it assists 
with institutional memory for new members, it should give 
us some sort of indication, as you say, Chair, on what 
maybe we should look at and any wise man should be able 
to say well, let us look at that thing and if it has merit, let 
us take it, but I do not think it is binding but certainly is a 
resource that any new arrivee, if there is such a word, 
10 
should consider. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now obviously I would think that if one 
committee prepares a legacy report in which it includes 
very 
important 
issues 
which 
require, 
in 
their 
view, 
oversight or further attention by the next committee and 
the next committee for all intents and purposes does not 
do anything about such an important issue it defeats at 
least one of the purposes of a legacy report, would you not 
agree? 
MR SMITH:   I do, Chair.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SMITH:   I do agree with you that  – that yes, that is 
why I said earlier on that a wise person would look at that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SMITH:   Present it to the new committee and the new 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 184 of 235 
 
committee then to apply its mind to the contents of that 
legacy report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now you said the function of 
parliament, the function of parliament as far as oversight is 
concerned, you said it is persuade the executive.  Do you 
remember that?   
MR SMITH:   I do, Sir, I do, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now there may be different ways of 
persuading.  One way is for me to say Mr Smith do you not 
think it would be a good idea to take action against so and 
10 
so and I say whatever.   
 
Another way is that I may start like that but we 
engage in a discussion, if you are not convincing, you do 
not want to do what I believe is the right thing to do, I may 
start to be quite robust, I am not instructing you but I may 
start to be quite robust and show that I am horrified at you 
not doing the right thing.  But from what I have heard from 
what you have said and from what I have – reports that I 
have seen, to the extent that there may have been any 
attempt to persuade on behalf of your committee must have 
20 
been a very superficial attempt, would you not agree? 
MR SMITH:   Chairperson, I…  I do not want to say 
something that, whatever… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but …[intervenes] 
MR SMITH:   I do not think, Chair… 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 185 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But feel free because you must feel free 
to defend your committee, feel free to defend yourself but 
obviously I expect you not to defend something if you do 
not feel it is defensible, you must just speak freely in terms 
of what you believe to be true. 
MR SMITH:   I do not think, Chair, that the committee was 
docile.  I am using my own words and not your words.  I do 
believe 
that 
the 
portfolio 
committee 
on 
Correctional 
Services, during my tenure anyway, was very robust with 
the minister, with the department and I am sure that if we 
10 
went to all engagements including the budget – and I am 
talking about all members of the committee. I do think – 
and of course we could have been maybe robust, of course 
we could have been more – but I do think that we were – 
we were not shy of pointing out our dissatisfactions.   
And I take the point, Chair, that pointing them out is 
one thing but pointing them out and following them up and 
continuing to nag, for want of a better word, would have 
probably been more effective but I would not say that that 
committee was docile.  I am not sure, I forget the word that 
20 
you used, Chair, but I do not think …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I used superficial.  I used superficial. 
MR SMITH:   Oh, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR SMITH:   No, I do not – the committee’s oversight was 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 186 of 235 
 
superficial, that is my response to Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But I am not talking about their general 
performance of oversight work in general.  I am more 
focused on in regard to these matters of allegations of 
corruption between, involving BOSASA and Correctional 
Services.  I am saying that from what you have told me and 
from the evidence of others in the reports about what the 
committee was doing, it seems to me that if the committee 
sought to persuade the executive to do something about 
these matters it seems that in regard to BOSASA its 
10 
attempts were superficial. 
Maybe in regard to other matters they were quite 
robust but in regard to BOSASA it seems that if they were 
then they were superficial because even from your side you 
were not sure, even whether they raised these issues, 
sharply.  But what you could remember is that in SCOPA 
they were raised but in this committee that you Chaired, 
my impression of your evidence is you were not so sure 
that these issues were raised sharply.  
MR SMITH:   Chair my words, were if I had benefit of the 
20 
quarterly reports and the budget speeches I might be more 
sure.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR SMITH:   But I agree with you Chair, that it would not 
have been as robust as it would have been at SCOPA.  But 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 187 of 235 
 
on that one I concur 100%.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Then just two further matters.  I - would 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee, 
maybe 
would 
your 
Portfolio 
Committee this one on Correctional Services when you are 
aware of problems, serious problems in the department or 
in a portfolio and you have maybe you feel that you have 
limitations as members of the committee because you 
cannot instruct the executive what to do. But you are 
concerned that, for example, taxpayer ’s money is wasted 
and so on or is being stolen and so on.  
10 
Would you go back to your party the ANC, the 
majority party and say to them, you know, we are faced 
with this problem.  But in our capacity as members of 
Parliament we cannot instruct comrades so and so’s, 
Minister of Transport to take steps, to take action.  But you 
are the people who go to the electorate every five years 
and ask the electorate to vote you into power and this is 
going to give you a very bad name.  
We are now reporting to you, do something about 
this.  Would your party -  would that be part of what 
20 
members of the ANC, for example, in their capacity as 
members of the ANC would report back to the party to say 
comrade so and so is Minister of this and that is not really 
doing his job.  We are concerned and it is taxpayer ’s 
money we are talking about here. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 188 of 235 
 
MR SMITH:   Maybe not in the fashion that you raised 
Chairperson but you know, when I speak for the ANC and I 
would imagine it is the same for all other parties, including 
in the Western Cape where the opposition is Chair, I mean 
a majority party.  
In our case, Thursdays we have caucuses and 
members are then able to raise that matter in the caucus 
because our linkage with the leadership of the ANC would 
be through the Chief Whip.  I do not think it stops members 
from going directly but I think the more discipline members 
10 
would go via the Chief Whip because it is the Chief Whip 
that is the link between me as an ordinary MP and the 
leadership of the ANC at HQ.  
So yes Chair it is possible to go and say look 
comrades, this is what we think we are seeing and maybe 
as a party let us look at it but I do not know that members 
will go directly and undermine the role and authority of the 
Chief Whip who is the link between members of Parliament 
and the leadership at HQ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Then the last one is you were not 
20 
in agreement with Mr Freund when he suggested that your 
committee was culpable in terms of not performing its 
oversight function properly in relation to the BOSASA 
matter. I just want to give you a chance to say whether you 
stand by that or whether you would like to reconsider it on 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 189 of 235 
 
the face of it, it seems to me that the committee could 
have done and should have done much more.  Maybe I 
should not say much more, but certainly more.  Are you not 
in agreement with me that it should have done more over 
the five years?  
MR SMITH:   I am not a legal fundi that is why I got scared 
when you use the big word culpable, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let forget about culpable let us say, 
in terms of doing its work ja, let us leave out the legal 
terminology.  Would you not agree that it fell short of what 
10 
can reasonably be expected from a Portfolio Committee 
performing its oversight functions properly?  
MR SMITH:   Chair no I would not think it fell short and my 
defence for that, although I am not being defensive, is that 
I 
think 
Chair 
we 
must 
all 
understand 
that 
Portfolio 
Committees are for want of a better word, a Sub-committee 
of the House.  So even if the Portfolio Committee was not 
doing whatever it was doing, all committee reports go 
through the National Assembly.  
And I believe that the 400 members of the National 
20 
Assembly, if there was there was blatant not doing your 
work should be the ones that would correct us because 
ultimately it is the report of the National Assembly, we are 
only but tasked with doing work on behalf of the National 
Assembly. So I do not want to be defensive, we could have 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 190 of 235 
 
done much better as a committee I believe everybody could 
have but I do not think it was for the lack of trying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is your position that you believe that 
the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services over the 
five-year period in 2014, in regard to the matters affecting 
BOSASA and Correctional Services, is your position that 
you believe the committee performed its oversight function 
satisfactorily? 
MR SMITH:   There could be much more improvement 
Chairpersons from where I am sitting now but with the 
10 
resources at our disposal, both financial and also warm 
bodies and the resources at the disposal of the executive, I 
think we did our best.  I do want to emphasise Chair and I 
do not want to make excuses, I do want to emphasise that, 
you know, Parliament in terms of its capacity to research 
and do whatever it wants to do. 
Parliament has 11 lawyers as an example for forty 
committees.  Any department would have at its disposal 
any number of senior counsel, researchers and so on.  So I 
do think that more than just the Portfolio Committee, I 
20 
think there is a fundamental structural problem.   
If we want to improve oversight, there is a real 
structural problem in terms of the funding of Parliament as 
a whole.  The resourcing of members of Parliament and 
committees and the whole budget. How do we fund 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 191 of 235 
 
Parliament?  I really do think Chair that there needs to be 
a debate around the funding model.  It cannot be correct 
that the oversight body as Parliament must be dependent 
on the executive for its budgets and be expected then to 
oversee Parliament.  So I am saying there might be 
weaknesses Chair, individual committees and individual 
members but I do think there is a structural problem that 
needs to be addressed. 
And my understanding is that you engaging us to 
make recommendations and one of the recommendations 
10 
that I am making is that the funding model of Parliament is 
fundamentally flawed when the executive are the ones that 
determine the budget for Parliament who needs to oversee 
it.  That is just one of the points and there are many more 
that I could raise, if given the opportunity, but not taking 
away the fact that we could have done more Chair but I do 
think we have done the best under the circumstances.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well although we are under time 
constraints if they are important points, other important 
points that you would like to make I can give you five 
20 
minutes to make them.  
MR SMITH:   I am very grateful for that, Chair.  Chair you 
know, in preparation for this hearing, I went to do some 
research on what happens in other jurisdictions.  In India, 
for instance a multi-party committee of MP’s decides on the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 192 of 235 
 
financial requirements of Parliament and then go and say 
this is what Parliament requires and the executive are not 
able to dispute that. And that talks to the economic 
independence of Parliament to be able to do its work 
properly.  
The second point that I wanted to make Chairperson 
you know, I have heard many of the witnesses before you 
saying that one of the solutions to this thing is going the 
constituency route.  Now, I did some research myself 
again, you know, in the UK not in the UK, in the USA they 
10 
have the constituency system.  
But if you look at the recent events that are 
happening in the USA even with the constituency model, 
the party bosses still have power.  Look at what is 
happened now recently in the USA, so I am saying Chair 
that is why I am saying we need to have a real talk about 
what is happening around Parliament's ability, both not 
Parliament, the legislature whether it is local, whether it 
provincial, or whether it is national, the role of party 
bosses, the role of constituency, the role of the list 
20 
committee.  
And the last point that I would want to make 
Chairperson is that - and again it was my sums I speak 
under correction but I did some homework and just by way 
of comparison, I am looking for my document.  In the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 193 of 235 
 
English Parliament the ratio between committee what we 
call the committee section, and what in the UK they have 
as support for MP’s.  In England of the - more than then 
R560million that Parliament has R19million goes to what 
we would call member support.  
That is about a 33% of the national budget in South 
Africa, 
of 
our 
R2billion 
budget 
that 
Parliament 
has, 
committee section or research capacity is only R50million I 
think it is, that is less than 1%.  
So I am saying we need to capacitate MP’s to ask 
10 
relevant 
questions 
to 
be 
confident 
to 
deal 
with 
an 
executive that has all the resources to defend themselves.  
So I want to leave it at that point Chair and I do think that 
a debate is required on the funding models of our 
Parliament versa vie what the executive have at their 
disposal.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I certainly do think that in seeking 
to ensure that going forward Parliament's oversight, the 
performance by Parliament of its oversight functions will be 
effective.  A number of things need to be looked at some of 
20 
which 
are 
the 
ones 
you 
have 
mentioned 
funding, 
researchers and so on and so on, enough, you know, 
capacity.  
But I at this stage and I am still going to hear more 
people I might change my mind but at this stage it seems 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 194 of 235 
 
to me that no matter how much money can be poured into 
Parliaments oversight function and the researchers and 
whatever.  If there is not enough protection for members of 
parliament, particularly those who belong to the ruling 
party to be able to be protected against any adverse 
consequences from their party should they stand up for 
what they believe is right for the country.  
If we do not provide a proper protection for them 
then I am not sure that anything we do will really be 
helpful. Unless we reach a point where the ruling party, 
10 
well at this stage it’s the ANC, but one can talk about any 
ruling party in the future, unless we can reach a stage 
where the position of the ruling party would be.  
We believe that our members of Parliament who 
belong to this party, know what is in the best interests of 
the people of South Africa and what is in the best interests 
of the people of South Africa is what we to as the parties 
stand for and if there is anyone among ourselves, who is 
posing a risk through his conduct or her conduct to the 
interests of the Republic our members must take part, for 
20 
example in supporting a vote of no confidence in that 
person if his President or she is President, we are not 
going to protect and we are quite happy to leave the 
judgment to our members.  
But maybe because I am not a politician Mr Smith, 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 195 of 235 
 
maybe I am just being theoretical and I am talking about 
things that will never happen.  Some people who are 
listening, say look at the Judge his talking about things 
that will never happen, you know.  But as long as a 
member of Parliament who belongs to the ruling party is 
not able to say I am going to vote and I am going to 
perform my functions of oversight, as I see them to be in 
the interests of the people of South Africa, to be in the 
interests of the Republic.  
And as far as I am concerned that will coincide with 
10 
what my party wants and there will be no consequences for 
me.  As long as they fear that if they do what they believe 
is right there will be adverse consequences.  I am not sure 
that we are going to be able to have proper oversight but it 
may well be that there are other ways. 
But at this stage it seems to me that if we do not 
have 
proper 
protection 
- 
of 
course 
mechanisms 
are 
important, oversight mechanisms that are available to 
Parliament but oversight mechanisms that are good and 
that can be used quite well do not help if there is no 
20 
willingness or commitment on members of Parliament to do 
what is in the interests of the people of the country.  
You are a politician, so you I give you a chance, 
you might say, ja, you see these Judges they do not know 
what they are talking about.  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 196 of 235 
 
MR SMITH:   No, Judge I think you are correct.  In the 
ideal world that is what really should happen that members 
should be protected to do what they think is right but that 
is in the ideal world.  In the real world of politics Chair, it 
seldom happens, whether it is at national, whether it is at 
province, whether it is at local or even internationally.  I 
mean not so long ago there were three members that voted 
against the Mayor in Johannesburg.  Those members were 
summarily dismissed because they voted not to support the 
Mayor.  
10 
Now, that is the kind of pressure that we all face, 
Mr Selfe raised the issue of Feinstein, that when he voted 
against he was systematically worked out, it works across 
political parties.  The DA does all the time, the ANC does it 
all the time, the Republican Party or National Party or 
Democratic Party…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the EFF does it…[intervene] 
MR SMITH:   It’s just tough Chair, it’s tough. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we have got to - if we say these 
things, this scenario is in part responsible, if at the end of 
20 
the work of the Commission we say this situation is in part 
responsible for why Parliament did not stop the corruption 
or State Capture and so on and so on.  
We need to say, so what must we do to make sure 
that we never again find ourselves in this same situation 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 197 of 235 
 
where these levels of corruption happen again, or State 
Capture happens?  We have got to identify things that we 
need to sacrifice in order to try and make sure that certain 
things do not happen but as you say, it might be very 
difficult.  But we as a nation might have to choose, you 
know do we choose to take the risk that these things could 
happen again and we are not prepared to make certain 
sacrifices to make sure they do not happen during our 
children's time or our grandchildren's time when we might 
not be here.  And they will look back and say, why did not 
10 
take measures to make sure these things do not happen 
again?  But I think it is important that all of us, put our 
heads together and makes make suggestions as to how 
these things should be done but I guess you have you have 
made your points Mr Smith, I thank you for having come to 
assist the Commission.  Thank you very much but you are 
now excused.  
MR SMITH:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I was going to ask for leave just 
20 
ask a couple of questions but if you feel that we have had 
enough then I leave it to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, you can you can ask him.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I just wanted really to follow 
through on one point.  On this issue of persuasion, I think 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 198 of 235 
 
you accept that there is nothing to be found in the Legacy 
Report that indicates an attempt by you or your committee 
to persuade the executive to act differently than it was 
acting on the BOSASA issues.  I think you will be me thus 
far; do you agree? 
MR SMITH:   I do.  
ADV FREUND SC:   But what I heard you suggesting, 
admittedly without any detail was that you thought that you 
might have raised certain things in - what are the budget 
meetings?  
10 
MR SMITH:   SCOPA?  
ADV FREUND SC:   DCR? 
MR SMITH:   I cannot hear you Chair, in? 
ADV FREUND SC:   The budget…[intervene] 
MR SMITH:   The BRR Report.  
ADV FREUND SC:   The BRR Reports? 
MR SMITH:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Okay, the BRR Reports or BRR 
meetings or something.  You might have said we might 
have raised things but what I want some clarity on is 
20 
raised, what?  Now what I want to put to you is that to the 
best of my knowledge, nowhere did you or your committee 
raise with the executive - and when I say your committee I 
mean the majority because I think opposition parties did 
say certain things.  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 199 of 235 
 
That 
nowhere 
did 
your 
committee 
put 
to 
the 
executive 
whether 
in 
the 
form 
of 
the 
Minister, 
the 
Commissioner, or DG or senior personnel.  Nowhere did 
you put that the way you are continuing to do business with 
BOSASA in the light of the serious allegations against it, is 
inappropriate.  Do you agree with me and if you disagree 
with me, can you give me any detail? 
MR SMITH:   In your words sir I do not want to belabour 
this thing, in your words sir, we did.  But I am saying to 
you that even in 2013 and we might not have followed it up 
10 
but in 2013 we did say to the department look guys, what 
you are doing we can tolerate for now but going forward we 
think you should change your mind. 
And maybe we were not harsh enough I am 
accepting that but - and of course, in hindsight, much more 
could have been done I am accepting that also, sir.  But I 
do not think there should be an impression created that 
there was a deliberate downplaying of onus, that is all that 
I am saying.  
It should not be; I do not want us to or I do not want 
20 
the impression to be created that we just did not do 
anything. And as I said earlier on in my own words it was 
not from the lack of trying but if we had a chance to do it 
all over again now, I think we would have done it 
differently.  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 200 of 235 
 
And I am saying so because post 2019 there was a 
Precedent set in Parliament that changes things and we 
cannot change what happened in the past but we certainly 
can improve going forward.  So I do not want to dispute 
what you are saying, sir but I do not think that I would not 
want to defend the committee as a whole because in that 
committee, there is no opposition or whatever.  
It is the Portfolio Committee's decision.  So I will 
defend the Portfolio Committee to the extent that I think 
they have done as best as they could, sir and I take the 
10 
point that much more could have been done.  I do take that 
point and I do think that going forward much more will be 
done by all Portfolio Committees and by Parliament as an 
institution.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Mr Smith.  I have no 
further questions.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Smith you are excused.  
MR SMITH:   Thank you very much Judge, Deputy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I have available Mr - Associate 
20 
professor Richard Calland, if you wish to hear him or at 
least to commence with his evidence.  As you have said 
earlier it may be that we can get through a substantial 
proportion of it in the time available or you may feel that 
we should defer, I am in your hands. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 201 of 235 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think we should – we might not be able 
to use an hour but maybe we could use about 40 minutes. 
What do you think?  
ADV FREUND SC:   I think we can make useful progress in 
that time, Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, up to half past six.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  
ADV FREUND SC:   If you just bear with me, maybe Mr 
Calland if he is here he might come on screen.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Is 
Professor 
Calland 
available?  
Professor Calland are you there? 
MR CALLAND:   Yes Chair, Mr Freund I am here.  Can you 
hear me?  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. Good afternoon to you.  
MR CALLAND:   Good afternoon to you, Deputy Chief 
Justice.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, welcome.  Thank 
you for coming to assist the Commission.  We might not be 
able - actually we will not be able to do all your evidence 
20 
this evening but we would like to do what we can, up to 
half past six and then arrangements will be made subject 
to your availability and the availability of Mr Freund to 
complete it as soon as possible, preferably this week if 
possible.  Do you understand?  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 202 of 235 
 
MR CALLAND:   I do indeed, thank you very much.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
MR CALLAND:   I am in your hands and I am available 
tomorrow morning at your disposal.  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay 
thank 
you 
registrar, 
please 
administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Mr Calland will you be taking the oath of 
the affirmation? 
MR CALLAND:   I am comfortable with the oath.  
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record? 
10 
MR CALLAND:   Richard James Tristan Calland. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR CALLAND:   No, I do not.  
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR CALLAND:   Yes, I do.  
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
that you will give will be the truth, the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth.  If so please raise your right hand and 
20 
say, so help me God. 
PROF CALLAND:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Professor Calland.  
Mr Freund you may continue. 
RICHARD JAMES TRISTAN CALLAND  [duly sworn, states] 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 203 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair Professor 
Calland 
has 
submitted 
a 
report, 
an 
affidavit 
and 
accompanying documents which jointly are to be found in 
Bundle 3 and form what is intended to be Exhibit ZZ9.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  Professor Calland can I take you 
firstly to the confirmatory affidavit which appears at Bundle 3 
pages 3 to 5?  Can you confirm that that is an affidavit to 
which 
you 
have 
deposed 
and 
the 
signature 
is 
your 
signature? 
10 
PROF CALLAND:  Yes I have it in front me Mr Freund and I 
confirm that that is my affidavit that I deposed and that it is 
my signature. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Chair I would then move that 
Exhibit ZZ9 in its entirety be admitted as an Exhibit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Freund.  Has Professor 
Calland confirmed his signature? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes I have confirmed his signature which 
is at page – page 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and this will be Exhibit ZZ? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  ZZ9 
CHAIRPERSON:  9.  Okay.  The affidavit of Professor 
Richard Calland which starts at page 3 will be admitted as 
Exhibit ZZ9. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now Professor Calland 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 204 of 235 
 
is it correct that really the substance of your contribution is 
an annexure – Annexure A to your confirmatory affidavit? 
PROF CALLAND:  Yes it is. 
ADV FREUND SC:  That starts at page 9 of Bundle 3 and is 
a report that you submitted to the commission in July 2020, 
is that correct? 
PROF CALLAND:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  As the title Parliamentary Oversight and 
Executive 
Accountability 
in 
a 
time 
of 
State 
Capture.  
Diagnosis of an Institutional Failure and Ideas for Reform.  
10 
And not only is that the title that is really a synopsis of the 
whole point of your submission, am I correct? 
PROF CALLAND:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  We will of course come back to that 
shortly in some detail.  You have provided certain annexures 
for the moment the only annexure I want to deal at the outset 
is Annexure 4 and Annexure 4 as I understand it is your 
Curriculum Vitae – I am just looking for the page reference.  
Perhaps you could just take the – the Chair very briefly 
through those parts of your CV and experience that in your 
20 
view qualify you to give the evidence that you are intending 
to give and to make the submissions you are intending to 
make. And if I could make clear that they really fall into two 
categories.   
 
There are – there are observations that you make as 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 205 of 235 
 
a close observer of the South African Parliament and then 
there are positions that you propose as it were wearing the 
hat of a lawyer who looks at questions of constitutional law, 
accountability in the proper place of Parliament.   
 
So against that background if you could just take the 
Chair very briefly through your professional background and 
experience so that we can understand from which vantage 
point you make these assertions. 
PROF CALLAND:  Certainly. So the first part of career was 
spent as a member of the Bar in London as a practicing 
10 
Barrister with the general common law practice.  I mention 
that simply because it also means that I was familiar with the 
British political system and indeed although this is not in my 
Curriculum 
Vitae 
maybe 
personal 
to 
some 
of 
the 
conversations we might have about other Parliaments and in 
particular of course the British House of Commons. 
 
That because I was an active member of a British 
Political Party the Labour Party I was very familiar with the 
British Political System and its electoral design. 
 
In 1994 I came to this country supposedly for one 
20 
year sabbatical which has become somewhat extenuated and 
in 1995 I found employment with the Institute of Nocsi [?] in 
South Africa as it was then known IDASA as it later became 
known. 
 
And I was employed to set up what was became 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 206 of 235 
 
known as the Parliamentary Information and Monitoring 
Service.  And the mandate of the new unit was to watch the 
new South African Parliament in its first years to disseminate 
information about it; to advocate for change or reforms as 
the Institution built itself up during those extraordinary early 
years of the 1990’s; to watch the constitution making 
process unfold in the constitutional assembly and so on. 
 
So that was then a very significant part of my own 
professional development and of course during that period of 
time I spent a great deal of time in Parliament.  Barely a 
10 
week would go by often barely a day would go by when I was 
not in Parliament watching the proceedings in particular the 
nascent Parliamentary Committee system which became the 
engine room as many of us describe it during that founding 
period of the 1990’s. 
 
Those I think are the most important parts.  I should 
just briefly add that during that period of the ‘90’s I along 
with two other people founded the Parliamentary Monitoring 
Group and I must say it is gratifying to see and hear the 
PMG refer to so often in these proceedings.  It is an 
20 
organisation which clearly has stood the test of time fills an 
important gap and provides a very useful service to the 
public and to commissions such as this. 
 
In 2007 I think it was I joined the University of Cape 
Town as an Associate Professor of Public Law.  To teach 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 207 of 235 
 
Constitutional Law which I have continued to do for the last 
thirteen years to take the 00:06:48 course in Constitution 
making and litigation under the Bill of Rights and for ten 
years I headed a unit called the Democratic Governments 
and 
Rights 
Unit 
concerns 
in 
particular 
the 
judicial 
appointment and we leave it there. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And if you would just refer very briefly to 
your publication where more in particular publications of any 
relevance to the issues that we are now concerned with. 
PROF CALLAND:  Well I think my first academy publication 
10 
long before I joined the University was back in the ‘90’s I 
think ’97 when I wrote a paper called All Dressed up with 
Nowhere to Go which was about the new Parliamentary 
Committee System in the South African Parliament. 
 
Since 
then 
I 
have 
written 
extensively 
on 
the 
Constitutional design features of South African; I have 
written a number of books which primarily about politics, 
anatomy of South Africa 2006 was the first such book.  The 
Zuma Years in 2013 and a book called Make or Break in 
2016.  And I have been a political columnist for the Mail and 
20 
Guardian newspaper since 2001. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright now if we can turn to the 
substance of your report which starts in Bundle 3 at page 11.  
It seems to me and correct me if I am wrong but really the 
first three pages are simply a summary of where you are 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 208 of 235 
 
going to be going in due course. 
PROF CALLAND:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And perhaps there may not be any need 
at this stage to deal with that and can maybe deal with that 
as a conclusion to the extent necessary.   
 
And the first substantive issue you deal with in your 
Part 2 is headed Parliamentary Oversight and Executive 
Accountability under the Constitution and the Law and you 
deal 
initially 
with 
Parliamentary 
Oversight 
under 
the 
constitution and it seems to me we do not need to belabour 
10 
that you are addressing a constitutional court Judge but 
nonetheless it might be helpful just to – just to cherry pick as 
it were the essence as you see it of the constitutional 
position. 
PROF CALLAND:  Well what I think what is significant and 
this is a very obvious point in comparison with this one such 
as the British one.  But the rules of the game in South Africa 
are very clearly expressed in law. 
 
And most importantly perhaps they are enshrined in 
the constitution itself.  And I think that is very significant 
20 
because it means that the authority on which Parliamentary 
Oversight is faced has very, very sturdy roots.  There can be 
no doubt in my view that Parliament has the power, it has the 
authority, it has all the legal means necessary to pursue an 
oversight over the Executive if it has the will to do so. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 209 of 235 
 
 
Now there are a number of provisions which I think 
are well-known but to the commission I set them out in the 
report that has been set out in many other reports over the 
years.  I think it is almost trite to say what I have said but 
the mandate of Parliament to exercise oversight is very, very 
clear.  It is very well established.   
 
And more over it is not just a mandate I would argue 
that it is a duty it is a responsibility. 
 
For example Section 55 says that the National 
Assembly must provide for mechanisms to ensure that all 
10 
Executive organs of the state are accountable.  So there is a 
– there is a responsibility on Parliament to organise itself in 
such a way that it can hold the Executive to account in an 
effective meaningful fashion. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I think you made the point yourself 
that your early years as a junior Barrister in England gave 
you some insight into the position in Westminster.  Is there a 
relevant point of comparison between the South African 
Constitutional provisions in point and as it were the 
traditions that have emerged slowly and in fits and starts in 
20 
the Westminster system? 
PROF CALLAND:  Well I think the – it is obvious that the 
British Parliament has been around a lot longer in its 
democratic forms why it is often described as the Mother 
Parliament.  And it has strengths and weaknesses. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 210 of 235 
 
 
One of its weaknesses was that the – the rules were 
often this is going back some time I think they have been 
clarified somewhat since but certainly in the ‘90’s when I was 
as you said a junior Barrister and certainly a junior member 
of a political party was that the oversight system in fact at 
Westminster was weak. 
 
For similar reasons to South Africa in that the 
whipping system was strong and it was often hard for back 
bench members of Parliament to stand up and take a stand 
against their brothers and sisters in the Executive.  That is a 
10 
commonality.   
 
The difference is where I think as follows: 
 
Firstly there was even at that point an established 
conventional – set of conventions that in fact was probably 
more important than the rules.  And what I have listened to 
Mr Freund over the last week or so listening to much of the 
evidence with members of Parliament is a sense that despite 
the rules being written down in South Africa, despite the 
authority and mandate as clear as I have suggested to you 
that is that that convention, that practice of oversight has 
20 
simply not embedded itself, has simply not developed and 
that in many ways it has been – it has been crushed at 
various points.  
 
There have been moments where committees and 
individual MP’s have stood up and been counted but I have 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 211 of 235 
 
to say that they have in general been exceptions to the rule. 
 
The other distinction I think that needs to be borne in 
mind and I will not attempt to dwell on the point because I 
think you will probably want to return to it later is the 
difference in the overall political system and in particular the 
electoral systems.  So I do not know Mr Freund if you would 
like me to make that point now or to come back to it? 
ADV FREUND SC:  I think we can come back to that at a 
later stage.  Now having sketched in your report as it were 
briefly relevant constitutional provisions you refer firstly to – 
10 
be known as the Corder Report and thereafter to what it had 
come to be known as the OVAC Model the Oversight and 
Accountability Model.  It is intended in due course to call 
Professor Corder the author of the Corder Report but 
nonetheless if you could refer briefly to its origin and its 
significance in the unfolding story of the development of 
Parliamentary Oversight practice in South Africa. 
PROF CALLAND:  So as I recall it and I was observing 
Parliament closely at the time but there are others such of 
course as Professor Corder an author also others who were 
20 
working in Parliament or the Speaker’s office at the time but 
I think what happened – this is my recollection is that during 
the First Parliament which was in many ways a golden age of 
legislative reform the emphasis inevitably was very much on 
the law making function of Parliament in the sense that there 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 212 of 235 
 
were hundreds of apartheid era pieces of legislation that 
need to be repealed or substantially changed and of course 
that is what happened. 
 
At an average of a hundred pieces of law a year 
Parliament for five years overhauled the legal system of 
South Africa so inevitably the preoccupation of Parliament 
and its committees its new committees was in that law 
making function. 
 
And in the sense too it was probably too early for 
Parliament to really get its teeth into the oversight role 
10 
because there was not that much to oversee.  The new 
government as new, it was unlawliness[?] new programs and 
so as I say the emphasis, the bias was very much on law 
making. 
 
But as those five years came to an end I think there 
was 
a 
very 
sage 
recognition 
from 
the 
leadership 
of 
Parliament and I am thinking here of Speaker Jinwala that 
actually Parliament needed to start thinking about its 
oversight role for various reasons. 
 
And so that led I think to the commissioning of the 
20 
report by Professor Corder and later following of that the 
OVAC Model. 
 
I should say if it is helpful that my view on both 
reports is that they both contain excellent material.  They are 
full or they are ripe 00:15:07 with very useful ideas about the 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 213 of 235 
 
reform of a system where in which the system could be 
tinkered.  I no doubt will come back to perhaps some of 
those ideas. 
 
But my overriding point perhaps Chair and this is the 
– goes to the core of my evidence I think is that whilst you 
can tinker with the system as much as you like there are 
some bigger structural issues in relation to the institution 
and to the political conventions and climate that are more 
important. 
 
So you can change the rules of Parliament, you can 
10 
tinker with the system of accountability from a technical 
sense, you can even improve the budget and I am picking up 
very much on the exchange between Justice Zondo and Mr 
Smith a few minutes ago.  You can throw money at the 
problem, you can resource Parliament better but all of it will 
be a waste of investment, a waste of reform time if you do 
not tackle those big structural issues and I am sure we will 
get to those.  But I am talking really about the leadership, 
about the political climate and about the willingness of 
individual members of Parliament in the particular Chairs of 
20 
Committee to really stand up and take their responsibility 
seriously. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right now just for the record the – the 
Corder Report is in the Reference Bundle at page 49 and 
having placed that on record and I do not propose to take 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 214 of 235 
 
you there to it and it – it proposed a set of reforms with a 
view to improving oversight practice.  It was followed some 
years later by a further exercise the OVAC exercise and you 
say at page 15 in the report – that is using the Commission’s 
pagination system. 
PROF CALLAND:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  That Corder Report had essentially 
gathered dust.  None of its main recommendations were 
taken up but then in 2009 which is some ten years after the 
Corder Report a committee of Parliamentarians essentially 
10 
developed what is called the OVAC model which was then 
adopted in Parliament according to other evidence we have 
heard in the course of 2009.  Would that be a fair synopsis 
of the chronology here? 
PROF CALLAND:  It would.  Can I add one thing to my 
earlier answer and to partly response to what you have just 
invited me to comment on and that is this. 
 
The Corder Report it is number 1, it is primary 
recommendation.  There should be legislation to support 
oversight.  That there should be a piece of law that co-
20 
defined the responsibility that would set with members of 
Parliament 
and 
Parliamentary 
Committees 
to 
do 
that 
oversight role.  
 
Now what I can tell you is that at the time and I am 
talking here about the Second Parliament so 1999 to 2003 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 215 of 235 
 
the Corder Report was sitting there.  It was taken seriously 
but it was not acted upon and one of the reasons I do not 
think it was acted upon was because at the time there was 
not an appetite for more law.  There was a sense amongst 
some leading Parliamentarians in the ruling party that what 
needed 
to 
happen 
was 
the 
building 
of 
practice 
and 
conventions of the sort I have referred to earlier. 
 
In fact I can remember a conversation with an ANC 
member of Parliament Fatima Chohan I hope she will not 
mind me referring to this but she was part of a group of 
10 
members of Parliament that I accompanied on a trip to 
London to examine the way in which oversight took place in 
the British House of Commons. 
 
I remember a particular conversation with her where 
she said and I am – it is not about her it is about I think the 
prevailing the mood was that we do not need to legislate this 
what we need to do is become more practiced at oversight.  
We need to develop conventions.   
 
So that when a member of Parliament stands up and 
asks difficult questions of a Minister from his or her own 
20 
party it is treated as normal practice rather than as an act of 
ill-discipline or lack of loyalty. 
 
And that was the thrust of her thinking and I think I 
am right in saying she was the Chair of the Ad-hoc 
Committee whose job it was to as it were process the Corder 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 216 of 235 
 
Report.   
 
And that may be one of the reasons probably one of 
the less political reasons why the Corder Report did gather 
dust over a period of time. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But the essence as I understand it of the 
OVAC model was to propose that the Portfolio Committee 
system be strengthened better regulated by the existing 
rules of Parliament and that certain specific improvements 
were recommended.  Would that be a fair summary? 
PROF CALLAND:  Yes I think there is a great deal of merit 
10 
in both reports but the OVAC report takes it further – it is a 
very systematic look at the – the approach that Parliament 
needed.   A sort of belt and braces, nuts and bolts in some of 
the engine approach to what oversight entails. 
 
It deals with a range of issues including training, 
capacity building.  It creates what they call as an oversight 
cycle.  It is a very technical report and I think there are some 
people perhaps including myself who would recognise the 
merits and the value of what it is suggesting but with – and I 
am sorry if I am repeating myself would say yes that is all 
20 
very well but it will not succeed unless the political 
leadership creates a climate and a culture in which that kind 
of system can prosper. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I am going to come back to that 
point which I know is very central to your views.  But just 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 217 of 235 
 
while we are talking a little bit more technocratically if I can 
you to the foot of page 15 of your report and we are in 
Bundle 3 at page 15.  You will see there that you refer to the 
proposal in the OVAC model about the need to create an 
oversight and advisory section whose responsibility would 
include tracking and monitoring mechanisms.  I think you 
may have heard some debate about that in the course of the 
hearings thus far.  But that was an idea emphasised in the 
OVAC model.   
 
You will see at the top of page 16 the proposal that 
10 
rules should be developed to assist Parliament further in 
sanctioning Cabinet Ministers for non-compliance after all 
existing avenues and protocols have been exhausted.  
 
Another idea that we have discussed to some extent 
already in the course of these proceedings.  And another 
point that I would highlight or the last bullet point near the 
top of page 16 the recommendation to integrate Parliament 
public participation function within its overall oversight 
mechanism.   
 
And I mention that because the evidence of Mr 
20 
Johnston comes to mind.  I do not know if you saw Mr 
Johnston’s evidence who is from OUTA but one of his points 
of concern as a representative of a body that has taken an 
active interest in the state capture allegations, corruption 
allegations on the role of Parliament is the need to facilitate 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 218 of 235 
 
the participation of – of the public in the oversight process. 
  
 And that was – that was an idea that had the support 
of the authors of the – of the OVAC model as I understand it, 
am I correct? 
PROF CALLAND:  That is correct yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And of course the OVAC report was 
adopted by Parliament but I think you make the point that 
only implemented in part. 
PROF CALLAND:  That is right and I think Mr Frolick the 
other day conceded in answering some of your questions 
10 
that that was the case that Parliament had not made a great 
deal of progress in really executing the main ideas in the 
OVAC model. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you refer also at page 16 in your 
report to the report of the Independent Panel Assessment of 
Parliament in 2009.  I do not think there has been any 
mention thus far as that in these proceedings.  If you could 
just crisply take us to what that was about and why it has 
any relevance if it has any relevance? 
PROF CALLAND:  Well it was appointed if I – if memory 
20 
serves in a sort of period of time where I think the political 
terrain was more fluid and so there was a sense that 
Parliament and some people called it a sort of proud sprain.  
There was a sense that Parliament could – could have some 
kind of renaissance and that part of that renaissance would 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 219 of 235 
 
need to be giving much more active attention to this 
oversight role.  It needed to get out and about.  It needed to 
see for itself what was happening in the country and that is 
where I think the point that you say Mr Johnston made about 
the relationship of public participation is a good one. 
Because often it is the public and not with respect members 
of Parliament who know what is going on on the ground, in 
hospitals, in schools and so on. 
 
And so the need for members of Parliament to 
actively connect with communities find out what is happening 
10 
in terms of policy execution and implementation is really 
perhaps where the – where the tyre hit the road in terms of 
oversight rather than simply sitting in Cape Town asking 
difficult questions of Ministers and DG’s although that is also 
a very important part of the function. 
 
It seems to me that if you are a member of 
Parliament if you have actually garnered the information 
accumulated real knowledge of what is happening with policy 
execution you are going to be in a much better position to 
put questions of meaning and value and substance to a 
20 
Minister or a DG appearing before a committee. 
 
So I think the independent panel assessment as I say 
came about through in a period between around 2006/7 and 
2009/10 when there was a great deal of political change 
going on within the ruling party in particular and therefore in 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 220 of 235 
 
Parliament. 
 
And so there was some more I think political space 
for some new ideas to gain root.   It is a good report, it is 
another good report with good ideas but I do not believe it 
has been properly taken up. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now the very first point that you – bullet 
point out of that report is the idea that Parliament should 
consider – consider the impact of the party list electoral 
system.  The panel being of the view that the current 
electoral system should be replaced by a mixed system. 
10 
 
We can come back to that later but that is – that is 
one of the ideas that was – that was being taken seriously at 
that time, is that correct? 
PROF CALLAND:  Well I think it is a question of electoral 
reform has raised its head at various points since 1994 or on 
every time it does raise its head there is a brief debate and 
then it is kind of pushed to the back burner. 
 
I do not think there has ever been sufficient political 
support for it particularly within the ANC to really get 
momentum going behind it and of course there is the 
20 
Wentzel Slabbert report which we will probably refer to later. 
 
But it does seem to me that the electoral system the 
way in which members of Parliament are elected and the – 
the authority and political power that they have in a 
relationship with not just the executive but with their own 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 221 of 235 
 
party is absolutely critical to us understanding the system 
and the limitations that are placed politically on Parliament 
and MP’s from doing their work. 
ADV FREUND SC:  As you say we will come back to that.  I 
note that the second bullet point you make the point that 
they too recommended the putting in place of an extensive 
monitoring schedule to ensure that the recommendations of 
the oversight model found expression in Parliamentary 
processes. 
 
And here we are in a more than a decade later and 
10 
we have still got nowhere with that or so it could be argued. 
PROF CALLAND:  Well clearly their idea of a proper tracking 
and 
monitoring 
system 
for 
recommendations 
made 
by 
Parliament and if we – if we accept and I do not accept but 
let us for a moment we accept what I heard Mr Smith say a 
few minutes ago that Parliament’s power is merely advisory.  
I think it is more than that but let us say it is merely advisory 
then the very least Parliament needs to do is keep track of 
its advice, monitor the extent to which that advise is taken or 
not and then follow up.  And if it cannot do that it seems to 
20 
me that it is – its oversight if I may pick up a word used by 
the DCJ is really superficial.  It is preying lip service to 
oversight. 
 
It 
is 
asking 
questions, 
it 
is 
making 
recommendations but if you do not follow up in the face of a 
recalcitrant or inefficient or incompetent or perhaps corrupt 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 222 of 235 
 
Executive then you are really not doing your job. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I want to move on.  You deal in 
point 2.6 with Parliamentary Committees as the engine room 
of Parliament talk to that point very briefly because it now 
seems the truism the – it had to evolve. 
PROF CALLAND:  Well in – I was not here but what I learnt 
was that in the pre-’94 Parliament there was no system of 
committees to speak of.  And that is primarily because of 
course the old Parliament was a rubber stamp.   
 
So when the new Parliament was created post-’94 
10 
and particularly with the new constitution in place it was 
clear that Parliament was going to be a serious place of 
work.   
 
Now if you add to that the political factor which was 
as I set out in report the fact that the ANC for various 
reasons decided most of its senior leadership, most of its 
talent, most of its experienced people into Parliament at that 
time you had this abundance of experience of talent and of 
political clout all inside the ANC caucus. 
 
Now Mandela’s Administration, his Cabinet could not 
20 
accommodate all of those people so what you have on the 
back benches of the ANC caucus in that First Parliament was 
this extraordinary array of really significant political leaders 
who many of whom were appointed to be Chairs of the new 
committees. 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 223 of 235 
 
 
And of course being very dynamic ambitious and far 
sighted people that they were what they did was to make 
their committees affective and gave them real meat and real 
legs.  And that is why some of the most I think effective work 
certainly even on the oversight side but certainly on the 
legislative side was done by committees in the early ‘90’s 
and 
it 
created 
a 
really 
I 
think 
important 
precedent 
established the practice that the committee system was 
meaningful, it was here to stay and it was, to use the cliché, 
it has become the engine room of Parliament.  It is where 
10 
most matters of Parliament really takes place.  What 
happens at the National Assembly, with no disrespect, is 
often for sure it that of the Parliament and politics.  The 
real work when it is done, it is done in the committees. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I want to take you to a point you 
made at page 18 in the second last paragraph.  You say 
that – and I am just picking up in the middle of the 
sentence, about ten lines from the bottom. 
“The political leadership needs to encourage a 
culture of independent mindedness not in an 
20 
oppositional paradigm but in the spirit of 
ensure the Executive remains loyal to the 
mandate given to by the electorate. 
This requires real leadership and a profound 
commitment to the Constitution and its system 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 224 of 235 
 
and accountability which in turn begs the 
question. 
 
Do 
turkeys 
have 
a 
vote 
for 
Christmas? 
My answer is yes.  Why?  Because at various 
times in the past 25-years I have heard senior 
ANC politicians speaking in such terms. 
Their 
identity 
is 
not 
material. 
 
What 
is 
important is that there had been the insight, 
essential said perspective within parts of the 
ruling party that it is in fact in the ANC’s 
10 
political 
interest 
to 
Parliament 
to 
do 
it 
constitutional job and to hold the Executive to 
account.” 
 
Now are you prepared to elaborate any further or 
was the point fully made there? 
PROF CALLAND:   Well, I think it is because I can make it 
even simpler than what I said in my report; it is that real 
oversight can lead to political embarrassment for the ruling 
party. 
 
Because if you are asking difficult question and if 
20 
you accept, as I certainly do, that governing is difficult 
particularly in a country such as South Africa with a myriad 
of complexities and problems with a mountain to overcome 
in 
terms 
of 
rebuilding 
the 
economy, 
overturning 
the 
injustices of the old order, the apartheid era.  Governing is 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 225 of 235 
 
very, very difficult.   
 
You are going to make a lot of mistakes.  And I 
have got a huge amount of sympathy for those who have 
the garden of governing. 
 
If you exercise oversight in that context in a way 
that is not superficial but is probative then inevitable you 
are going to reveal all of those mistakes. 
 
You are going to expose the vulnerabilities in the 
Executive.  And that requires courage then from the 
Executive.  It requires courage from the ruling party to say 
10 
we still need to do that.  A, because the Constitution tells 
us but also because we have the wisdom to say it is in our 
interest because it will make us govern better. 
 
And here I do not – I revert to say is that that has 
been the prevailing attitude.  So the people I am referring 
to in the paragraph that you have read from my report, 
unfortunately have been in the minority.   
 
There have been exceptions to the rules.  There 
have been people I think with real perspective, with a 
deeper understanding of the role of oversight but I fear 
20 
that they have been lost voices in the wind. 
 
And that as the political climate changed over the 
years and as 2006 and 4 t h, 5 t h, 6 t h Parliaments kicked in, 
those voices have been largely extinguished. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 226 of 235 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   I want to move ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, just one second.  You know 
Professor Calland, you may have heard what may be 
described as a little bit of some idealism on – in regard to 
some of the points that I was raising with Mr Smith. 
 
But why is it idealistic to think – and I am not 
saying you are saying that – to think that a ruling party, I 
am talking in general, and this ruling party right now that 
we have in South Africa could take the view that says.   
 
You, Mr President, you are the President of the 
10 
country and the President of our party.  Your ministers are 
part of this party.   
 
We want to tell of you in the Executive and we 
want to tell the DG’s and everybody, the CEO’s in SOE’s 
and the boards that we want you to be at the forefront of 
fighting corruption in your departments from now on or 
from a certain date.   
 
And if you do not – if you allow corruption in your 
department as a Minister, as a DG we are instructing 
members of the ANC who are in Parliament to say you must 
20 
expose DG’s and Ministers who fail to act in accordance 
with what we, the ruling party, have said would happen.  
Deal with corruption effectively.   
 
So maybe somebody who is listening says:  Well, 
that is not going to happen.  But I do not know.  What 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 227 of 235 
 
would 
you 
say 
Professor 
Calland 
to 
that? 
 
Why 
...[intervenes]  
PROF CALLAND:   Thank you Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it a risk that exposing corruption 
might pose to the members of the ruling party itself and to 
the ruling party that would deter it from taking that stance? 
MR CALLAND:   So think there many ways in which one 
could answer that question.  Let me make just one or two 
brief points. 
 
Firstly, I do not think it is either idealistic or naïve 
10 
to adopt that position.  I think that is the position that the 
Constitution takes.   
 
I also think it is a – it reflects a profound 
democratic finding which is the representatives of the 
people should be there to serve the people and not to 
serve the interest of a particular political party. 
 
And indeed, the Constitutional Court has said as 
much in more than one judgment but all of that comes up 
against the hard rock of kind of political reality, which is 
that political animals and political parties, whether it is in 
20 
India or in South Africa, tend to be – have exaggerated 
sense of their own vulnerability. 
 
And tend to, in my experience, to exaggerate a 
political harm that could afford one where they do open up 
to acknowledging and even revealing their own mistakes 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 228 of 235 
 
and 
weaknesses. 
 
Now 
that 
is 
the 
most 
generous 
interpretation.   
 
When it comes hardcore corruption then of course 
one is up against a hard core, let us call it economy but is 
connected to that corruption but the corrupt people inside 
the system will do everything that they can, will exploit the 
system to ensure that the people who are charged with the 
responsibility are asking the difficult questions of making 
the inquiries and leading the charge to expose them, will 
not be able to do so but they will be hung-strung.   
10 
 
And that is why it is necessary to look, in my view, 
at the system as a whole to see why that is and to see 
what reforms could be adopted but would – the word you 
used in your exchanges earlier with evidence and again 
with Mr Smith just now, is to protect.  
 
The word that I use in my report is insulate.  How 
does 
one 
protect 
or 
insulate 
individual 
members 
of 
Parliament and committees from doing their job so that 
they do not succumb to the political pressure points that I 
have referred to? 
20 
 
The last point which is more particular I think to 
South Africa is first of all the political culture of the ruling 
party.  Now it may be, as you have pointed out, that other 
political parties in office were either behave in a similar 
fashion or would behave in a way that had the same impact 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 229 of 235 
 
or the same outcome. 
 
But certainly the hierarchical nature of the ANC, I 
think, and its tendency towards royalty and discipline in 
terms of how they put it, means that it is even harder, I 
think, for members of Parliament from the back benches to 
raise issues.   
 
Mr Selfe, rather elliptically, made reference to the 
fact that the caucus which meets every Thursday – he 
mentions this, meets at the Old Assembly Chamber Room 
of Parliament.  Clearly the last six Parliaments that caucus 
10 
have been between 200 and 300 people. 
 
Very, very difficult for a back bench MP to raise 
their hand – and I am talking in practical terms here Chair 
– raise opposition, challenge a leadership that is so much 
more senior and more powerful to it within that particular 
culture. 
 
That is why Mr Smith said:  Well, the way one 
would do it is to have a chief whip.  The chief whip would 
be the channel but to channel any concerns to the 
leadership. 
20 
 
And then lastly to add onto this, the fact that the 
MP’s of Parliament is extremely exposing and vulnerable 
because they do not own the seats in Parliament, the party 
does. 
 
I am sure that Mr Freund will take me to this in due 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 230 of 235 
 
course but Section 47(3) of the Constitution is a really, I 
think, chilling provision in this context. 
 
Because what it does is remind – if reminding is 
necessary – everybody concerned of where the power 
really sits in that relationship between the individual 
members of Parliament and the leadership and senior 
leadership and hierarchy of the particular party. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, Mr Calland you have a capacity 
to foresee where I am going because in fact that is the 
very issue that you start to deal with at page 19 which is 
10 
where we were before you were asked the last question. 
 
Maybe let me just read into the record for those 
who do not know it.  Section 47(3)(c). 
CHAIRPERSON:   As you do so Mr Freund.  I see that we 
have gone half-past six but let us take the next five 
minutes to ask one or two further questions. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So that provision provides: 
“A person loses membership of the National 
Assembly if that person: 
c)  
ceases to be a member of the party 
20 
that nominate that person as a member of the 
assembly.” 
 
And 
then 
there 
is 
a 
qualification 
which 
is 
immaterial.  So the point you were making is that you do 
not own your seat.  And you maybe – if you lose your 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 231 of 235 
 
membership of the party, you lose your member of 
Parliament. 
 
And the question is, what could lead you to lose 
your membership of the party?  And that I suppose is an 
issue that we can take further when we resume but perhaps 
if you could just comment, just in brief, on the problem 
there? 
PROF CALLAND:   So I suspect that a very few of 
members of society know that this provision exists.  I have 
to say that although I am very troubled by that provision 
10 
and had been for many years and although I recommend at 
the end of my report that it should be repealed, albeit in 
the context of electorate form.   
 
I should add that the provision is not illogical.  It is 
not incoherent.  It is align with, I am sure as a result of the 
fact, but of the particular choice that was made in terms of 
South Africa’s electorate system.   
 
So South Africa falls at one of end of a long 
spectrum. 
 
It 
is 
a 
simplest 
form 
of 
proportional 
representation through a list system in which the public 
20 
has no say or influence over the list system.  The party 
determines who is on the list and it determines the ranking 
on the list.   
 
And it is used in very particular political ways and 
it is used to bring people into Parliament and it is used to 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 232 of 235 
 
exclude people from Parliament.   
 
And we heard about the fate that befell Ms Rantho 
after she, late in the day perhaps, did her job as the Chair 
of the Public Enterprises Committee from 2017 onwards.  
She was not returned on the ANC list in the 2019 Election.   
 
But the point is that because of that electorate 
system, if the ANC wins 60% it gets 60% of the seats and 
60% of the list of 400 names that gets put forward will get 
elected into Parliament and the party owns those seats. 
 
And if a member of Parliament starts to conduct 
10 
him or herself in a way that is inconvenient of the 
leadership of the party, then he or she will be reminded.   
 
And I know of many, many occasions, people – 
sources have told me that that is often used to remind 
members of Parliament of their responsibilities to be loyal 
to the party. 
 
And so it is a sort of dangling thing.  It hangs over 
the head of all members of the party.  And I think it was 
Mr Selfe from the opposition party who admitted that this 
of course is a very valuable tool for the party managers.  It 
20 
gives them all the power in the world.  It means that they 
can control the membership of the caucus so easy.   
 
If I contrast that with the British system and I want 
to be very careful what I say here.  The constituency 
representation system and I think Mr Smith suggested in 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 233 of 235 
 
the United States was a lot as South Africa, it is at all – it 
has a very different system of government and elections 
and Parliament. 
 
But the British system of parliamentary democracy 
are based on purely constituency of representation.  No 
proportional representation.  It is not a kind of to all and I 
will 
be 
very 
cautious 
in 
approaching 
evidence 
from 
anybody who say that reform of the electorate system will 
solve all of this.   
 
It will not but it may be an important measure.  It 
10 
may be a necessary extent in fact if one is serious about 
how to solve this difficult problem. 
 
But what constituency system does do and I speak 
from direct experience as an active of the British Labour 
Party in the late 80’s and early 90’s.  It gives the member 
of Parliament elected in that constituency some kind of 
shield 
against 
the 
party 
bosses 
and 
the 
whips 
in 
Parliament.   
 
He or she, and in my case it was a she, would say 
to me I can say to the Chief Whip in the House of 
20 
Commerce, of course I want to be a loyal and obedient 
member of Parliament, and the Labour Party but back down 
in ...[indistinct] in South London.   
 
The constituency Labour Party is very unhappy 
about this issue, wants me to vote in a particular way, 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 234 of 235 
 
wants me to ask difficult questions of the Prime Minister, et 
cetera, et cetera.   
 
So it provides some level of the kind of insulation 
or protection that I think should be the driving principle to 
govern any reform. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you Professor and Chair.  I 
imagine that might be the convenient moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I think Professor Calland said from 
his side he will be available tomorrow morning if we 
thought that that is when he should continue.  Did you say 
10 
that Professor Calland? 
PROF CALLAND:   Yes, I am at your disposal from 08:30 
onwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. Mr Freund, how is your 
situation tomorrow morning? 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, I can manage that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   For a limited period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am thinking that we could start maybe 
at half-past nine and we will eat into the time of the Eskom 
20 
work stream who would have started at ten but we could 
see whether we – an hour or on an hour and 15-minutes 
would not be enough for us to finish.   
 
And then I can – we can – I can sit a little longer 
later in the afternoon to pay that back to the Eskom work 
08 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 339 
 
Page 235 of 235 
 
stream, to pay whatever time we took from them. 
 
So if that is fine with both of you, I will suggest 
that we continue at 09:30 tomorrow morning and we could 
...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I cannot hear you clearly but it 
is certainly find with me, 09:30 for an hour or an hour and 
a half at the most, would certainly be fine with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Professor Calland, that 
would be fine from half-past nine tomorrow morning?  
Maybe an hour, maybe an hour and 15 minutes or 
10 
thereabout that we could finish? 
PROF CALLAND:   Certainly would be DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
PROF CALLAND:   With pleasure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, thank you very much.  We are 
going to adjourn then for the day and then we will continue 
with 
Professor 
Calland’s 
evidence 
at 
half-past 
nine 
tomorrow morning and thereafter, I will hear evidence 
relating to Eskom.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURN TO 9 FEBRUARY 2021 
20 
