 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
06 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 277 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 288 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
06 OCTOBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 3 of 288 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 06 OCTOBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Good morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning. 
MR LINNELL:  Chair I cannot hear.   
UNKNOWN PERSON:  I can hear you.  
MR LINNELL:   They do not seem to hear me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is that now? 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  Are you sure about that because 
10 
they also do not forget things are on mute at the moment. 
MR LINNELL:  Oh okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Linnell was saying he could not hear 
us. 
MR LINNELL:  I can hear you now Counsel. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  He can hear now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes those things should be checked 
before I come in.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Indeed so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Are we ready? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay let us get going.  Mr Linnell the 
oath you took yesterday continues to apply today.  You 
understand that? 
MR LINNELL:  I understand that Mr Chairman. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 4 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know that when we lost the signal I had 
asked you a certain question and I asked you not to forget 
the question and your answer and you promised not to 
forget the question and the answer.  Do you still remember 
the question and the answer? 
MR LINNELL:  I do indeed Mr Chairman.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  I cannot remember what 
the question was.  Obviously, I do not know what the 
10 
answer was going to be. 
MR LINNELL:  I will follow on from that as you asked me to 
do.  Mr Chairman yesterday you asked a specific question; 
could I have made a statement – a general statement that 
state owned enterprises and other state entities that the 
internal capacity or capability to interrupt and prevent 
corruption.  So you queried that on the basis that these 
entities all have capable Human Resource and Legal 
Departments within them and then therefore should not 
necessarily need external … 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It seems we lost the sound. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we have lost him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Okay he is still talking but we 
cannot hear him.  We cannot hear you Mr Nick.  Maybe you 
can hear us but we… 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 5 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do I need to adjourn? 
MR LINNELL:  No, no I… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is he coming back? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman so you queried whether why 
was it not that internal companies with HR Departments 
and Legal Departments had the capacity to do this.  And … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes now… 
10 
MR LINNELL:  You wanted my answer… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I am sorry Mr Linnell you have 
helped me remember what my question was but I think you 
may have understood it in different way than I intended it.  
I think you had said that you had assisted SAA to deal with 
a disciplinary matter or disciplinary hearing relating to 
somebody at SAA.  And I had questioned why Ms Dudu 
Myeni would bring you into deal with that because an entity 
such as SAA would have a Legal Department and would 
have a Human Resources Department that could deal with 
20 
disciplinary matters.  I think that was – that was my – my 
question.  And you were going to give your answer because 
I think you said that SAA did not have – either did not have 
a Legal Department or did not have people who could do 
what you were doing. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 6 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman that – as I understood your 
question then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  My answer to that is – is that if it were true 
that these state owned enterprises including South African 
Airways and Eskom and others did have the capacity to do 
as you will expect then you would not be here for the last 
200 
hundred 
days 
listening 
daily 
to 
state 
owned 
enterprises 
that 
had 
failed 
to 
detect 
and 
prevent 
corruption.  
10 
Every single one had an internal HR and Legal 
Department and every single day brought before you are 
instances of how that failed.  And South African Airways is 
no exception.   
In the case of South African Airways where I 
performed a coordinating role it provided an external 
influence to the – the investigation and it allowed a light to 
be 
shined 
on 
that 
investigation 
which 
the 
internal 
functionaries were dispossessed of that power simply 
because 
of 
the 
environment 
in 
which 
state 
owned 
20 
enterprises and other state entities are obliged to operate 
even to this day.   
So my comments Sir was to make it clear that this – 
the role of an external coordinator lived – a liberty could 
detect what was wrong; to highlight it and expose it was a 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 7 of 288 
 
positive influence in value to these entities and when I 
come before you with my affidavit which the commission 
has in respect of SAA I would hope to explain my role 
there.   
Obviously today as we go through my role as a 
coordinator at Eskom, I hope to be able to provide you with 
that explanation of what my conduct was at SAA.  In fact, 
and the fact that other entities might have had an agenda 
why they might of interposed my role I would ask to have 
that divorced from what I did.  Because what I did is what I 
10 
did.   
Their motive they must come before you and explain 
directly.   But I do not conduct their motive; I conducted my 
role which I hope to put to you today Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I understand what you are saying 
Mr Linnell but I think your answer is wider than my 
question or maybe address is a slightly different issue.  
You talk about corruption in general.  I was talking about to 
the extent that you were brought in to deal with disciplinary 
matters to the extent that you were brought in to deal with 
20 
disciplinary matters.   
So my question was; my understanding would be 
that the – these SOE’s would have people who can run 
disciplinary hearings and I do know that sometimes they 
would bring in lawyers from outside.  But it seems to me 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 8 of 288 
 
and you must tell if I am – tell me if I am misunderstand 
what you said.  It seems to me that in relation to 
disciplinary matters at least the one at SAA if I understood 
you correctly.  SAA would have a situation where they bring 
you in in regard to a disciplinary matter and you – they 
might still need to bring lawyers as well.   
So if I am right that they would have internal people 
who can deal with disciplinary matters it would seem 
therefore that they leave people within the department – 
within the entity who can deal with disciplinary matters.  
10 
And 
disciplinary 
matters 
do 
not 
really 
need 
lawyers 
because disciplinary matters are not supposed to be run 
like trials in courts you know.   
They would have internal people and then they 
bring you in then lawyers are brought in.  It just seems to 
me that you – in that situation you are bound to end up 
with the entity paying a lot of money for outside people on 
a matter that could be dealt with internally.   
So that is what I am talking about and I am 
confining it to a disciplinary hearing purposefully because 
20 
it is easier to deal with that than to talk about general.  We 
can talk about general later on but just confining oneself to 
a situation where you were brought in to deal with a 
disciplinary matter in – for example SAA.  That is my 
concern.  You understand? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 9 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman if I could – I do Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR LINNELL:  Thank you.  Mr Chairman disciplinary 
procedure 
is 
an 
end 
result 
of 
an 
allegation, 
an 
investigation which if it has merit leads to a disciplinary 
hearing. 
 
The 
first 
step 
is 
an 
allegation 
and 
an 
investigation.   
In most SOE’s many of the functionaries who are 
associated with wrongdoing are the people at the top of the 
organisation.  Not exclusively but in many cases they are.  
10 
It is impossible for people who are subordinate to those 
leaders in that environment to have their independent 
capability to enquire and investigate their bosses.  It does 
not happen.  In real life Sir it cannot happen.   
It is unfair on those people to challenge their 
bosses and get to a point where they suggest their bosses 
be subject to a disciplinary hearing.  I did not get involved 
in the many disciplinary hearings which HR and Legal do 
every day in those organisations.   
Typically though when people who are at the heads 
20 
of the organisation and it is unfair and unreasonable for 
someone internal to that to try and discipline or expose his 
boss.  And I think Sir even listening to many of the – 
people 
who 
have 
deposed 
before 
you 
during 
this 
commission have expressed that limited ability and I think 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 10 of 288 
 
Sir I have heard you express consternation that that was 
not possible and it ought to happen. So at SAA Sir the 
investigations and coordination I was involved with and 
always with professional people alongside me was simply 
to make sure that the people at the top to whom 
allegations have been made were thoroughly investigated, 
exposed and dealt with and Sir many times that exposure 
led to them being acquitted.   
So there is a transparent investigation that had led 
to them being exonerated.  And it is also right and it was 
10 
also fair and just.  So it is not just people who are found 
behaved incorrectly it is as important to be found to be 
independently exonerated.  And that was my role Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  And I think today hopefully that would be 
depicted in Eskom as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No you see to the extent that you 
talk about top people like the CEO, the CFO I think one 
would understand the idea of bringing somebody from 
outside you know.  But there may be a lot of managers who 
20 
can be dealt with internally.   
So I think that it would be a question of looking at a 
particular entity and looking at the level of the position that 
a particular employee or manager holds.  If there are 
people within the entity who can handle that disciplinary 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 11 of 288 
 
matter in relation to that person because there are people 
above him or her who can deal with the matter then that 
should be dealt with that way.  But once I accept that once 
you reach a certain level the CEO, the CFO you might need 
somebody from outside.   
But even there my – my query would be if you are 
going to need attorneys why do you need a coordinator you 
know?  I know for example with regard to SAA that there 
was a matter which has been testified about before this 
commission where a law firm was brought in and the law 
10 
firm provided what is called an initiator like a prosecutor if 
you like in the disciplinary inquiry.  Then they brought in an 
advocate to chair the disciplinary inquiry you know.   
So there are those things – so I would imagine that 
to the extent that an entity does that that should be 
enough.  Do you want to say something about that?  
Obviously I am not speaking about a specific case I am 
speaking in general.  You want to say something about 
that? 
MR LINNELL:  I think you said two things Mr Chairman.  
20 
One is that that the lower levels the internal capacity 
should be enough to deal with those because those would 
be typically free of influence because they are normal.  
And I – I will agree with you totally.   
And you then said that the people at the higher 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 12 of 288 
 
levels might warrant an external person in the form of an 
advocate or an attorney to come and provide some sort of 
independence.  And I agree with that.   
But in a big matter and possibly Sir the better way 
of me explaining the role of a coordinator provides value 
would be heard in the evidence which will be brought 
before you today on what my role was or intended to be at 
Eskom.  Because the proper coordinator understands that 
in complicated cases even an investigator acquires a 
perception and a direction where they follow.   
10 
And it is not untoward it is not unreasonable to 
have someone else who points out and says does this 
necessarily lead in this way or should we also expose that?  
And I think in the Eskom papers that will be demonstrated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR LINNELL:  In a factual way.  But Sir in the SAA ones 
when I – if you read my statements for a couple of years 
not you personally your commission has in each of the 
instances that I have been involved there would have been 
largely similar to what you will hear today.  But when I 
20 
come before you in those instances I could then be able to 
deal with those facts as facts in those instances. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay no that – that is fine.  Thank 
you.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Linnell we know 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 13 of 288 
 
that in respect of Eskom there were no disciplinary 
proceedings instituted against the executives that got 
suspended. 
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman there was to the point that I 
left Eskom the week of the 19 t h.  The executives had been 
suspended on precautionary suspension as we discussed 
yesterday with a view to ensuring that the investigation 
was free of their influence.  Subsequent to my removal 
those executives or some of them were terminated for want 
of a better reason.  But to my knowledge no disciplinary 
10 
hearings or allegations were ever made against those 
people. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  But you would have known that.  
That was clear from the very beginning that no wrongdoing 
was 
being 
alleged 
against 
them 
or 
any 
issue 
of 
misconduct.  So that was apparent from the very beginning.   
MR LINNELL:  If I could it put Mr Chairman I could answer 
it this way.  Certainly, there were allegations about a host 
of things within Eskom which we now know to be true.  But 
at that time they were allegations.   
20 
Some of those pointed to departments which before 
it was meant to be the three executives headed those 
departments and in some cases subsequent relevant have 
indicated those people were involved.  So at that time Sir I 
was aware and I think in the recordings of the board 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 14 of 288 
 
meetings I did indicate that the investigation could well 
identify wrongdoing on the part of these people but at that 
time there should be no preposition that anything was 
alleged or 
considered against them.  It was purely 
precautionary. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    But – yes but what I am saying to you 
Mr Linnell is what the board decided.  The board decided 
we will not make any allegations of wrongdoing against 
them. 
 
These 
people 
are 
not 
being 
suspended 
for 
misconduct.  Correct? 
10 
MR LINNELL:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  And I agree with that Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I agree with that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Thank you.  So yesterday we went 
through – and you know just before I move on that is 
evident also from your statement.  I want to read that 
statement we were dealing with – the supplementary 
statement on page 26.3 top left hand corner 26.3.   
20 
MR LINNELL:  Is it the supplementary Mr Chairman? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is the supplementary yes.  The 
supplementary affidavit.  It starts on page 26.1.   
CHAIRPERSON:  If you could read it Counsel I will 
recollect it. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 15 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You will recollect.  That is para – it is 
on page 26.3 paragraph 15.4.  It says -  
“While there was – there was unverified 
information that the three might have been 
– might have had previously been received 
– perceived to impeded an investigation of 
their areas of responsibility.  It was made 
clear 
that 
no 
direct 
aspersions 
or 
allegations were intended or contemplated 
at that stage.  That was the task of the 
10 
investigation.  The executives were as I 
understand 
individually 
counselled 
regarding that point and this was publicly 
stated to staff and – and through the media.  
The 
suspensions 
were 
precautionary 
to 
allow the investigation to proceed quickly 
and free from any perceived influence while 
acknowledging that if wrongdoing was found 
then some accountability rests with top 
management. So my emphasis is on it was 
20 
made clear that no direct aspersions or 
allegations were intended or contemplated 
against the executives.” 
MR LINNELL:  I stand by that statement correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 16 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Linnell we have gone through the 
version that is put by Ms Dudu Myeni in her affidavit 
yesterday.  And the Chairperson also asked you the 
question about – well expressing this particular point that 
it may well be good to have concerns about what is 
happening in a SOE.  It is well and good but the question 
is and it is another matter what – how do you express 
those concerns and how do you go about dealing with 
them?  You recall that? 
10 
MR LINNELL:  I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Now let us see what is happening 
here because as we were going through the statement of 
Ms Myeni yesterday you could see that the type of 
meetings that were held with you and where they were 
held, at times they were held have become an issue before 
this commission.  You appreciate that? 
MR LINNELL:  I appreciate that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  You see that the – coming out of 
those 
meetings 
we 
have 
had 
completely 
conflicting 
20 
versions about what transpired in those meetings.  Do you 
hear me? 
MR LINNELL:  I can hear you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes but… 
MR LINNELL:  Do you want me to comment? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 17 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is a yes or a no?  We have gone 
through the evidence yesterday. 
MR LINNELL:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And we see one version from Ms Myeni, 
a different version from yourself.  You can speak out. 
MR LINNELL:  Okay.  You are correct Mr Chairman that 
there were different versions.  I think the version of Mr 
Tsotsi and my version is by and large similar. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  yes. 
MR LINNELL:  The version of Ms Myeni is entirely – that 
10 
the documentation which immediately followed that meeting 
confirms the call it my version and Tsotsi’s version by and 
large. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  The documents documented that is the 
evening of the 8 t h in a sense were a version of the minute 
because it agreed a process. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And let us take the point further 
Mr Linnell because we dealing here specifically with how 
do you address the concerns?  What steps are proper to 
20 
address those concerns?  Look at the meetings that you 
have.  Look at the persons who are present in those 
meetings.  The meeting which is particular held on Sunday.  
These meetings are not at Eskom.  You follow? 
MR LINNELL:  I do. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 18 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  This meeting is not with the board at 
Eskom. 
MR LINNELL:  I agree. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You agree.  And what you see out of 
this meeting is – is Ms Myeni disavowing even the 
involvement of the President in the meeting. 
MR LINNELL:  I do – I understand that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And that is exactly the concern that 
Chairperson is trying to raise with you.  You may have 
concerns about what is happening but how do you go about 
10 
dealing with those concerns?  You need a proper way.  Ms 
Myeni herself in her affidavit says the President could 
never have been part of this meeting.  He could never have 
given instructions in the manner in which Mr Tsotsi says 
the President did.  And I quickly want to read from her 
statement she says: 
“At the level of the former President.” 
At the level of the for 
“One would expect a written directive to the 
Minster of – or Chairman of the board.” 
20 
MR LINNELL:  I remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka.  I am not sure Mr Linnell can 
help much on that.  He was invited to a meeting.  He 
agreed to come to a meeting.  He was told what the venue 
was.  He went to the venue; participated and as long as he 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 19 of 288 
 
was asked to be involved, he continued to be involved until 
he was told he was no longer required.  So I am not sure 
that he can help much in terms of – of that.  Of course if 
you asked him a direct question whether if you raise or you 
make a proposition of what was wrong with this meeting or 
with this way of handling of things then he can comment if 
he is able to.  Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Mr Linnell you have heard 
the Chairperson?  Let me – let me put to you what I am 
seeking to raise with you which is did the manner in which 
10 
the matter was dealt with – the manner in which meetings 
were held, issued discussed and decided to be carried out 
not raise a concern to you as a former Magistrate; as a 
lawyer with you know in your experience as a lawyer? 
MR LINNELL:   You see, Mr Chairman.  In my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe... maybe... I am sorry Mr 
Linnell.  Let me ask the question this way and if you are not 
covered by the answer afterwards you can put in another 
way.   
 
Mr Linnell, when you look at this meeting in Durban, 
20 
when you look at who was present at the meeting, what was 
being discussed and that it was about Eskom. 
 
Is there any concern you had about the meeting and the 
discussions and the composition of the meeting and the 
venue, everything was there?  Anything that concerned you 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 20 of 288 
 
about the meeting? 
MR LINNELL:   I think the simple answer Mr Chair is.  No, I 
was not concerned ...[indistinct] [connection not clear]  The 
reason I am not concerned is more important than that.   
 
You see, I have no doubt in this real world that meetings 
with government and state do not take place in every 
instance.   
 
Even to this day, in a formal environment, interactions 
take place and that is how the world works.  It happens in 
business, it happens in the state and if that was the then 
10 
president’s preferred modus operandi...   
 
As long as he was doing it for a proper purpose, then 
there was nothing wrong with it.  I would think we could cite 
hundred of examples where presidents meet third parties 
because they want to facilitate the improvement of the state 
and there is nothing wrong with that. 
 
So it is not untoward in my view.  I agree that if the 
motive is improper, then the whole thing is improper.  The 
important thing was the execution of that intention should be 
done properly ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess what you are saying ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   ...intention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  I guess what you are saying is, in 
principle there is nothing wrong with a president of the 
country asking people that he wants to meet, to come to his 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 21 of 288 
 
residence for a meeting.  That is the one thing you are 
saying.  Is that correct? 
MR LINNELL:   I am saying that yes in the context of state 
business ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   ...there is nothing wrong with him to conduct 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   ...his state ...[indistinct] [connection not 
clear] where he thinks best. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  And with regard to the 
composition of the meeting, you are saying you would leave 
that to the president as to who he wants in a particular 
meeting.  Am I right that that is what you are saying? 
MR LINNELL:   I would be saying that as well, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay alright.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Thank you, Mr 
Linnell.  So let me go to the... to this point Mr Linnell 
regarding the role of a coordinator because that also has to 
do with the manner in which this process unfolded.   
20 
 
And as I going to it, may I ask you this?  I seem to 
understand you have explained to the Chairperson that you 
are saying, and correct me if I am wrong, that the end 
justifies the means? 
MR LINNELL:   I would not go as so far as to say the word 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 22 of 288 
 
statement.  I think certainly the means are important.  The 
means have to proper and appropriate and lawful.  So I am 
not saying one can do anything.  For example... as an 
example [connection not clear] ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   [Indistinct]  
MR LINNELL:   I think the practise(?) [connection not clear] 
is important ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   ...as much as the end. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  Now let us look at your position 
10 
because you are asked to be the coordinator of an 
investigation or an inquiry.   
MR LINNELL:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was there a formal appointment for you? 
MR LINNELL:   I think in simple terms or ...[indistinct] 
[connection not clear] there was no formal appointment.  I 
sat at a board meeting in which the resolution adopted was 
that I conduct certain subsequent steps.  The board was 
present and I think that is largely documented in my 
...[indistinct] [connection not clear] 
20 
 
If I was... if one said, was I appointed to run and 
coordinate the whole investigation, that had not arrived 
because the preconditions to the approval to this which is in 
my board memorandum included, for example, the approval 
of the Minister of Finance ...[indistinct] [connection not clear] 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 23 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
MR LINNELL:   So they had got to phase 1. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay there is ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   But I was appointed ...[indistinct] [connection 
not clear] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Sorry.  So your answer to the 
Chairperson is, there was no formal appointment for you to 
serve as a coordinator. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess when you say formal appointment, 
you mean a written appointment or a letter as a coordinator? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   By Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   By Eskom by the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  H’m.  I think the answer is yes he 
has ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   There was no ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...written letter of appointment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   [Indistinct] [connection not clear]  There was 
no letter of appointment. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And we see from your affidavit Mr 
Linnell that you would have started with the work of drafting 
resolutions, 
drafting 
a 
memorandum, 
drafting 
letter 
of 
suspension even before you met with the board. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 24 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Seleka it is important, once we 
have moved away from the Durban meeting ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that we deal quickly with what he did 
after the Durban meeting but before the meeting of the 11t h.  
There are, I think, memos and emails that we covered that.  
Then we come to the meeting of the 11 t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you might... if I am derailing you. 
10 
[laughing] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, no. [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Feel free to follow ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...your plan.  But I would like it in that 
sequence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say, we dealt with how he was called to 
Pretoria by Ms Myeni.  We have dealt with the meeting in 
Pretoria.  We have dealt with the meeting in Durban.   
20 
 
We need to deal with what happened after the meeting in 
Durban but before the 11t h.  Then we come to the 11t h and 
then there will be a time to say, between the 11t h and the 
19t h or 20t h, what was his involvement and what happened. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 25 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is going to be easier, certainly to me 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...if we deal with it in that sequence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sequence.  That is also an appropriate 
order Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Linnell, I was running ahead of the 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughing]  So Mr Linnell, let us take it 
step-by-step then.  Coming out of the meeting on Sunday.  
You say you would have left the presidency at around four in 
the late afternoon. 
MR LINNELL:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Then could you please relate 
...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Could you please relate to the 
Chairperson what was given to you as a task relative to the 
20 
intended inquiry for you to do? 
MR LINNELL:   The agreement... thank you, Mr Chairman.  
The agreement, leaving that meeting, the understanding was 
that I would prepare a board memorandum together with 
supporting resolutions which should be submitted by Mr 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 26 of 288 
 
Tsotsi that evening to the members of the board which would 
propose 
to 
them 
an 
extraordinary 
board 
meeting 
the 
following day being the Monday the 9t h to discuss the 
contents of the memorandum which were a proposal that an 
inquiry be conducted into the affairs of Eskom. 
 
That ...[indistinct] [connection not clear] point was 
agreed.  Then I think ...[indistinct] [connection not clear] 
agreement but not immediately following that evening’s 
requirement was that I would prepare a draft, a memo which 
would be used to support the board in conducting the pre-
10 
suspension hearings with the individuals concerned. 
 
So the following day on the Monday or maybe overnight 
or whatever, the next day, I had prepared a memorandum 
which is before us in the pack together with suggested 
suspension letter.  
 
The memorandum included the various steps on how to 
conduct 
preliminary 
hearings 
towards 
precautionary 
suspension. 
 
And then I sent that to a large legal firm.  I asked them 
to vet that memorandum and proposal and the suspensions 
20 
letters. 
 
And I asked them specifically to determine three or four 
points which are in the letter in the pack including, is this 
right, is this proper, is this lawful and is there anything else 
which might or might not be right or wrong with it. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 27 of 288 
 
 
Subsequent to that, that was done and that document 
was also forwarded to Mr Tsotsi at SAA and those same 
lawyers attended the meeting, I think, on the 9t h at Eskom 
but we never called in because the meeting aborted the 
discussion. 
 
But they would have ...[indistinct] [connection not clear] 
to discuss the legality of pre-suspensions but that was the 
meaning of that point what I was instructed to do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Thank you.  So that, if you go to 
your affidavit, if you would Mr Linnell.  On page 33 from 
10 
paragraph 24.  As you go there, it says: 
“That evening... 
 
And I believe you are referring to the evening of Sunday, 
the 8t h of March 2015? 
MR LINNELL:   That... Yes, I am there, Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  The evening is over the 
8t h of March 2015? 
MR LINNELL:   Correct.  Do you want... would you like me to 
read that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, no.  I will read it quickly. 
20 
“That 
evening, 
I 
drafted 
the 
proposed 
board 
memorandum 
and 
proposed 
resolutions 
and 
forwarded these to Mr Tsotsi.   
The email also provided process guidance notes for 
Mr Tsotsi for the board meeting.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 28 of 288 
 
This note emphasised the meeting from the board of 
the president’s role and the key requirements of the 
proposed inquiry.” 
 
The next paragraph which is 25.  It says: 
“Between Monday, 9 March and 11 March, I took 
formal legal advice on the proposed suspensions.  
This 
included 
the 
opinion 
that 
the 
proposed 
suspensions were not inconsistent with Eskom’s 
disciplinary code of prevailing case law.” 
 
Paragraph 26: 
10 
“I prepared an aid in a more detailed in the process 
of the suspension discussions together with the 
draft 
suspension 
letter 
which 
were 
reviewed, 
amended and finalised by the senior labour lawyer 
attorney consulted and these were forwarded in 
writing to Mr Tsotsi on the 11t h of March.” 
 
And then you say you went to Megawatt Park in 
anticipation of being called by the board.  You took with you 
a senior labour lawyer consultant and his associate deal with 
labour matters requested by the board. 
20 
“We were, however, later told that the board was not 
in agreement and we left in part considered that 
might be the end of the matter.” 
 
So which date... well, is this what you are referring to in 
your explanation to the Chairperson? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 29 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   It is Mr Chairman.  One point though which is 
correct here or needs clarification.  Paragraph 27 when we 
went to Megawatt Park with the attorneys, I think that was on 
the 9t h.     
 
With the sequence as you read it, it is almost as if it 
might have been on the 11t h.  They attended the first board 
meeting or they were downstairs on the 9t h.   
 
So at that stage the formal documentation that you have 
read about, you refer to as annexures.  I do not think they 
were being completed at that point.  So the lawyers went 
10 
before the documents had been done.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   In case they were asked to give a verbal 
opinion. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did you attend the meeting of the 
9t h of March of the Eskom Board? 
MR LINNELL:   No, we remained downstairs until we were 
told it has been cancelled. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does that mean you were on standby for 
that meeting if you were needed at the meeting? 
20 
MR LINNELL:   Correct, Mr Chairman.  We were asked by Mr 
Tsotsi... well, he did not ask me to bring the attorneys.  He 
asked me to be there in, I think in the morning of the 9t h to 
appear before the board.   
 
I asked the attorneys to go with me because it was going 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 30 of 288 
 
to require some form of legal assistance.  We sat downstairs 
in the reception area until about midday at which stage we 
were told there was not going to be an occasion to meet and 
we all left. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Mr Seleka, we identified all the 
documents he prepared. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And forwarded to Mr Tsotsi after the 
Durban meeting but before the meeting of the 11t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We have not gone into them yet 
10 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We can do so now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We can do so.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I just have one question to ask him 
before we do so.  Mr Linnell, you were in Durban the Sunday 
evening on the 8t h of March.  This meeting on the 
9t h of March is the next day and we understand that it was 
20 
scheduled to take place at nine o’clock.  Did you come to 
Joburg directly from Durban? 
MR LINNELL:   I did Mr Chairman.  I believe I flew out on 
the first flight on the Monday morning, the 9t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  I think the Chairperson was asking 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 31 of 288 
 
about that in relation to another meeting.  So it related to 
this meeting.  Now let us look at the annexures that you 
referred to.   
 
Let us go back to paragraph 24 of your affidavit, page 33 
where 
you 
say 
you 
have 
drafted 
a 
proposed 
board 
memorandum, proposed resolutions and forwarded these to 
Mr Tsotsi.   
 
This note emphasised... there is a guidance note as 
well.  It emphasised the need to inform the board of the 
president’s role.  And you refer us to page 15.  That would 
10 
be page 43 ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   [Indistinct] [connection not clear] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...of the bundle. 
MR LINNELL:   43? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   Oh.  That is correct.  That is the letter I sent 
to Mr Tsotsi on the morning... evening of the 8 t h.   
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the gist of what you were saying 
in that email/stroke? 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman, it had two annexures on with 
20 
the memorandum to the board calling for a special meeting 
of the board, short notice.  And included some narrative 
about the formalities of that.   
 
And it included the proposed resolutions that the board 
would have wanted to consider if they agreed to that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 32 of 288 
 
memorandum.  So they were attached.   
 
And then, the letter is more incisive than that requisite.  
It is a number of things.  It suggested that the company said 
to adapt these documents to meet standards of the company.   
 
So I was providing the content and I was asking that the 
company secretary address it in the terms of as Eskom 
requires them.   
 
And I then provided some guidelines as the importance 
of how to get people to a meeting.  And then coming back to 
counsel’s 
earlier 
question 
this 
morning 
about 
the 
10 
discrepancy of an unrecorded or un-minute meeting in 
Durban on the 8t h.   
 
In this document which you are looking at now towards 
the bottom, it makes it quite clear.   
“The president has engaged both you as chairman 
and the minister regarding the current status of 
Eskom.  It is his view that the effect on the economy 
is massively understated.  
He believes that the board is obliged to addressed 
the weaknesses and challenges as in the company.  
20 
In order to do that, the board must be certain that 
there is an accurate practice [connection not clear] 
on hand.  Once that he has its/his facts, it should 
...[indistinct] [connection not clear] conviction.”   
 
And then it goes on.  It says in paragraph 4 there: 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 33 of 288 
 
“We have also had a conversation with the minister 
who has concern concur with the initiative as 
proposed 
by 
the 
president 
and 
formulated 
by 
yourself.” 
 
So the nexus of that Mr Chairman is that, he has made 
quite clear in those earliest documents of the 8t h that this 
directive originates from the presidency and it requires the 
involvement of the minister.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I see that in the second half of the 
10 
letter/email at page 43, you say to Mr Tsotsi: 
“Once you get the green light, please call each 
director providing them with context: 
1. The president has engaged both you as chairman 
and the minister regarding the current status of 
Eskom.  It is his view that the effect on the 
economy is massively understated.” 
 
Were you basing that on the Durban meeting on what 
was said at the Durban meeting? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct, Mr Chairman.  And it 
20 
probably needs clarification.  That was not in so many words 
his words but that was the words that were proposed to him 
in that second session.  So the discussion included this 
which has sent through.  So these were sent to what was 
discussed is this as opposed to this thing, his wording. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 34 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Just for the purpose 
of the record Mr Linnell.  I will identify the email.  It is an 
email from yourself sent on Sunday, the 8t h of March. 
MR LINNELL:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Sunday, 8 March 2015 at 
06:37 p.m.  It is sent to ztsotsi@liquifier.biz and the subject 
line is Board Memorandum and Resolutions, 9 March 2015.  
You say: 
“Dear, 
Chair. 
 
Please 
find 
a 
copy 
of 
the 
10 
memorandum and proposed resolutions.  If you are 
happy, I would suggest that you require the company 
secretary to adapt to any format standards used by 
Eskom.” 
 
So you have said that already to the Chairperson. 
“Could you also review the substance of this to 
ensure that you feel it makes the point adequately?  
This document would be circulated together with a 
notice of an urgent meeting for the board to attend 
at nine a.m. or ten a.m. (If you believe it will give 
20 
members more time to attend.) 
It 
is 
critical 
that 
the 
company 
secretary 
communicates this notice both in email and verbally, 
confirming that he has delivered the notice to each 
director. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 35 of 288 
 
At the meeting, it will be important to record the 
directors 
who 
were 
not 
present, 
whether 
they 
received the notice.  We need to have at least seven 
members present all that is apparent from this 
email.” 
MR LINNELL:     Correct, Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And then the portion which the 
Chairperson was reading out to you which says: 
“Once you get the green light, please call each 
director providing them with context.  The president 
10 
has engaged both you as chairman and the minister 
regarding the current status of Eskom.” 
 
Did you know that the minister was also engaged? 
MR LINNELL:   The agreement that we left the presidency 
had an obligation ...[indistinct] [connection not clear].  And I 
say it with respect.  And an obligation on Mr Tsotsi.   
 
The president agreed that he would there and then 
consult with the minister and obtain her approval.  So my 
expectation was by the time this is done, that had been 
done. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay but at that stage, you did not know 
for sure that the minister had been consulted? 
MR LINNELL:   I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You wrote that in the expectation by the 
time of the meeting of the board that would have happened? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 36 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   Correct, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 2 then reads: 
“He believes that the boards... 
 
You are referring to the president there, I suppose? 
MR LINNELL:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
“He believes that the board is obliged to address the 
10 
weaknesses and challenges facing the company.  IN 
order to that, the board must be certain that it has 
the ultimately facts to hand. 
Once it has these facts, it should decisively and with 
conviction the manner in which this process is 
managed is un-turn-able.   
And 
independent 
inquiry 
is 
possible 
the 
best 
approach as that has the capacity to act urgently 
and potentially has an independent and objective 
approach. 
20 
It will also be seen to be more transparent.” 
 
Is this your own words?  I mean, concepts or are these 
concepts that were used by the president, an independent 
inquiry which should be more transparent, right?  Which 
should be urgent and have an objective approach. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 37 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   My paraphrasing of the understanding of the 
meeting.  If... with respect Mr Chairman.  If we look at the 
part of the meeting in my affidavit where we concluded this 
...[indistinct] [connection not clear] the report by agreements 
at the meeting with the presidency.  I believe this sums up 
those points. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Basically, what you were doing here in this 
email.  You were seeking to guide the chairperson, Mr Tsotsi 
as to how to handle this issue with regard to at the board 
meeting and you were basing that on your understanding of 
10 
what the Durban meeting contemplated. Is that right? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  That is right.  But I will just 
read this one paragraph Mr Linnell.  It says paragraph 4: 
“You have also had a conversation with the minister 
who has concurred with the initiative proposed by 
the president and formulated by yourself and their 
approach proposed.” 
 
I will ask you again a similar question in respect of the 
20 
first paragraph, did you know that Mr Tsotsi have had a 
conversation with the minister? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you not ask him already that 
question? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That ...[intervenes]  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 38 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That related to the president, the first 
one Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I thought there was specifically the 
one relating to paragraph 4 which only refers to the 
minister? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 1 also refers to the minister, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Linnell, I thought he had asked 
you that question but if he has not, you can answer but I 
10 
know what the answer is.  [laughing] 
MR LINNELL:   I think it is a different question.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR LINNELL:   So at that stage, when I said Mr Tsotsi had 
spoken to the minister, that was me writing as it would be at 
nine o’clock or later that evening because he was going to 
have a conversation with the minister.   
 
So it was recording what he would be saying that he had 
a conversation with the minister.  That is Mr Tsotsi’s 
conversation with the minister rather than the president.  A 
20 
separate conversation with the minster. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, we may have spoken at cross-
purposes but when earlier on you read paragraph 4, I came 
in and said that what you were writing under 4 was what you 
expected would have happened by the time of the - so we 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 39 of 288 
 
might have spoken at cross-purposes but I was talking 
about the Minister that is why I was saying – I thought the 
question had been asked.  Okay, alright. 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, if you look at paragraph 1 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It also has the Minister – the President 
has engaged both you as Chairman and the Minister so 
that my first question related to that. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
I 
certainly 
was 
looking 
at 
10 
paragraph 4, not 1.  But paragraph 1 – my paragraph 1 
says the President has engaged both you as chairman or – 
and the minister in a small letter …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see under (d) the minister is capital 
letter so it is easy to see it.  Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes because the first one says it is the 
President 
who 
engages 
the 
minister, 
the 
second 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I spoke thinking we were talking 
20 
about 4, but that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, that is fine, Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So Mr Linnell these were then the 
documents exchanged with Mr Tsotsi prior to the meeting 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 40 of 288 
 
of the 9 March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think sent rather than exchanged 
…[intervenes] 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:    …sent to him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because Mr Tsotsi did not send anything 
did he? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, he also did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh he did?  Oh, okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, we did go through those emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright, so they were – it is 
documents that were exchanged. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Mr Linnell? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you confirm that, Mr Linnell? 
MR LINNELL:   That there was an exchange of emails – I 
certainly sent it to him I think at half past six on Sunday 
night the 8 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR LINNELL:   Possibly I think there was further 
communication I think between him and me subsequent to 
this, there were back and forth emails on sent topic that 
evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 41 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   So I think Mrs (indistinct – recording 
distorted) a dialogue via email with Mr Tsotsi that evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you confirm the contents of the 
memorandum 
appearing 
at 
page 
45, 
that 
is 
the 
memorandum, one of the memoranda. 
MR LINNELL:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You confirm the contents thereof, is that 
right? 
10 
MR LINNELL:   I confirm the contents thereof of that email. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, is there anything you want to 
highlight in that memorandum or we can take it as read?  
You were simply giving guidance? 
MR LINNELL:   Bear with me, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were giving guidance. 
MR LINNELL:   Chairman, there is one – ja, there is 
nothing extra to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Nothing you want to highlight. 
MR LINNELL:   Unless there is something you want to me 
20 
to refer specifically, if it reads for itself I can elaborate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, if you want – if there is 
something you want him to highlight, I do not think it is 
necessary, the memo speaks for itself. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 42 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then at page 47 you have got a decision 
record of the board.  You prepared that to assist Mr Tsotsi 
in the meeting in terms of what the board would need to 
resolve, is that correct? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And the briefing notes at page 51?  
What was the purpose of those briefing notes?  Was that to 
guide the Chairperson in carrying out the suspension of the 
directors, of the executives? 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman, on what page? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, page 51. 
MR LINNELL:   51? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, says briefing notes for pre-
suspension …[intervenes] 
MR LINNELL:   That is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR LINNELL:   Yes.  Mr Chairman, these – from 51 
following, I developed that I think between maybe that 
evening or Monday the 9 t h through to the I think the 11 t h.   
At the 11 t h these were signed off by the external attorneys 
20 
who 
reviewed 
this 
and 
this 
document 
was 
the 
one 
ultimately that I forwarded I think on the morning – I stand 
corrected it is in the record on the morning of the 11 t h in 
advance of that board meeting.  So this was a briefing that 
in detail as to how did to go about properly and traversed 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 43 of 288 
 
suspension letters and if I might, Mr Chairman, I do not 
think I mentioned it to counsel but the suspension letters 
here are not ultimately the suspension letters which Mr 
Matona was required to sign and [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, before – yes. 
MR LINNELL:   …subsequent CCMA matter …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, before we get there, let us just 
finish …[intervenes] 
MR LINNELL:   And this is not part of that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Mr Linnell.  Let us finish with 
regard 
to 
the 
briefing 
notes 
before 
we 
get 
to 
the 
suspension letters.  What was the purpose of the briefing 
notes?  Was to guide the Chairperson in handling the 
suspension of the executives? 
MR LINNELL:   Yes, it was, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It has got to give him a step-by-step 
guide as to what to do, is that right? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct.  My sense was if you are 
going to do this and we do not do it properly it will be 
20 
upended on day one and this stressed the importance of 
doing it procedurally correctly.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and I see that as at this stage in 
terms of these notes you were – it seems you were talking 
about the suspension of only three executives, is that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 44 of 288 
 
correct? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At that stage you had no knowledge of a 
fourth executive who was going to be suspended? 
MR LINNELL:   Not to my recollection.  My recollection is 
that the fourth name was certainly discussed but I think it 
was during the board meeting or the [indistinct] 07.00 and 
risk committee board meeting on the 11 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   But when I drafted this, my recollection 
10 
there were only three people who had been identified. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR LINNELL:   But certainly I remember later there was a 
discussion about the fourth. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Seleka.  I am happy 
up to that point unless there are some specific questions 
you want him to deal with in regard to those notes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, Chair, that is – the issues are 
apparent from the notes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  He wanted to say something 
20 
about the suspension letters, do you want to ask him about 
that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Mr Linnell, you were trying to 
explain to the Chairperson whether the suspension – well, 
sorry, let us go to page 55.  Let us go to page 55 of the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 45 of 288 
 
bundle.   
MR LINNELL:   I am page 55. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We see drafts – what appears to be 
draft letters of suspension. 
MR LINNELL:   Correct, these are. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Would this have been drafted by you 
as well? 
MR LINNELL:   I drafted these but I had a firm of attorneys 
to review them.  They made certain corrections to them 
which were incorporated in this version you have here. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And what did you want to say to the 
Chairperson about this letter of suspension? 
MR LINNELL:   Probably at the wrong sequence but, Mr 
Chairman, counsel may come to it later.  Mr Chairman, as I 
understand it later when the CCMA hearing was heard I 
looked at the discourse on that and I think this process and 
the suspension letter was not followed in at least one of 
the instances when the suspensions took place.  So the 
purpose of this to some extent not [indistinct] 09.12 as 
intended. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Should we understand you to be 
saying the suspension letter you drafted were not – was 
not the one ultimately used in the suspension itself? 
MR LINNELL:   I believe when I checked, and I stand 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 46 of 288 
 
corrected, there were changes made to the letters which I 
think in the CCMA together with the discussions rendered 
them procedurally unfair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  So going to the meeting of the 
9 t h you say you were not called into the meeting.  You were 
invited but you did not get to go into the meeting because 
you were advised that the board does not agree with the 
proposal. 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct, Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can you tell the Chairperson what 
10 
happens thereafter in regard to your services in particular? 
MR LINNELL:   I think at that point when we left, we – my 
perception was this has come to the end but I think it was 
later that afternoon or the next day Mr Tsotsi invited me to 
come back on the 11 t h.  So to the extent that on the 9 t h was 
attended.  By the 10 t h or 11 t h I had be re-invited to attend a 
meeting on the 11 t h.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So the 11 March 2015 was a 
Wednesday? 
MR LINNELL:   I believe so, Mr Chairman. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, the Sunday is the 8 t h and you have 
a meeting on the 9 t h, the next day, the board, not yourself, 
which was a Monday.  Tuesday is the 10 t h and the 11 t h is a 
Wednesday.  Did you go back to Cape Town or you 
remained in Jo’burg? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 47 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   I remained in Jo’burg, Mr Chairman, I was 
there on another matter which required me in Jo’burg. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did you do any further work in relation 
to the intended inquiry between the 9 t h and the 11 t h? 
MR LINNELL:   I would imagine so, I cannot recall when Mr 
Tsotsi said he would want me there on the 11 t h but I am 
quite sure between the 9 t h and the 11 t h I had done a lot 
more 
work 
including 
having 
the 
documents 
we 
just 
reviewed signed off by a firm of attorneys. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Could you tell the Chairperson when 
10 
did you put together the terms of reference for the 
intended inquiry? 
MR LINNELL:   I would have started – Mr Chairman, I 
would have started that process in my mind I would 
imagine after the 11 t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MR LINNELL:   Then there was no time period in which to 
do it although it was urgent so it might have been 
piecemeal but on the 15  March, which would have been the 
Sunday following.  I got an email from I think the company 
20 
secretary - it is one of the annexures - asking me for my 
comment on their version of the terms of reference. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MR LINNELL:   At that point I …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We will come to it. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 48 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   …redrafted theirs and forwarded it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, we will come to it.  Chair, we 
need to go into the meeting of the 11 t h.  I see the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we will – well, let us just start a 
little bit – what was the purpose of your being asked to 
come to the meeting of the 11 t h, Mr Linnell, as you 
understood it? 
MR LINNELL:   I think it was – Mr Chairman, I think it was 
very much the same purpose of the 9 t h that I would 
[indistinct] 13.54 for the board to discuss the proposed 
10 
inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be correct to say the purpose 
was for you to effectively give support to Mr Tsotsi as 
Chairperson in reporting to the board about the Durban 
meeting and assisting to answer questions in the – 
assisting in the answering of questions that could arise 
from the meeting, the board meeting with regard to the 
investigation, you know, the inquiry and the suspension 
and all issues connected with what was discussed in 
Durban, is that right? 
20 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And to see whether the board was 
approving the Durban decisions so to speak, is that right? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the Durban decisions included that: 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 49 of 288 
 
1. There should be an inquiry into the affairs of Eskom. 
2. That inquiry should not take more than three months. 
3. That inquiry should be conducted transparently. 
4. That inquiry should be independent. 
5. You should be the coordinator of that inquiry and, 
6. The three executives should be suspended pending 
the completion of that inquiry. 
Those were some of the important issues that needed to be 
placed 
before 
the 
board 
to 
see 
whether 
the 
board 
approved.  Is that right? 
10 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
okay, 
let 
us 
take 
the 
tea 
adjournment and we will resume at half past eleven. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   The technicians who advise us about 
this laptop must talk to the technicians or advisors who 
were 
involved 
when 
I 
heard 
the 
evidence 
of 
other 
witnesses via video link because the witnesses could see 
20 
me without a laptop here, so I have had a number of 
witnesses via video link and I do not remember that there 
was ever a laptop here, so – but let us continue.  Okay, Mr 
Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Linnell you 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 50 of 288 
 
are still with us? 
MR LINNELL:    I am with you thank you counsel.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.   When we adjourned we 
had gone into – we were about to go into the meeting of 
the 11 t h of March 2015, the Chairperson had asked you to 
give a summary of the purpose for which you were invited 
into that meeting, and five points were highlighted to you 
which I think arise also from that email you had sent to Mr 
Tsotsi. 
 
Now did you – this time around, the meeting of the 
10 
11 t h, were you called into the meeting? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you met with the board members in 
the meeting? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now just for clarity purposes we 
understand that there were three meetings if not four even 
on that day.  There was a meeting of the board at 9 o’clock 
which was followed by a meeting of the board with the 
Minister, Minister Lynn Brown at the time.  Were you 
20 
present in any of the two meetings?  
MR LINNELL:   I was not present in the first meeting or the 
meeting with Minister Brown but I think the recollection is I 
attended the board meeting after that and then one of the 
committee meetings after that but the record would show 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 51 of 288 
 
call it the first – the meeting after Ms Brown.  I think that 
was a board meeting I attended but it might have been a 
committee meeting but I did not attend the first one or the 
one with Ms Brown.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see and the committee one so sorry – 
you would have attended the third meeting on that day.  
MR LINNELL:   I believe so.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   And you say you would have attended 
a meeting with the committee.  
MR LINNELL:   That is correct.  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That would have been the PNG, the 
People and Governance Committee?  
MR LINNELL:   I think that is what it is called.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did you just quickly did you also 
attend a meeting where the executives were suspended? 
MR LINNELL:   No, I did not.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you were not present when they 
were given letters of suspension? 
MR LINNELL:   No, I was not Mr Chairman.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay now let us look at the points for 
20 
which you were invited in the meeting with the board.  The 
Chairperson read out to you or summarised to you the five 
main points one of them included delegating powers to a 
sub-committee that will execute the mandate for the 
enquiry. 
 
So 
you 
had 
a 
proposal 
which 
included 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 52 of 288 
 
establishing an enquiry and coupled with that was a 
suspension of the executives.  Can you confirm to the 
Chairperson those two points which were proposed in the 
resolution whether the board agreed to those?    
MR LINNELL:   When I attended Mr Chairman I think it was 
very clear that they agreed to the enquiry, they agreed 
through the delegation of authority to sub-committee to 
manage that process and I think it was on the board sub-
committee they approved the suspensions.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Did they approve that you be the 
10 
coordinator?  
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman I do not recollect that in so 
many – I cannot recall whether it was expressly referred to 
but it will be in the minutes I think I read it in the minutes 
they did.  But without doubt that was the outcome of that 
meeting because that sub-committee then directly engaged 
me to do a number of activities.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I have looked at the transcripts, maybe 
transcripts I believe one of them is that of the board 
meeting that took place after the board had met with the 
20 
Minister.  That would be the board meeting at which you 
were introduced to the board members, is that correct?       
MR LINNELL:   That is correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Were you introduced by Mr Tsotsi to the 
board members? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 53 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   Yes, that is correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and as to what your role was going 
to be was it Mr Tsotsi who explained this to the board 
members or was it you who explained what your role was 
contemplated to be? 
MR LINNELL:   As I recall Mr Chairman he asked me to 
explain that to the board.  So I would have told the board 
what I thought the role would be or should be.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I saw in the transcript wither of that 
meeting or in the transcript of that meeting as well as the 
10 
transcript of the PNG committee meeting that from a 
certain stage you became very involved in the discussions.  
Is 
my 
understanding 
correct? 
 
Both 
at 
the 
board 
meeting…[intervene] 
MR LINNELL:   I was certainly involved in the discussion.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Both at the board meeting as well as at 
the PNG committee you appeared to have been very active 
in the discussions.  Is that correct?     
MR LINNELL:   That would be correct Mr Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I got the impression and you must 
20 
tell me if this is not correct.  I got the impression that the 
board did not reject you, did not reject your involvement 
and rather that they embraced you in terms of your role in 
this Eskom matter.  
MR LINNELL:   That is correct Mr Chairman, very much so.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 54 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So to the extent they may not have 
expressly 
approved 
your 
involvement 
they 
certainly 
expressed no objection and they certainly made use of 
your availability and your services and allowed you to be 
very active in the discussions that followed.  Is that right?    
MR LINNELL:   That is correct Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay now at the end of the board 
meeting before the PNG meeting the board had agreed that 
there should be an enquiry, is that correct?  Is it correct 
that the board had agreed that there should be an enquiry?  
10 
MR LINNELL:   Very much so Mr Chairman the board 
approved the enquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the board approved that the enquiry 
should not take longer than three months, is that right?   
MR LINNELL:   Yes, they especially said three months.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And if the board approved the idea that 
there should be a suspension of executives, is that 
correct?  
MR LINNELL:   That is correct Mr Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:   At that stage are you able to remember 
20 
that is now the stage of the board before the PNG meeting 
do you remember whether the board was speaking about 
four executives which included the financial director or 
whether they were speaking only about three executives at 
the end of that meeting or is that something that you are 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 55 of 288 
 
not able to remember?  
MR LINNELL:   I remember the discussion was back and 
forwards, one meeting I attended when that was certainly 
discussed at one moment the board or the sub-committee 
said there were four and then there were three and then 
there were four and then there were three, and that 
facilitated back and forwards until there was a point in time 
then it was four.  So there were often times that someone 
would summarise okay there is four and then a minute later 
someone would say are there not three.  So the final 
10 
outcome of that discussion was there were four.  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is by the end of the board meeting 
before the PNG meeting?  
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman the record would, the 
transcripts would show what meeting it was I cannot recall 
that debate about four or three backwards and forwards 
took place at the committee meeting or it was at the formal 
board meeting but it was one of those two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine I thought you might 
assist.  I looked at the transcript I think if I am not 
20 
mistaken by end of the board meeting you probably arrived 
to say somebody would speak about three, somebody else 
would speak about four but I think certainly at the PNG 
meeting there was certainly a discussion of four even 
though Mr Tsotsi at some stage even at the PNG meeting 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 56 of 288 
 
might have at some stage said no it is three.  But in the 
end the people who were suspended were four executives 
including the financial director, is that correct?      
MR LINNELL:   That is correct Mr Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Seleka you may continue.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Chairperson I will 
not traverse those issues shall I move on.  Mr Linnell then 
we have from your affidavit references to your subsequent 
engagement by the board.  Can you tell the Chairperson 
about that in regard to how you are then engaged further 
10 
by the board?   
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman would you like me to 
paraphrase it generally and then go to paragraphs so that 
you can have an overview first? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can paraphrase.   
MR LINNELL:   So okay, so after that meeting if I think of 
one of the board sub-committees which is now delegated 
with this task Ms Mabude took me to the – I went to see 
the internal auditor executive and we had a meeting about 
how the process could unfold and to what extent internal 
20 
audit could supply copies of past audit reports.  Then the 
next day that was the 12 t h there was a media briefing at 
which Mr Tsotsi and members of the board introduced the 
enquiry to the media including reference in that media 
briefing to a role that I would play as coordinator.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 57 of 288 
 
Then following that I attended a meeting with the 
top 30 executives and that was with Ms Mabude and Dr 
Naidoo and I was introduced into that meeting as the 
person who would coordinate and run this investigation and 
I addressed those executives with a request that as those 
people would have knowledge of some of the matters that 
ought 
to 
be 
investigated 
could 
they 
submit 
them 
anonymously or through the company legal advisor who 
would then send them through to me and they would be 
incorporated in terms of reference and that was agreed at 
10 
that point.   
Then following that I was then asked by Dr Pat 
Naidoo to attend the – I think there were a number of 
letters describe but it was a recovery type committee of 
Eskom which was looking at the turnaround of Eskom and I 
was invited to that with the introduction to the members of 
that committee that this person will be coordinating the 
investigation 
and 
I 
should 
take 
part 
in 
all 
their 
deliberations to make sure I got that input.  And then I was 
also invited back to the sub-committee to which I would 
20 
have reported to if I should continue and both of those 
committees 
to 
which 
I 
have 
been 
invited 
to 
were 
subsequently cancelled.  One was reinstated and then 
cancelled again and I never met any of those committees 
again after that and that summary takes a course of about 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 58 of 288 
 
a week.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that is helpful.         
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I was about to ask you to give us 
a sense of the timing of these events Mr Linnell because 
the meeting is on the 11 t h and you end, the day is ended 
with the suspension at least of the three executives.  But 
where were you at the time of the suspensions of these 
executives because we see from the minutes of PNG that 
the suggestion is that you may have been present in that 
meeting when the executives were suspended.    
10 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman I was certainly in a meeting 
where the suspension issues were discussed.  I was vocal 
in that meeting and there was a lot of discussion about the 
priority of doing it, how it would be done the fairness of it, 
the fact that they should not have preconceived ideas there 
have to be a process and that debate was quote lengthy 
where we went to the importance of doing it properly and 
that is recorded in the sub-committee’s meetings.  But and 
at that meeting I think there was some discussion about 
towards the end of it as I recall the legal officer of the 
20 
company re-drafting or drafting the suspension letters.  But 
after that meeting I cannot recall where I went when I did 
not sit in the suspension hearings.          
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, there was also a talk about the 
formation of a media release…[intervene]  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 59 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct Mr Chairman.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   In the PNG meeting, was – did you 
prepare a draft media statement for Eskom as well? 
MR LINNELL:   I think I did prepare a draft and I have not 
got my hands on that but certainly I participated in that 
meeting and what should be included in that document.  I 
cannot recall now if I drafted something before that as a 
template but I was certainly involved in the discussion 
about the media release.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, let me just recall help you recall 
10 
quickly because the transcripts showed that as they were 
talking about who will formulate a media release and what 
should go into it you then said I have a draft and I will put 
together a draft and you say oh you put together a draft 
and they talk about it but then they say Dr Naidoo you will 
work with Dr Pat Naidoo to finalise the draft.  Do you recall 
that?     
MR LINNELL:   Sorry what did he say? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That you – then there is a voice saying 
that you will work with Dr Pat Naidoo to finalise the media 
20 
statement.  
MR LINNELL:   Okay that did not happen, I did not sit with 
Dr Naidoo to do there press release.  To my knowledge or 
recollection now I do not think they did a press release at 
that time in the end I think they had a media briefing.  They 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 60 of 288 
 
might have read a press release to that media briefing but 
I cannot recall that exactly – I do not recall sitting with Dr 
Naidoo to finalise it but if he deduced I did then I would 
accept that I just do not remember that.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well we do not know what happened 
that is what we pick up from the transcript.  Talking of the 
press conference you say you were announced at that 
press conference as the coordinator?    
MR LINNELL:   That is correct.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   And who from the board side was 
10 
present at the press conference? 
MR LINNELL:   I cannot remember which ones but there 
were four or five and that might have been that committee 
which was now responsible for the enquiry who was left Mr 
Tsotsi I think he did the discussion.  I think all the 
members of staff were also invited to that same meeting so 
it was in their auditorium and immediately after that media 
beefing I received numerous enquiries directed to me from 
media about the enquiry.  So it was quite clear in the 
media’s mind as well as anyone else’s that I was appointed 
20 
to do the coordination.     
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, questions Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it correct that you cannot remember 
exactly who or at what stage the financial directors name 
was included in the list of executives to be suspended, is 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 61 of 288 
 
that right?  You are unsure about that.    
MR LINNELL:   It could be in either one of those meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do you remember who exactly 
introduced her name into the list?  
MR LINNELL:  I cannot recall but I am sure the recordings 
would pick that up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MR LINNELL:   But it certainly went back and forth I think 
for…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   For some time   
10 
MR LINNELL:   Time to time there were different agreeing 
and disagreeing with it.  There was one gentleman who 
consistently opposed it, in fact one gentleman consistently 
opposed all of the suspensions.     
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, who – do you remember whether 
that would have been Mr Baloyi? 
MR LINNELL:   It was Mr Baloyi you are right, Mr 
Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the names of the people who were 
20 
going to act in the positions that would be temporarily 
vacated by the four executives.  Do you know at what 
stage those names were introduced into the discussions? 
MR LINNELL:   I did not go through all the transcripts but I 
do not think I was in any of those meetings where that was 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 62 of 288 
 
discussed but I do recall being in a meeting when Mr 
Khoza was announced or indicated that he would be, he 
was appointed to be the acting CEO because I have got a 
note somewhere at that comment that was surprisingly 
because he made a comment in response to that which and 
I still remembered because it was quite interesting.  He 
asked what is the difference between generation and 
distribution. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Between generation, between what and 
what?      
10 
MR LINNELL:   He made a statement which indicated 
seeking to understand the difference between generation 
and distribution. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR LINNELL:   That struck my mind at the time because 
that is rather key to the business and if you were going to 
be appointed acting CEO that is quite an important thing to 
understand.  So I was present when that was said in one of 
the meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Tsotsi testified as I recall when the 
20 
meeting of the board ended before lunch he went to lunch 
and when he came back he went to the PNG committee 
whose meeting had already started.  I think he said he 
thought it may have been running for ten minutes before he 
arrived and he said he found the meeting of the PNG 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 63 of 288 
 
committee discussing names of people who were going to 
replace the executives to be suspended and he said he 
was shocked by this because of all the people who were in 
that meeting who were board members or members of the 
committee he was the only who would know the people who 
could replace temporarily the executives.   
Now to the extent that you may have attended the 
PNG meeting you might recall whether he said anything 
like that or is it something that you cannot remember?        
MR LINNELL:   I cannot recall at the back was recorded 
10 
then I suppose but I personally do not remember being 
present when that committee discussed who was going to 
do it and I do not remember the sequeli to that.  But mainly 
what I remember was that bit when that appointment of the 
acting CEO made that comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR LINNELL:   I was present then because that struck me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think that soon we will need to go 
to what happened during the week preceding or the days 
preceding the 19 t h of the 20 t h of thereabout of March but 
20 
before we do that I want to talk to you about whether there 
was a need to suspend the executives.  I have seen in the 
correspondence and in the minutes where you motivated 
why you thought that the executives should be suspended.  
As I understand your evidence and I think that was the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 64 of 288 
 
evidence of Mr Tsotsi and Mr Ngubane as well and Ms 
Klein.  The reasons given seems to be that either they, if 
they were not suspended they could interfere with the 
investigation or people working under them would have felt 
that they were not free enough to contribute to the 
investigation if they were asked for information.  Is my 
understanding of your reasons correct?      
MR LINNELL:   That is correct Mr Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, now bearing in mind that the board 
said that the investigation was not into any allegations of 
10 
wrong doing on the part of the executives. Why would they 
want to interfere with the investigation because they were 
not the accused, they would be seeking to assist in finding 
a solution to problems at Eskom.  Why should they not 
have been allowed to be at Eskom to continue with their 
jobs while assisting the investigation in whatever way 
because they were the people who were running Eskom?    
 
Who would have known what decisions they took; 
when they took those decisions; why they took those 
decisions; who could say this is what we have tried?  It has 
20 
failed because of this or that and if those conducting the 
investigation said have you tried this they could say no we 
did not try it because of A, B, C, D and engage them on 
possibly looking at other ways of resolving problems. 
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman I think there is two parts to that.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 65 of 288 
 
My strong belief is that there is ignoring the identity of the 
individuals there is a strong human risk that if there is an 
investigation in areas which I control that – and there might 
be culpability or just incompetence within that area of control 
the people underneath me who have information might be 
intimidated by my mere presence from coming forth.   
And I think that is – that business principle is well 
established that that is a risk which happens.  Including as 
turned out that in a – in a few months after this one of the 
returnee invest – executives was re-suspended and during 
10 
his suspension he was found to have been communicating 
with people providing the then investigators with – with 
information.   
So the first point is I think there is a high risk of 
people being intimidated that they might interfere.  The 
second point to make Mr Chairman is this. That in the 
suspension letters they are required to be available to the 
company and the investigators at their request in order to 
provide information.   
So the fact that they are suspended does not mean 
20 
they are excluded from providing information.  It is just that 
one wants to situationally remove them from creating a 
presence which might intimidate.  They are not prohibited or 
discouraged from providing evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There – there was no factual basis was 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 66 of 288 
 
there to say these specific executives would be – would be 
likely to interfere.  The – the idea of a suspension was just 
based on a general proposition without reference to the 
specific executives, is that right? 
MR LINNELL:  Not entirely Mr Chairman.  In the briefing 
notes for the suspensions there was – I placed in that 
briefing that in respect of each of the three not the four – the 
three one issue which if true would indicate a propensity to 
interfere or not come forward with – or not disclose 
information which needs to be disclosed.  So those were in 
10 
the briefing notes that I gave.   
So I do not know when the suspension discussions 
were held whether my [?] memoir for the suspensions did 
disclose those to those executives.   But in each of instance 
there is one point which said there is this allegation that in 
this instance you did not disclose this and therefore this 
might indicate a propensity for you to not be forthcoming.  
So – and they would be a – they were invited to re my [?] 
memoir they would have been invited to comment on that 
allegation.  Whether that happened or not I do not know. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know whether… 
MR LINNELL:  So I put that in the documents.  So it was 
substantive issue and a general theory that one wished to 
avoid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I would have thought that if the idea 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 67 of 288 
 
was to find a solution without any focus on wrongdoing I 
would have thought that they should have been there; they 
should have continued with their job and they should have 
been brought in to ask – to answer questions and to engage 
in discussions and obviously if they gave information 
whatever information they gave could be verified.   
The investigators I take it would have all access they 
needed to information at Eskom and they would be part of 
the solution rather than they being excluded while a solution 
is being found and yet they were the people who were 
10 
running the organisation.   
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman I do not – with respect Sir I 
would not agree with that.  I think if one starts off with a 
premise that there 
were 
problems 
at Eskom 
because 
evidence [00:05:59] to maladministration.   
There was allegations of as we saw yesterday of 
sabotage.  If it could be in reality in those allegations then 
the Heads of the Departments in which those allegations 
submit to then either those people are incompetent not 
knowing that this is happening or they are complicit in it 
20 
happening.   
So the moment you have a situation where there is a 
strong demand for an investigation because there is a 
problem in Eskom as I think it is clear that there was.  Then 
one has to say, those people either knew it and covered it up 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 68 of 288 
 
or they were not competent so they did not know it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You see... 
MR LINNELL:  And both of those would render them 
vulnerable. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see that – that was part of the issue I 
raised with Mr Tsotsi or Mr – or Dr Ngubane or both of them 
about this idea that the executives were being told do not 
worry there are no allegations of wrongdoing bla, bla, bla 
because I was saying but if there were problems at Eskom 
surely the leadership of Eskom if there is something that has 
10 
gone wrong surely the leadership of Eskom must have 
something to do with it.   
Either in terms of doing certain things intentionally or 
not running Eskom the way it should be run and so on.  And 
– and this idea that do not worry it is – it is – there are no 
allegations of wrongdoing might have been inaccurate 
because maybe it might not be misconduct as such but it 
might be that you people are failing to provide proper 
leadership to the entity.  You people are failing to identify 
where the problems are.  You people are failing to identify 
20 
the solutions that should be identified as leadership of 
Eskom.   
So – so at one level there is that problem but at 
another level there is the issue of – if you take them out in 
circumstances where you say you are not pointing fingers of 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 69 of 288 
 
them – or at them.  It seems to send different messages.  
But I think you –you have made your point.  Is that right? 
MR LINNELL:  Correct Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Linnell you – the 
difficulty again the Chairperson is going to have is this.  One 
of the board members when – when asked about this 
question whether there was any evidence that the executives 
would interfere with the investigation Ms Klein said to the 
Chairperson there was not a shred of evidence.  And hence 
10 
the question was there a need to suspend the executives? 
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman I have in my – it is my opinion 
that there is no doubt that they ought to have been 
suspended.  Whether four or three – fourth I do not have a 
view on but the three key players in the main departments 
needed to be removed because it was well known at the time 
that those areas were the areas which needed to be 
investigated because there were things wrong in those 
areas.  
 At that time the company – the country was suffering 
20 
massive blackouts and as we know a potential – sorry load 
shedding but a potential blackout was – was possible.  Now 
if we have to just oppose the interests of three executives 
with the lives and the economy of the country these are 
choices one has to make and they are not easy and they are 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 70 of 288 
 
not necessarily either right or wrong.   
But it is a balanced point of view and if you want to 
stop the bigger danger one has to take a view how will I 
determine this properly?  And our view at the time I am not 
sure about Ms Klein’s view – my firm view on the time and I 
think subsequent events have supported that, that that was a 
necessary step. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well let me add because there is not only 
Ms Klein you have already said to the Chairperson one board 
member was opposed to the suspension in general – 
10 
suspensions and that was Mr Baloyi.   
You have also said to the Chairperson which is what 
we know Mr Tsotsi also testified before the Chairperson that 
he was opposed to the suspensions when he was at the 
meeting on the 8 March with yourself, Dudu Myeni and the 
President.     
So there is at least three members of the board – not 
outside of Eskom – of the board, serving on the board with 
fiduciary duties you say either there is no evidence or that 
we are opposed to the suspensions.  Do you have any 
20 
comment on that? 
MR LINNELL:  Well I do.  Mr Tsotsi as you indicated 
yesterday was without a doubt unhappy with the suspensions 
on the 8t h.  On the 11t h he was totally supportive of the 
suspension so in that board meeting he spoke in support of 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 71 of 288 
 
the suspensions.  There is no doubt about that.   
Dr Baloyi – Mr Baloyi consistently opposed it but I 
think in the end he agreed to it.  Whether it was against his – 
his judgment but I – my recollection ultimately he – he 
aligned with the majority view.   
As to Ms Klein’s view is I do not remember that 
specific comment of hers but my recollection is if you take 
the totality of the meeting in the end she would have been 
supportive of that suspension.  So yes she might have had a 
comment too in the discussion and as I said yesterday or 
10 
earlier today that discussion was extensive and when that 
[00:13:02] over a lengthy period of time it was not an 
automatic acceptance by the board.  It arose out of a lengthy 
discussion at which consensus was achieved at the end. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  But can I make it clear to you 
because the proposition the Chairperson is seeking to test 
with you is the need for the suspension not whether people 
supported the suspensions.   
So Ms Klein says there is no – she testified before 
the commission not that she made a comment at the meeting 
20 
in this commission she testified there was not a shred of 
evidence that they would impede the inquiry.   
Dr Ngubane said if they went to courts they would 
succeed.  If you look at the grounds on which they were 
suspended. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 72 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:  Mr Chairman I think I read the transcript that 
Mr Ngubane made a comment.  If one reads the – to the end 
of all those minutes all of them present agreed to the result.  
So certainly on the way people were persuading each other 
one way or the other but at the end of that meeting there 
was a con – as I recall there were no detractors from the 
decision to do what was done.   
And that was a board meeting and I think I made it 
clear I my contribution in that meeting is these are things 
you have to decide and this is – this is your decision and I 
10 
certainly 
was 
a 
proponent 
to 
that 
decision 
or 
recommendations but they agreed to it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes well –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Did – did the inquiry that was going to 
happen – the investigation that was going to happen did it 
require interviews with lots of employees?  The inquiry that 
was contemplated. 
MR LINNELL:  It would have – the Terms of Reference did 
authorise an investigators to interview all members of staff 
but it also proposed a whistle blower facility.  Because one’s 
20 
experience is that even in any situation some of the best 
information arises when someone just says I am not 
prepared to be identified but I have something to tell. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well  
MR LINNELL:  Chair. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 73 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I was… 
MR LINNELL:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I was going to… 
MR LINNELL:  [00:15:52] into an interview. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I was going to say to you to the extent that 
there may have been concern even if there may have been 
no factual basis for the concern that some employees might 
not feel free to talk if the executives were not suspended.  
The employees could be told that they could speak to the 
investigators without them having to identify themselves.  
10 
The investigators I guess would be people who did not know 
them.  They would not have to write down – write 
statements.  They could simply say this is what I know, this 
is what I suspect is contributing to the problems without 
having been – without having to sign anything and without 
the investigators having to know their names.  Is it not?  
That – that could be done in which case the employees 
should feel free to say whatever because they know nobody 
is going to know within Eskom that they are the ones who 
gave that information. 
20 
MR LINNELL:  With respect Mr Chairman I do not think that 
is so good.  If two people robbed the bank and one makes an 
anonymous tip off of it; the other was involved.  That person 
knows who tipped them off.   
So if there was a wrongdoing at Eskom and one 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 74 of 288 
 
person knew that the boss had done it and he – his boss 
also knew he had done it and there is a whistle blower report 
then it is quite clear who told the story Sir.  Those things are 
– are – that is the reality of these things I think it is bono 
facto experience ad nauseum I do not think this is a unique 
situation of Eskom.  I think…  
CHAIRPERSON:  But you see – you see. 
MR LINNELL:  Just hang on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see Mr Linnell obviously you are not 
going to have a situation where there is hundred percent 
10 
guarantee or anything.  There is no such thing on this [?].  It 
is a question of whether it is reasonable you know.  Whether 
you 
taking 
reasonable 
measures 
and 
whether 
it 
is 
reasonable to think that somebody is going to fear this or 
that if the following scenario is presented.  I hear what you 
say but as things stand I still am inclined to think that there 
may not have been – really been a need but I will hear more 
witnesses and maybe by the time I hear the last witness I 
will have been persuaded.  But I have heard what you have 
to say in support of the need.  Mr Seleka. 
20 
MR LINNELL:  That I [00:19:06] Mr Chairman.  I think… 
think… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  May I [?]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes do so. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 75 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:  Chair if I may respond to that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR LINNELL:  At that time the facts were not known.  At that 
time one had to make a decision on what you did know and 
those decisions as I have said just now when you have two 
competing 
issues 
and 
they 
both 
have 
consequences 
someone at the time has to take a view and sometimes that 
view is subsequently deemed to be the wrong view.  It – you 
have to take a view. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR LINNELL:  And at that time the view was this was the 
right thing.  I think it had been – the principle had been 
supported by external legal opinion.  I have just seen 
another bundle where a subsequent legal opinion supported 
it and so in the circumstances at that moment that appeared 
to be the right situation.  Since then events turned out 
regarding these suspensions which were never anticipated 
and if that had not happened I do not believe we would be 
questioning the wisdom of the suspensions now.  There is 
only [00:20:18] that one thinks this went wrong therefore was 
20 
it the correct first step?  But at the time there was nothing to 
indicate that this was incorrect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So your point is simply that – your point is 
that as the commission looks at whether there was a need 
for suspensions or not it must remember what was known – 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 76 of 288 
 
what you knew then as opposed to what you may have come 
out after? 
MR LINNELL:  I think there is a totality of both Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From my side I am happy that we moved to 
that last week. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you still have some things? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Feel free to explore them. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  You see Mr Linnell whether or not 
the executives are inside or outside of the company at the 
time of the investigation if information is uncovered now 
testing your – your two robbers of the bank – if the 
information is discovered then the executives would know if I 
acted with somebody within Eskom that can only be that 
person who told the investigators what the information is.  
Whether they are inside or outside. 
MR LINNELL:  That is true and that is my point Mr 
20 
Chairman.  It is during the investigation you want someone 
to come forward.  If I – if I come forward with information 
and you are found guilty of that and you are removed and I 
have no risk then I am free to give you the information.   
But if you sitting there and at that time I say if I come 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 77 of 288 
 
forward with information you might penalise or affect the 
future of my career I am going to take the option and it has 
been made in front of this commission before today with 
other witnesses they feared retribution.  That is a human 
behaviour.   
It is not unique to Eskom.  That is how people 
behave.  If they feel retribution they do not come forward.  
That is how we felt at that time and I accept that a league of 
opinions supported that view.  But if we were wrong I accept 
we were wrong. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry Mr Linnell.  The fear of retribution 
was definitely not made in relation to the executives we are 
talking about. 
MR LINNELL:  I would – I would differ that is definitely the 
risk. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
No 
do 
not…you 
are 
giving 
the 
commission a general view. The commission has to deal with 
the facts.  There was no allegation that we feared retribution 
from these executives. 
MR LINNELL:  Well I do not know Mr Chairman but what I do 
20 
know is in the briefing documents.  I placed one incident in 
respect of each of the three people which indicated there 
might be a propensity to interfere with an investigation.  That 
would be – if we followed the [?] memoir those individuals 
would have been asked whether there was any validity in 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 78 of 288 
 
those allegations.  And if – if there were not valid and they 
were disputed then I would agree with you that tends to 
weaken their argument.  But from my perspective they were 
written and that was part of the record. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well the executives have submitted 
affidavits to this commission have said none of that was put 
to them.  The board members who came before the 
commission as well have not said to the commission we put 
that to the executives.  So that is not the evidence before 
this commission that there were fears of retribution or that 
10 
there would be interference with the inquiry. 
MR LINNELL:  From my perspective with respect Mr 
Chairman is in the documents that I prepared and the 
argument I prepared for the board included that very 
purposely. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  And if the board chose to do something else 
from my perspective they will have been wrong.  From my 
perspective I thought that was the right thing to do and I 
sought opinion on that.   
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja we understand that.  That is from a 
theoretical point of view.  Factual point of view is something 
else.  But you see the commission deals with these facts Mr 
Linnell that there was a meeting even before the 11 March.  
The meeting one of which you attended that the executives 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 79 of 288 
 
must be suspended.  You were not given reasons for the 
suspensions.  You said before the commission you thought if 
you investigate those areas you will have to remove those 
executives.  There was a meeting we understand.  You want 
to comment on that?  There was a meeting at Melrose Arch 
where the four executives were discussed. 
MR LINNELL:  Ja that obviously I was not aware of.  We 
were in meeting on the 6 t h and the 8t h and then the 11t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So there seems to be a pre-
conception – a preconceived idea that the executives must 
10 
be suspended and they go about to play it that reasoning 
with the concepts of legalities.  And they get you to do it. 
MR LINNELL:  I – I would argue that the evidence of Ms 
Daniel which I heard on your commission hearings about the 
meeting I think it was on the 10t h which she was told by one 
of the Gupta associates that this was going to happen.  And 
that in itself did not resonate with me as being particularly 
logical in its content.   
Because if that was the case and these Gupta people 
knew in advance and had planned in the weeks before the 
20 
6t h they intended to suspend these four people.  Why on 
earth would the Gupta’s on the 10 t h be calling in one of the 
employees and saying how do we do this?  That does not 
make sense.  Something happened there but it is not as we 
think it is.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 80 of 288 
 
The board started off on the 11t h – on the 9t h as being 
hostile to the whole process.  They demanded a meeting with 
the Minister on the 11 t h at which she convinced them that 
this was necessary.   
At the meeting of the suspensions on the 11t h the 
board was not ad idem at the beginning as to the 
suspensions.  If that had all convoluted beforehand I would 
have expected everyone [00:27:50]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes but that does not address the point 
Mr Linnell.  It does not address the point.  The point is this, 
10 
when the suspensions were meted to you you were not given 
grounds why these people should be suspended.  You say to 
the Chairperson I considered that the people in these areas 
should be suspended.  You considered that.   
You then sold the idea to those you were meeting 
with that this is the people – if you investigate these areas 
these are the people to be suspended.   
MR LINNELL:  That was quite right. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  And the context of that is on the first day 
20 
when we discussed the need that is on the 6 t h and the 8t h to 
have another [?] investigation it is my firm belief that the 
main actors need to be removed in fear of that investigation.  
Otherwise it will fail. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 81 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:  That is a principled decision I took.  The 
process of doing it was in the process of defining the 
approach 
to 
the 
pre-disciplinary 
– 
pre-suspension 
discussions which I formulated what was fair process.  But 
that is a process in principle I bought into on the 6t h and 8t h 
that if you are going to do this properly do it properly.  Those 
people needed to be – or the right people needed to be 
removed.   
What happened on the 11t h or the 12t h when they 
were spoken to that was a process and if you are going to 
10 
the process properly you must follow the legal process which 
I did.  I proposed and it is documented.  But I am not trying 
to say that I did not – did not want the suspensions to 
happen on the 6 t h and 8t h that would have been something I 
would have been quite convinced would have been the 
appropriate thing. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR LINNELL:  Who was to be suspended I did not have a 
view. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, we understand that.  The thing is, 
20 
there is no factual basis and that is what we are attesting 
with you.  There was no factual basis to affect the 
suspensions.  You worked on the basis what you say it is a 
principle in life.  People influence the inquiry or intimidate 
others.  But that was not the case here.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 82 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   I am afraid I have to disagree Chairman.  
The issue of whether it is prudent or not to suspend 
executive 
is 
possible 
that 
of 
someone 
who 
has 
got 
independent skills to come and discuss that with you and 
provide and opinion.  My thinking at the time was that would 
definitely 
would 
have 
led 
to 
an 
inhibition 
and 
fairly 
...[indistinct] [connection not clear] inquiry.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MR LINNELL:   If that is wrong, then the best person to 
come and tell you is someone who know better than that.  
10 
[connection not clear] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, that is alright.  That was your 
opinion Mr Linnell.  Can we move on, on that basis? 
MR LINNELL:   Absolutely. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So because you have indicated then that 
the board engages with you in the days following, the 
11t h of March? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct, Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  I could expedite that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he gave a summary of what 
20 
happened ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...for the week after the 11 t h of March. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think he should now tell us about 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 83 of 288 
 
what happened the end of that week after the 11t h of March 
up to the time when he understood he was no longer needed.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want to tell me about that Mr Linnell? 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman, starting from the 15t h which is 
the Sunday... so prior to that, as I have mentioned, I was 
invited 
to 
certain 
committee 
meetings 
which 
were 
subsequently cancelled but on the 15t h, which is the Sunday, 
I was asked to provide input into the terms of reference from 
Ms Mabunda [connection not clear] via, I think it was the 
10 
company secretary ...[indistinct] [connection not clear] or 
one of the... I think it was Leo or Theo, in Eskom.   
 
I provided input to that as a first draft.  I then, the 
following three days, the 16t h, 17 t h and 18t h continued to 
develop the terms of reference.   
 
Given at the time, included with invitations to the various 
committees, these terms of references were circulated to 
members of the committee until we got to the morning on the 
18t h when I did my final draft of the terms of reference which 
are before the committee.   
20 
 
Those terms of reference were objected to by Ms 
Mabunda and on the night of the 18t h, I met with Mr Tsotsi 
and Ms Mabunda to discuss those.   
 
And at that meeting she said to me the committee does 
not want this.  And we have an adversarial conversation.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 84 of 288 
 
Because I said:  Well, what is wrong with these that she 
does not want these terms of reference and that associate(?) 
media [connection not clear] release?   
 
She could offer no reason other than at the end of that 
meeting she said:  Well, you can appear before the 
committee tomorrow and argue that yourself.  We left the 
meeting on that basis.   
 
The next morning, my invitation to that meeting was then 
cancelled.  It was reinstituted I think on the 23rd and 
cancelled again.   
10 
 
I never had any more engagement beyond that.  So I 
was engaged with drafting the media statement on the 18 t h 
and the terms of reference on the 18t h.  And from that 
moment my services were disconnected... discontinued.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So what is your... were you told either 
verbally or by way of an email or letter that your services 
would no longer be needed?  Or did you infer that your 
services were not needed once meetings to which you had 
been or invitations to meetings that had been extended to 
you were withdrawn? 
20 
MR LINNELL:   I ...[indistinct] [connection not clear] Mr 
Chairman.  I think it was on the morning of the 17t h following 
the 16t h, we were talking and it is said at about five o’clock 
a.m... before five o’clock a.m.  
 
I received an official email from, I think, the company 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 85 of 288 
 
secretary saying, and we can refer to the document here, 
saying that your services are no longer required.   
 
The ...[indistinct] [connection not clear] committee no 
longer needs you in respect of the inquiry ...[indistinct] 
[connection not clear] no longer required to attend the 
...[indistinct] [connection not clear] and recovery meetings.   
 
So ordinarily, one would have said:  Well, I am no longer 
required to this inquiry.  However, at that time, I was 
disinclined to accept that as termination of what I believed I 
had been asked to do.   
10 
 
So I discussed that with Mr Tsotsi by way of informing 
him and I continued.  So on the 17 t h and the morning of the 
18t h, I continued to develop the terms of reference for the 
inquiry.   
 
And that is why on the 18t h, I have sent Ms Mabunda the 
final draft and I mentioned here on that evening of the 18t h to 
discuss that final draft.  So I do not know if I have covered 
that adequately? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   You are right Mr Chairman.  There was an 
20 
email I received ...[indistinct] [connection not clear] morning 
of the 16t h or the morning of the 17t h.  And ...[indistinct] 
[connection not clear] they continued on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I wanted to ask whether having 
regard to everything that happened, you are able to put your 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 86 of 288 
 
finger on why your services were no longer needed or is that 
something you cannot put your finger on? 
MR 
LINNELL: 
 
 
Yes, 
objectively 
and 
...[indistinct] 
[connection not clear]  The inclination I was given at the 
time, I think it was the night of the 16t h.  It might have been 
a Monday.   
 
I was told that an informal gathering of board members 
and some of the suspended executives had taken place 
during the evening of that.   
 
It was the evening of the 16t h  at which they were 
10 
discussing the inquiry and whatever.  It was immediately 
following that information I received that I received a letter, 
the email of the 17 t h early hours of the morning saying you 
are no longer required further by this committee for the 
inquiry.   
 
So the information I had before I got the email indicated 
or corroborated the email I subsequently got.  That is the 
one point.   
 
The second point is, in my engagements directly with Ms 
Mabunda, on the terms of reference, on the evening of the 
20 
18t h, it is quite clear that she and I think representing the 
views of the Audit and Risk Committee, did not like my terms 
of reference.  And it was for that reason I was eliminated.   
 
At the same time Mr Chairman, they were circulating an 
internal alternative terms of reference which was probably a 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 87 of 288 
 
third of the scope and for example excluded important 
things.   
 
Like, in my terms of reference, as the documents will 
show, I recommended a retired judge to act as a role of 
almost overseer to ensure that there was no bias in the 
inquiry.   
 
Now that is one specific issue that Ms Mabunda and I 
think Ms Brown specifically objected to and I heard that from 
Mr Tsotsi and from another.  I think it might have been 
certainly Ms Mabunda.   
10 
 
So whether it was just that they did not want to judge... 
the former judge to be an independent overseer who would 
make 
sure 
that 
there 
was 
no 
cover 
up 
and 
it 
was 
transparent.   
 
They 
certainly 
approached 
that 
but 
I 
think 
they 
approached the whole depth of the inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   And certainly they were succeeding in terms 
of reference for the... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I am going to take you back to the 
20 
meeting of the 11 t h.  Mr Tsotsi gave evidence to the effect 
that, and I hope my recollection is correct, that Dr Ngubane 
said that it was the minister, Minister Lynne Brown who said 
the 
financial 
director 
should 
be 
included 
among 
the 
executives to be suspended.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 88 of 288 
 
 
You have any recollection of hearing Dr Ngubane saying 
that at either the PMG meeting or the board meeting that 
came after the meeting between the board and the minister? 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman, I do not recollect that.  What I 
recollect is, there was a lot of interplay between all the 
directors, whether it is three or four and was the FT(?) part 
of it or not.  But I do not remember anyone saying, whether it 
was Dr Ngubane or anyone else, that the minister had said 
anything at all.  That does not... I might have missed it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR LINNELL:   But I did not hear that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think, if I am not mistaken, Mr Tsotsi 
also said he was told when he raised the issue of... or when 
he expressed his surprise that the PMG meeting was 
discussing names of people who were going to act in the 
positions of the executives. 
 
When he expressed his surprise that the committee 
members were discussing these names and circumstances 
where they did not know these people.   
 
I think he said that somebody, either Dr Ngubane or 
20 
maybe somebody else, said the names came from the 
minister, Minister Lynne Brown.   
 
Do you recall having hearing anybody, whether it was Dr 
Ngubane or somebody else, saying that these names of 
people who were going to act in the positions of the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 89 of 288 
 
executives, came from the minister? 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman, I do not recollect any of that 
discussion whether it was mentioned that the names came 
from the minister.  I do not remember anyone... I do not think 
I 
was 
present 
when 
they 
discussed 
the 
names 
or 
replacements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR LINNELL:   The minutes might reflect that I was there 
but I have no recollection of being in that meeting at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR LINNELL:   So I would not heard that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR LINNELL:   But presumable the minister would have said 
that in the meeting on the 11 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   [Indistinct] [connection not clear] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Linnell, there is 
also a version put in one of the affidavits, if not two 
affidavits, that the names of the acting people came from the 
20 
presidency.  Would you know anything about that? 
MR LINNELL:   I have never heard that at all before today.  
No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let us go back to ...[intervenes]  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 90 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   Sorry, can I comment? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Mr Linnell. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  When I say I cannot 
recall that, that is certainly was not mentioned in the meeting 
on the 8t h.  Definitely not.  It might have been mentioned 
subsequently in another meeting but on the 8t h in Durban, 
that did not come up at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, it would not have come up in Durban 
because the names of acting people, as far as I recall, were 
10 
not discussed at the Durban meeting, is it not? 
MR LINNELL:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR LINNELL:   They were not mentioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  Thank you, Mr Linnell.  Going back 
to the time when you are told that you are no longer needed, 
you gave the chairpersons what you think were the reasons 
why you were no longer needed.   
 
One of those is that you learnt of a meeting that took 
20 
place in the evening of the 16 t h of March 2015.  And I am 
going to help you with the page reference to your affidavit.  
It is page 36.  And as you go there ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   Page 36? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is correct, yes.  Page 36, 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 91 of 288 
 
paragraph ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   Paragraph? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 42 and 44.  In paragraph 42, 
you relate about the email you received on the 17 t h of March 
which tell you that you were no longer needed.  Well, it says 
you are no longer required to attend a meeting.  And then in 
paragraph 44, you say: 
“Upon 
making 
some 
enquiries 
concerning 
this 
change of events, I received information that a 
number of members of the board and some of the 
10 
suspended executives had attend a late night 
private meeting during the night of Monday, 16 t h.  I 
assumed that this was linked to the early morning 
email cancelling my appointment.” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR LINNELL:   I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Can you... are you able, please, to 
relate to the Chairperson?  Who would you have made 
enquiries with as you state in paragraph 44? 
MR LINNELL:   I think as I have mentioned before.  I am 
20 
reflecting... I do not think I made deliberate enquiries.  I was 
informed of the meeting and I got a feeling I was informed of 
the meeting during its course.  In other words, it would have 
been on the 16t h.   
 
So, whereas here, I say on making enquiries, I think that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 92 of 288 
 
is actually in reverse order.  I think, as I recollect, it would 
have been on the 16t h, I would have been told that there was 
a meeting in progress as a house at which certain board 
members, certain suspended executives and with respect the 
minister being present.   
 
That was the purport of that information I received.  
Then the next morning, I got the email and so where I say 
here I got the email 04:50 a.m. and then made enquiries.   
 
I think the information I got was before the email and 
then I do reference to the email that what I read the evening 
10 
before.   
 
So my sequence is, without a doubt, I was given 
information that there was a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are at one minute to one on my watch.  
My position is that unless there is something else that has 
escaped my mind, Mr Linnell has covered most of the things 
that I considered important.  But if there is one or two 
questions you still wanted to ask him, feel free to do so.  But 
I would like that after lunch, we go to the next witness. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I can do so quickly 
20 
with Mr Linnell.  Okay Mr Linnell, thank you for clarifying the 
order there.  You said the minister was also present in that 
meeting of the 16t h of March? 
MR LINNELL:   That the... that was the information I got as 
part and parcel who was at that meeting. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 93 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
MR LINNELL:   And it was interesting because I think it 
might have been Jabu because I remember thinking:  How 
would anyone know who is having a meeting?  That was... it 
was quite strange information to receive.   
 
So I do not know in fact a meeting took place but it 
certainly appeared to be linked to the early hours of the 
morning the email.   
 
So the gentleman sending the email ought to be able to 
tell the Commission who instructed him to send that email at 
10 
04:50 a.m. on the 17t h because that would verify why this 
happened. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So when you refer to Jabu, are you 
talking about Jabu Mashinghani? 
MR LINNELL:   I think it would have been him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   If he deny it, I am not ...[indistinct] 
[connection not clear] but I think it might have been him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   ...who informed me of that meeting. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If not him? 
MR LINNELL:   Then it might have been Mr Tsotsi because I 
did not have... I did not know anyone else who could tell me 
that in the middle of the night. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 94 of 288 
 
MR LINNELL:   You know, early hours. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, you will recall that you mentioned in 
your affidavit that you wrote a letter for Mr Tsotsi to address 
to the minister. 
MR LINNELL:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And in that letter, this statement is also 
made 
that 
there 
was 
a 
secret 
meeting 
on 
the 
16th of March 2015 where some board members met with 
some suspended executives.  So is it you or is it Mr Tsotsi 
who knew about this meeting? 
10 
MR LINNELL:   I drafted that letter and I put that in because 
that was my information and he would have agreed to that 
information because he signed the letter.  So I drafted that 
letter, I think with some input from Jabu. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR 
LINNELL: 
  And 
so 
he 
subsequent ...[indistinct] 
[connection not clear]  So the ...[indistinct] [connection not 
clear] of the minister report of that was to complain to the 
minister that these behaviours of the board were continuing 
behind Mr Tsotsi’s back and the allegation that at the bottom 
20 
line is this was in order to prevent the inquiry going ahead. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   So it was a very specific letter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just quickly.  Can you tell the 
Chairperson whether you which board members were said to 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 95 of 288 
 
have convened this meeting and which some suspended 
executives? 
MR LINNELL:   I never heard that.  No, Mr Chairman.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   You were not given the names? 
MR LINNELL:   No.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, is that not strange?  But you... they 
said the minister... you think they said the minister was also 
present in that meeting. 
MR LINNELL:   And therefore then the inclusion of that or 
the letter to her would have been quite telling.  In a sense, it 
10 
was deliberate.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because of the information that she was 
also present at that meeting? 
MR LINNELL:   Well, it does come back to her that Mr Tsotsi 
knows about a meeting and if in fact she was present at that 
meeting, she would know that he knows that there was a 
meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see.  I think Chair that concludes my 
questions. 
MR LINNELL:   Chair, with respect ...[indistinct] [connection 
20 
not clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   Can I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Linnell? 
MR LINNELL:   Yes? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 96 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is there something that you would like to 
say? 
MR LINNELL:   [Indistinct] [connection not clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR LINNELL:   Thank you, Mr Chairman.  With... with regard 
to 
my 
role, 
if 
I 
could 
encapsulate 
that? 
 
From 
my 
perspective, I was asked to coordinate an inquiry.   
 
I believe that inquiry was necessary and urgent and 
critical to the country.  I have prepared documents including 
terms of reference to that inquiry, media briefings.   
10 
 
I have put together things which would ensure that that 
inquiry 
would 
be 
transparent 
and 
independent 
and 
comprehensive.   
 
And as a result of that, I ended up with an impasse with 
the board and that led to my removal.  So it is my view that 
the brief originally given to me, I sought to fulfil completely 
and even after that, I continued in a sense to oppose my... 
not so much my removal but the termination of the inquiry.   
 
As you would know, in the bundle a letter was also sent 
to the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee complaining 
20 
about the same thing and making the same allegation that 
the board was faulting the inquiry as scoped in the terms of 
reference.   
 
So 
the 
minister 
was 
told 
that 
the 
board 
was 
frustrating(?) this very expressly.  And the chairman of the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 97 of 288 
 
Portfolio Committee was told that expressly.   
 
And Ms Mabunda and the committee would have known 
that they were opposing that.  And that was the end of my 
dealings with the. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no.  That is fine.  Just one point.  
You know we spoke in relation to SAA about whether you 
were brought into... you were been brought into these SOE’s 
to do a job in respect of which they had capacities.  I have 
heard evidence that...  
 
For example, you talk about media releases that you 
10 
drafted.  I heard evidence that Eskom had a Communications 
Department which used to prepare media statements for the 
chairperson.  I think they...  
 
I have heard evidence about also there being a head of 
the Legal Department at Eskom.  But I am just mentioning 
that, that we have had the discussion about it.   
 
So I will look at it and bear in mind what you said and it 
would 
seem that the role 
you also 
playing 
was 
not 
necessarily strictly a role that related to giving legal advice.  
Is that correct?   
20 
 
It seems to have been some role.  Maybe the fact that 
you had legal background was useful but there must have 
been a reason why you would bring in lawyers when you had 
the legal background.   
 
Is my understanding more or less correct that your role 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 98 of 288 
 
is ...[intervenes]  
MR LINNELL:   For the suspensions of the ...[indistinct] 
[connection not clear]  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LINNELL:   The suspensions or the media? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  What I am saying is.  It seems 
that your role was not one that necessarily depended upon 
or required essentially legal knowledge and I am saying that 
maybe that is why we see you bringing in lawyers sometimes 
to assist and then you...  
10 
 
We see you drafting media statements something that 
the Communications Department at Eskom would normally 
do.  So it seems to me that your role was not necessarily a 
role to provide legal services.  Is that right? 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman, you are absolutely right.  You 
are correct, Mr Chairman.  I was not at all to provide any 
legal opinion or advice.  That was not the purpose.   
 
It was to doing a setup of an inquiry that required 
somebody with knowledge but I sought independent legal 
advice on legal issues.  But my main role was putting 
20 
together the terms of reference and the media statement and 
canvassing entities to do the functions referred to in the 
terms of reference.   
 
So my role was purely a business coordination role.  I 
was putting together the way of it all, to conduct an inquiry.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 99 of 288 
 
It was not a legal role at all.   
 
And I think... we did mention that the board and the 
minister refused to allow the media release to be released to 
the press.   
 
And the benefit of that would have been, that would have 
cast in stone how the inquiry subsequently would have rolled 
out because it sets out very clearly that it would be 
independent, that there would be a judge, that there would 
be independent people and that is what was squashed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Now to the ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR LINNELL:   [Indistinct] [connection not clear] that not be 
Internal Communications Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the extent that you say your role was 
not or that of providing legal services.  What qualifications 
did you have, formal qualifications to provide that non-legal 
service.  We know you had a law degree. 
MR LINNELL:   [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   We know you had law degrees, you had 
been an attorney in Zimbabwe, we know you had been a 
magistrate from – so if one said this somebody is going to 
20 
provide legal services one can understand from that point 
of view minus the fact that one does not know how much 
familiar you may have been with South African law but you 
may have been familiar with it but if we leave aside legal 
qualifications because those might be useful for legal 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 100 of 288 
 
services. 
What formal qualifications did you have to provide 
the non-legal role that you – to play the non-legal role that 
you were playing? 
MR LINNELL:   I have an Honours Bachelor Commerce 
degree from the University of Cape Town as in technology.  
I worked for 20 years in large corporates in South Africa all 
the way through to board level.   
I operated in a consultancy company which provided 
similar legal consulting services to many, many corporates 
10 
in South Africa over a period of 20 years.  So if you 
exclude the legal background I had altogether, I have had 
20 years extensive corporate South African business 
experience and almost 10 or more years, 15 years, of 
consulting experience within the South African business 
environment and so I have done many, many documents of 
terms 
of 
references, 
scoping 
of 
contracts, 
inquiries, 
projects, 
implementations 
of 
technology 
solutions, 
insurance company turns around, medical schemes, I have 
been there for 15 to 20 years, doing that.   
20 
This is what I do which I would have been engaged 
to do in Eskom.  Running of these terms of reference and 
the media statement would have been something I was very 
experienced in doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Mr Linnell, thank 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 101 of 288 
 
you for availing yourself to assist the Commission to throw 
more light as to what happened or what led to the inquiry 
that took place at Eskom and the suspensions of the 
executives and the role that you played up to the time 
when you were told you were not long required at the 
meetings …[intervenes] 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman, may I make one final 
comment, is it acceptable? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you may. 
MR LINNELL:   Mr Chairman, at the time we did the 
10 
suspensions, in no one’s mind was it ever contemplated 
that these people would not return to work in the way they 
did not.   
So what followed, no one, neither the press nor 
ourselves – it was never evident that what transpired was 
contemplated in any event and whether it was considered 
by anyone at that stage is debatable.  It might have but 
certainly we did not have any understanding that what 
transpired was contemplated at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well …[intervenes] 
20 
MR LINNELL:   And that I made clear in my statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR 
LINNELL: 
 
 
Where 
I 
identify 
their 
subsequent 
termination as being suspicious in relation to the terms of 
their suspension.  I draw reference to that in my affidavit. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 102 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I will see evidence, I will see when 
all the evidence is in but there is a possibility that there 
was someone or there were people outside of Eskom who 
were 
making 
certain 
decisions 
or 
influencing 
certain 
decisions that were being taken at Eskom including the 
decision to suspend these executives.   
We will see when all the evidence is in.  I did hear 
evidence, for example, that when Dr Ngubane was either 
Acting Chairperson or Chairperson, that is later than this 
time, 
somebody 
from 
outside 
of 
Eskom 
sent 
him 
a 
10 
document reflecting what resolution the board should take 
in regard to certain newspapers and Dr Ngubane took that 
document to the board and it seems the board endorsed 
those decisions that were sought it seems by somebody 
outside of Eskom but we will hear more evidence and one 
will hopefully get a clearer picture as we hear more 
evidence.  But thank you very much, Mr Linnell, for 
availing yourself.  Thank you very much. 
MR LINNELL:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are going to take – so you are 
20 
excused, Mr Linnell.  We are going to take the lunch 
adjournment, it is quarter past one, we will resume at 
quarter past two. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 103 of 288 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MR MAROKANE:   Daniel Letsetja Marokane. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MAROKANE:   No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
10 
MR MAROKANE:   I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give  
will be the truth the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth.  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
DANIEL LETSETJA AROKANE:  So help me God. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Thank 
you, 
Mr 
Marokane.  
Chairperson, the bundle we will be using is Eskom bundle 
10. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have got it. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that bundle  
MR MAROKANE:   And that bundle has – the file has 
various exhibits.  We will concentrate only in – for the 
purpose of this witness, EXHIBIT U15.  That is where the 
…[intervenes] 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 104 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, remember, you must still introduce 
the exhibits, let it get admitted. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then you can take it from there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is where the black pagination 
become relevant, Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   :   That is where the black pagination 
become relevant.  Mr Marokane, you will have a file before 
you also marked Eskom bundle 10. I just wish to confirm 
10 
whether it is in the same as mine.  If you look at the spine 
of that file it has a list of exhibits and I am looking at the 
first one which is EXHIBIT U15. 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that correct?  Thank you.   And just 
for 
housekeeping 
purposes, 
Mr 
Marokane, 
you 
have 
provided the Commission with an affidavit, two affidavits, 
one has become the main affidavit and the other a 
supplementary to the first affidavit.   
 
The first one is contained on page 4 and now the 
20 
pages numbers I am going to refer you to are the ones on 
the left right hand corner, top left right hand corner, the 
black numbers as opposed to the red numbers.  Do you see 
that? 
MR MAROKANE:   I see that, Chairman, thank you. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 105 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, just drop the microphone to get 
closer to it, thank you.  So that is an affidavit which is two 
pages long, page 4 to page 5.  There is a signature of the 
deponent on the 1 March 2020.  Do you confirm that to be 
your signature? 
MR MAROKANE:   I confirm that, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, I will beg leave to have 
that affidavit admitted as EXHIBIT U15.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the first one stuck in at page 4? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 4, correct, Chairperson.  Page 4 
10 
together with the annexures thereto which is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Daniel Lesetja 
Marokane starting at page 4 and going up to page 5 is 
admitted and will be marked as exhibit? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   U15.5? 
CHAIRPERSON:   U? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   15.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   15.5.  Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Then, Mr 
…[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has got it annexures? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It has got one annexure, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the letter starting at page 6? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 6, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So alright, okay.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 106 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   To page 10.  Thank you, Chair.  Mr 
Marokane, if you could please turn to page 11.  This is now 
between [indistinct] 05.17 supplementary affidavit, it starts 
on page 11 and ends on page 13, deponent signing on the 
27 September 2020 do you confirm that to be your 
signature? 
MR MAROKANE:   I confirm that, Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can you confirm this to be your 
supplementary affidavit as well? 
MR MAROKANE:   I do, Chairman. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson, I beg leave 
that 
admitted 
as 
EXHIBIT 
U15.2 
together 
with 
the 
annexures thereto. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The supplementary affidavit of Mr Daniel 
Lesetja Marokane starting at page 11 is admitted and will 
be marked as EXHIBIT U15.2 together with its annexures. 
MR MAROKANE’S SUPPLEMENTARY AFFIDAVIT PLUS 
ANNEXURES HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT U15.2 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson, there is a 
number 
of 
them 
there. 
 
Mr 
Marokane, 
just 
another 
20 
housekeeping which is apparent from your supplementary 
affidavit that you have testified in a closed session 
interview before you came to the public hearing.   
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The reference to that, if you are still 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 107 of 288 
 
on your supplementary affidavit, page 11, is to be found in 
paragraph 4.  Are you there?  You say: 
“I confirm that I was called to closed session 
meeting with the Commission on 1 September 2020 
wherein I testified under oath.  I also confirm that I 
have been provided with a copy of the transcript of 
my testimony...” 
In this case the interview. 
“…attached hereto as DM1.”     
MR MAROKANE:   I confirm that, Chairman. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now DM1 – well, let me complete the 
paragraph: 
“I have perused the transcript and hereby confirm 
the contents thereof to be a true reflection of my 
testimony.” 
Annexure DM1 is found on page 14.  Page one four. 
MR MAROKANE:   I confirm that, Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Shall we proceed, 
Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but just to clarify. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 Annexure 
DM1 
to 
Mr 
Marokane’s 
affidavit is a transcript of an interview conducted by 
members of the legal team of the Commission and in that 
interview he spoke under oath on the matters relating to 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 108 of 288 
 
his suspension and that transcript he has just confirmed he 
has gone through it and he confirms it as correctly 
reflecting his evidence.  You confirm that, Mr Marokane? 
MR MAROKANE:   Mr Chairman, I confirm that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.   Mr 
Marokane, in the light of the transcript, let me get an 
indication from you how – what you will be comfortable with 
when you testify now before the Chairperson.  Would you 
prefer to tell the Chairperson a story or would you refer the 
10 
Chairperson 
to 
portions 
of 
your 
closed 
investigation 
transcript? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairman, you know, having read a lot 
of documents in preparation for today will be prepared to 
engage with you on the questions that you have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   And allow the liberty to pick up any 
issues from the transcript or I myself may refer to a portion 
of the transcript as you go through. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine.  I think, Mr 
20 
Seleka, just lead him on the important issues.  He has 
confirmed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not think there is a lot that we 
require from him.  To a very large extent I think my interest 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 109 of 288 
 
is more on how he exited Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because in terms of how the suspension 
was done, there does not appear to be much controversy in 
regard to that but you can just lead him on the important 
issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr 
Marokane, 
in 
the 
light 
of 
that 
preamble 
from 
the 
Chairperson let me put this particular background to you.  
It has been extensively led before this Commission, 
10 
evidence 
pertaining 
to 
the 
suspension 
of 
the 
four 
executives on 11 March 2015.  You have been mentioned 
as one of the executives that were suspended.  If you 
could please keep your microphone on?   As you agree, 
state that on record so that agreement could be captured.  
You have been identified as one of the executives that 
were suspended at the time and ultimately a settlement 
agreement be concluded with you and Eskom.  Now does 
that – all that… 
MR MAROKANE:   That is a fair capturing of the events 
20 
there, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   A fair capturing of – a highlight of the 
events.  Now could you tell the Chairperson quickly in 
regard to what your position was at a time of the 
suspension on 11 March 2015. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 110 of 288 
 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, by the time I was 
suspended on the 12 March 2015 I was holding the position 
of Group Executive Group Capital.  This portfolio was 
responsible for the construction of all [indistinct] 12.52 
infrastructure.  This would include the well-known Medupi, 
Kusile, Ingula power stations, when we also involved a 
number of projects within the transmission space.  This is 
the portfolio that I took over as a fulltime executive in 
November 2014 having acted in that role for a period of a 
year. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, I should make the correction, I 
asked you about your suspension on 11 March.  So your 
suspension was 12 March you say? 
MR MAROKANE:   My suspension was on the 12 March a 
day after the rest of my colleagues who were suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When had you joined Eskom? 
MR MAROKANE:   Briefly, Chairperson, I joined Eskom in 
January 2010 as a managing director for Primary Energy.  I 
then moved through to different portfolios within a period 
of a year or so.  I became the Chief Commercial Officer for 
20 
the business and after a further period of a year that 
portfolio was expanded to include the technology group 
which 
essentially 
encompassed 
all 
the 
engineering 
responsibilities within the business.   
So it became Group Executive Technology and 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 111 of 288 
 
Commercial  I held that role until around July 2013 when I 
was asked to go and care take the portfolio of Mega 
Infrastructure Construction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then when did you get to the 
position that you were holding when you were suspended? 
MR MAROKANE:   I was in that role from, you know, 
July/August 2013 as a caretaker executive.  The executive 
responsible for that role had just left the company and 
whilst the search was on for a fulltime, you know, 
colleague, I looked after the goings on of that division 
10 
leading to my being appointed in that role eventually in 
November 2014 which was essentially some four months of 
being in that position by the time I was suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so at the time you were suspended 
you had been with Eskom for about four or five years? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  During that time had there been 
anybody 
at 
Eskom 
who 
had 
complained 
about 
your 
performance of your job? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairman, there has never been any 
20 
complaint about my performance in any job I have held 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.  I see you hold the 
degrees 
BSc 
Chemical 
Engineering, 
MSc 
Petroleum 
Engineering and MBA, is that right? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 112 of 288 
 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So your portfolio, the one you were 
in when you were suspended, just briefly, what does it do, 
what were you responsible for, what does it do? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, the portfolio Group Capital 
is responsible for the construction of the mega projects.  
So I will be quite specific here.  Medupi Power Station, 
construction of Medupi Power Station and Kusile were a 
direct responsibility of that portfolio.   
My getting to that role, Chairperson, and I talk 
10 
about these two phases of me being a caretaker and me 
being appointed fulltime in that role, I was asked to step in 
to deal with the challenges that led to the delays as I 
understood at the end of July 2014, Chairperson.  So I 
went in there to really help the team recover the schedule 
slippage and also deal with the topical issues that were 
making us be delayed in as far as bringing in new 
generation capacity is concerned.  Having done that, which 
is a matter that I go quite at length in my first affidavit, 
supplementary affidavit attachment, having identified the 
20 
issues I progressed with the team to execute on those 
plans leading to the attainment of the first mega milestone 
in as far bringing Medupi into operations.   
I was confirmed after Mr Matjila’s arrival as a Chief 
Executive, I was confirmed in November 2014 to be the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 113 of 288 
 
custodian of that role on a fulltime basis which effectively 
places me to have been in it with - you know, for four 
months by the time the new board, you know, engaged us 
with the discussions of the 11 t h, 12 t h March. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Was the board 
aware of the achievement you are referring to in regard t0 
the – is that Medupi Power Station? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, the board that engaged 
with me by the time I left had two members who came from 
the previous board, that is Mr Zola Tsotsi, the Chairman 
10 
himself also Ms Chwayita Mabude.   
All other board members were new, you know, and 
in my recollection I have only engaged with them, maybe 
three of them on the topical substantial issues of the 
portfolio I was dealing with.  So many of them had not had 
the opportunity to fully hear from me or understand exactly 
where my portfolio was at.   
As a matter of fact in the suspension meeting I took 
a little bit of time to actually sketch this background that I 
have sketched to now, Chairperson, to understand that 
20 
with the background that I have sketched to you now, are 
you actually now saying that you want to suspend me, the 
one that you have sent to go and fix the issues, you want 
to suspend me so that you can understand what the issue 
are?   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 114 of 288 
 
They were quite coy in terms of responding to that 
but it is a matter that I came back to in my letter in detail.  
In detail I thought I should afford the new board members 
some reflection in terms of how I got to be there so that 
they can then, you know, reflect on their own decisions 
now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They basically did not know you really.  
They did not know what you were – they were new, the 
majority of them. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja,  Chairperson, it is correct and fair to 
10 
say they did not know me, they may have known my 
socially, they were not au fait with my work and the details 
of my portfolio except the two that I have already 
mentioned, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Continue, Mr Seleka. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Thank 
you, 
Chair. 
 
So 
that 
achievement, Mr Marokane, would have been prior to the 
appointment of this board, the new board which we 
understand it was appointed in December 2014 or after 
that. 
20 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, we reached the milestone 
of bringing the first unit of Medupi on line around the 7 t h or 
the 4 t h – I speak under correction, it could be anytime 
between the 4 t h and 6 t h of March 2015, this new board was 
already there.  This achievement that they were alive to at 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 115 of 288 
 
a point in time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Alright.  So take us to the days of your 
suspension.  How are you contacted and made aware that 
the board wants to see you and when do you meet with the 
board or is it the board, whoever meets with you in regard 
to that? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chair, the lead up to the attainment of 
that milestone, you know, caused(?) some [indistinct] 
20.57 to it, the festive season prior to that was entirely 
spent on working.  As a matter of fact when the new board 
10 
was inducted myself and Mrs Molefe were actually on 
business travel overseas, we never even met them, as part 
of the preparations of meeting that milestone in the first 
week of March.   
So as a result of the intensity of the work leading to 
that period I took some time out after reaching that 
milestone, I asked for time for leave to recharge and as 
such, by the – when the board met on that specific day I 
was actually on leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 11 March. 
20 
MR MAROKANE:   On the 11 t h I was on leave, Chair, and it 
was only around nine o’clock at night when the company 
secretary called me to indicate that the board would like 
me to come in and have a conversation with them, it 
pertains to suspensions of some executives. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 116 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you understand why was everything 
so urgent that you must be phoned at 9 p.m. and the board 
wants to see you same evening?  Did you ever understand 
what was this great urgency? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chair, in my affidavit I point out that - 
you know, I asked the company secretary as to how long                     
has the board been meeting and I was given a response 
that they have been meeting the whole day.  
 I wanted to find out as to why is it that they could 
10 
not anticipate that they will need me in the course of their 
meeting at a later stage so that I could also do my 
planning, you know, can we not stand this down to the next 
day and the response I received was that the board 
actually intended to go out and have a media update on the 
subject the following day, which is the 12 t h and it is at that 
point that I actually to meet at six o’clock in the morning, if 
need be.   
We of course met at eight o’clock that morning prior 
to what was already set up as a media interview and 
20 
presentations at ten o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so you met them the following 
morning on the 12 t h? 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja, we met, Chairperson, at eight 
o’clock on the 12 t h, ja, in the morning. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 117 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but it was not the whole board that 
you were meeting at that time, is it not? 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja, my recollection  - and it was quite 
aided by the investigation team that it was primarily the 
members of the People in Governance Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, tell me about your encounter with 
them, your meeting with them. 
MR MAROKANE:   Well, when I arrived for my eight o’clock 
meeting, not all board members were there as yet so I 
stayed in my office for a while and I was later called into 
10 
the boardroom.   
The Chairman of the board was actually presiding 
over this meeting.  He welcomed me into the meeting and 
they said, you know, we are having conversations of 
executives, you are one of them that you need to have a 
conversation with and this pertains to specifically the 
board’s decision to institute an independent inquiry into 
the dealings of the company so they can understand 
precisely where we are and part of the resolution was quite 
clear that this investigation has to happen in a space that 
20 
is free from the influence of executives in whose areas of 
responsibilities the investigation is going to focus and as 
such I am going to be, you know, put on suspension for a 
period time when the investigation is ongoing.  
He made it very clear, Chair, that the investigation 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 118 of 288 
 
will take no longer than three months and also was quite at 
pains to explain that, you know, there is nothing wrong or 
any allegations against me that have been tabled, they 
need to create an atmosphere that is free to get to the 
bottom of the issues here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, continue, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  In explaining all 
that to you, Mr Marokane, the Chairperson – who is the 
Chairperson now at this stage? 
MR MAROKANE:   The Chairperson was Mr Zola Tsotsi. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Zola Tsotsi.  Does he explain also 
to you whether the board has any adverse allegations 
against you, allegations of misconduct, allegations of 
wrongdoing? 
MR MAROKANE:   No.  Chairperson, none of those were 
put forth.  As I said, he really emphasised that there is no 
wrongdoing on the part of the executives that was being 
suspended.   
The intention here is to create a space of unfettered 
access in terms of the board arriving at its own conclusion 
20 
in terms of the condition and state of the company. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We understand that there were issues 
relative to the war room, inaccurate information  given to 
the war room or unreliable information.  Was that raised 
with you in that meeting? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 119 of 288 
 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, none of that was raised 
with me.  I can put it also here that, you know, in the one 
meeting around my portfolio, that I had with two or three of 
the board members, this was some three weeks before 
then, I had suggested to the board that the intensity and 
pace of the war room in tackling the issues that we are 
dealing with required an accelerated pace of on-boarding 
the board so that they can meaningfully engage with the 
executives 
but 
also 
provide 
the 
guidance 
that 
the 
executives 
require 
from 
them 
and 
we 
had 
started 
10 
conversations around can we even look at a weekend 
session where we can spend more intense time to bring 
them up to speed. 
So at that point in time, Chair, nothing was raised 
about the unhappiness coming from the war room.   
If anything else, this could have been an issue of 
how do we accelerate the learning curve of the board 
members to be on par to meaningfully direct executives or 
contribute in the war room process itself. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Now your – the annexure 
20 
to your affidavit which is on page 6 of the bundle.  It is a 
letter I believe is addressed by you to the Chairperson now 
during your suspension. 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before that, Mr Seleka. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 120 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before we go to that letter, let us see if 
we can finalise that meeting.  I know that in the letter you 
touch on what happened at that meeting. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was advanced to you as the need 
for your suspension. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At that meeting. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja, Chairperson, in that meeting I 
10 
actually sat next to Mr Tsotsi, he was seated positioned 
like this.  He had a piece of paper that he was probably 
using to jog his memory in terms of the sequence of the 
points he needed to raise with me and that is a point that 
piece of paper, copy thereof, was also presented through 
to me so I could follow the story line with him but that was 
not before he had dealt with probably the important part, 
which was the opening paragraph of that letter which dealt 
with the rationale for the suspension.  
As I said, at that point in time he was really still 
20 
freewheeling 
and 
explained 
the 
rationale 
for 
the 
suspension to be one of we want to investigate and find 
out what really is happening and as a result of that you will 
be suspended. 
But we, you know, we reiterate you are not, you 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 121 of 288 
 
know, guilty of anything, there is no allegations against 
you, this will be a real fact finding exercise. 
 
The rationale for the suspension, Chairperson, is 
carried in the first two paragraphs of that letter but 
because he was really talking a lot of [indistinct] 29.37 on 
it, when we got to a point of dealing with the points now on 
a point by point, we were somewhere around point 4 or 
point 5.  That is when I got a copy of the letter to start 
moving with him.   
At that point in time I realised that some of the 
10 
process issues that he was confirming with me were 
inaccurate. 
 
For instance, it carried – and I carried this in that 
letter, my first letter which is on page 6 there.   You know 
one of the paragraphs which is in paragraph 5 it says: 
“I confirm that you made, you Dan Marokane, made 
various representations in respect of your possible 
suspension.  We have considered them thoroughly.” 
There was nothing like that, you know you’re sitting over 
here, these things are being read through to me, so I was 
20 
quick to pick this kind of inaccuracies and I requested that 
we actually scratch them out of my suspension letter. 
 
I was going to have to sign the suspension letter 
and therefore I needed it to be as accurate as possible.  
So this was scratched out, Chairperson, you’ll see that in 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 122 of 288 
 
my suspension letter two parts, including the date of the 
letter, because I met the Board a day after they already 
typed these letters, I corrected these inaccuracies and got 
the Chairman to initial next to me with the concurrence of 
the rest of the Board members who were there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you wonder what he was talking 
about 
when 
he 
said, 
you 
have 
made 
various 
representations that they’ve considered, which means he is 
sitting next to you and nothing like that has happened? 
MR MAROKANE:   And Chairperson, I mean, I’m a Senior 
10 
Executive I’m quite au fait with the disciplinary processes 
and what it entails, I could immediately see that this is, 
you know, this is procedurally getting quite messed up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay yes, so ultimately you had an 
agreement with him to cross out certain things in the letter 
that were not accurate? 
MR MAROKANE:   That’s correct Chairperson, we crossed 
out the areas that were, immediately visible to me being 
inaccurate including the date of the letter at the top and 
those two sections that I referred to and then we signed 
20 
the letter – we both signed the letter and I left the meeting 
room. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and that was your letter of 
suspension? 
MR MAROKANE:   That was my letter of suspension. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 123 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   It became the letter to which, you know, 
I reflected on in the next few days and wrote quite an 
elaborate letter to Mr Zola Tsotsi which is – that on the 18 t h 
of March, Chairperson, I wrote that letter to address, 
specifically, three things, the first one was the inaccuracies 
that I picked up in the meeting but also the inaccuracies 
that I subsequently found out that I could not see 
immediately in the meeting, that was the first issue, so I 
was dealing with factual issues.  The second one of the 
10 
things 
that 
I 
raised 
in 
there, 
Chairperson, 
was 
the 
discontinuity of the rationale that I was picking up from 
what he told me, verbally in that meeting and what I linked 
over from the first paragraph that was written there that, 
that first paragraph spoke about something else it spoke 
about intentional sabotage or intentional tampering of the 
power system.  So, I needed to reconcile the positions that 
he articulated and what he wrote and also the position that 
the company articulating in the public.  So, I addressed 
that particular thing as well in my first letter then the last 
20 
thing of course, if I may, Chairperson, dealt with the issue 
– I went to town in terms of explaining how I ended up 
being in a chair as an Executive of Group Capital, how I 
was sent there to go and fix problems, what I did exactly, 
what it resulted in and he milestone that we reached the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 124 of 288 
 
week before, imploring to the Board, to say, can we – can 
you let me get on with the business of fixing this thing and 
gaining the traction that we had set up ourselves in terms 
of accelerating the recovery of our schedule.  I offered, 
again in there, that I’m available I’d like to engage with 
this fact-finding mission of yours.  I reminded the Board in 
that document that we have just completed two intense 
forensic studies in terms of what were the problems with 
the welding issues at Medupi and how were we looking like 
in relation to the benchmark of a further project execution.  
10 
These were Board instituted processes that were less than 
a year old and we were ready executing on those we were 
gaining traction it was not the right time to actually be 
starting another inquiry that is not well defined.  I raised 
these three issues in that letter of mine, that letter was 
never acknowledged nor responded to and it became a 
pattern with all the subsequent letters like the rest of the 
Board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s where you wanted to go and – so 
20 
you are there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Marokane has covered certain 
important features on the letter, it is quite a detailed letter 
but it’s self explanatory we don’t have to read it into the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 125 of 288 
 
record.  We can read into the record only some parts if 
there are some that are particularly important but let me 
allow you to continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no correct, I think Mr Marokane, 
just that last part at paragraph 26 we have read it out to – 
I think Dr Ngubane as well it says, 
“If the Board has an absolutely genuine desire to, 
one, get to the heart of all Eskom problems, two, 
understand how those problems came about, three, 
and 
how 
they 
were, 
over 
time, 
handled 
and 
10 
mishandled and four, what Eskom needs to do in 
order to overcome  its challenges. I’m willing to 
cooperate with the independent investigation on the 
basis that I will be allowed to advance and share 
my genuinely held oath and my frank views without 
fear 
of 
retribution 
or 
any 
other 
adverse 
consequence to me, my professional integrity, my 
reputation in the marketplace and importantly my 
career in Eskom and my anticipated and, indeed, 
hoped for career path within Eskom”. 
20 
 
So, you still hoped for a career path within Eskom? 
MR MAROKANE:   That’s correct, Chairperson, we had a 
lot of work to do.  I joined Eskom as part of a broader 
belief and I was not yet anywhere close to where I thought 
the organisation needs to be with the assistance of 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 126 of 288 
 
professionals like myself. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see your reference to – that you be 
allowed to advise and share your genuinely held, open and 
frank view without fear of retribution.  We heard earlier, Mr 
Linnell talking about, he motivated for the suspension 
because the top Executives are there, he feared that they 
would not allow for an independent investigation even fear 
of reprisals by those who are working under the top 
Executives but it seems here, you are the one who had the 
fear of retribution. 
10 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, and this really comes from 
the work that we had done in understanding how we got 
there.  The delays in the programmes and so on, they 
required people who to face and fix the problem, you 
needed to, as one colleague of mine says, you needed to 
make reality your friend, you needed to face up to bad 
news, you have to be bad news ready, that way you can 
start going to your inner depths and finding solutions and 
talking about what was wrong inside Eskom or what was 
wrong with the projects, must as, amongst ourselves 
20 
professionals will easily get to the point, I’m not certain 
that, you know, then and even now, is a matter that is 
easily embraced by others who invested in – even including 
the shareholders.  So, part of fixing these problems is 
being able to face the truth and that’s what I was referring 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 127 of 288 
 
to there.  That if we have to go down the path of 
establishing what exactly happened, we have to be ready, 
all of us to acknowledge what works and what does not 
work without, you know, applying any coating to it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, what do  you say to this statement 
or allegation that, well your suspension was made because 
you could influence people under you, you could intimidate 
them not to cooperate with the inquiry? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson I wouldn’t spend a lot of 
time on that, as I said, this investigation was meant to 
10 
establish facts and against the background of having not 
been accused of anything or allegations it doesn’t make 
sense to me, why would I want to do that kind of 
irresponsible act as an Executive? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, as you were explaining your 
suspension to the Chairperson, I wanted to refer you to 
your letter which is on page 123 of the Bundle.  Page 123 
that will be top left-hand corner. 
MR MAROKANE:   I’ve got a different number here. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It’s further on. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let’s ask…[intervenes].  
MR MAROKANE:   Is it the red numbers or the black ones? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The black ones. 
CHAIRPERSON: That’s Eskom’s letter to him, is that right?   
ADV SELEKA SC:   That’s the suspension letter, yes 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 128 of 288 
 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It’s further on. 
MR MAROKANE:   Further on? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   Okay, sorry, okay I’ve got it – no sorry I 
don’t have it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, look if you just ask him, he 
probably will be able to respond even without reading the 
letter. 
10 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, I have it here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He had a lot of time to look at that 
letter, ask him what you want to ask him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes when you were dealing with the 
changes you were making I see you were paging, I thought 
you wanted to find the letter, I didn’t want to interrupt you.  
So that’s the letter that – the explanations of which you 
were making to the Chairperson. 
MR MAROKANE:   That’s correct, on that letter Chair, 
you’ll notice that the dates of 11 March is scratched out 
20 
and 12 t h inserted there, that point is also initialled, both by 
myself and the then Chairperson, Mr Zola Tsotsi, paragraph 
4 – paragraph 5, the sentence starting with, “I confirm 
that”, I’ve scratched that out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja one can see that ja. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 129 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That’s right, thank you and then that 
paragraph 1 of the letter, Mr Marokane it says, 
“I refer to the meeting of today, 11 March 2015 
wherein we discussed the company’s concerns 
regarding the serious state of the company and the 
Board resolution to conduct an independent inquiry 
into the possibility that the power delivery may be 
compromised by, either, intentional or negligent 
conduct”, 
 
Did you understand this statement? 
10 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, that’s exactly the point I 
was raising, that when we began the meeting and Mr Tsotsi 
was explaining the Board’s decision, at this point in time, 
after the pleasantries he was actually talking without direct 
reference to the note he has, which I now know, is a letter 
and he had already sketched the picture, as I articulated 
earlier that it’s about finding out the true state.  We started 
focusing on the specifics of the letter as we were moving 
from paragraph 3 or so down, which is why I was able to 
pick up inconsistencies or inaccuracies.  You will also see 
20 
that, in the first paragraph I have not scratched out the 11 t h 
of March date which is repeated there but certainly the 
reason as explained in here, the possibility that the power 
delivery may be compromised by, either, intentional or 
negligent conduct was not brought to my attention at that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 130 of 288 
 
point in time because this is different from fact-finding to 
establish what is happening because what is insinuated 
here is that there could have been some act of misconduct, 
I could have spent some time on that and this is why I 
wrote that letter subsequent to having time to read it in 
detail but also subsequent to looking at the rationale that 
Eskom was advancing to the world out there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But during your meeting with Mr Tsotsi 
on the 12 t h and whoever else was there, did you object to 
10 
the suspension or did you not object, you accepted that 
they’d made whatever decision, you didn’t agree with it but 
did not object or you did object? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, I may not have explicitly 
used the word, I object to the decision.  I definitely saw 
that you have taken no input from me whatsoever in 
arriving at your decision.  This was defined already. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   It was premeditated, it was finished. I 
was being told what you have decided and this is the 
20 
essence of some parts of my letter to them, that you’ve 
decided that you’re going to go down this route and I made 
it a point that my own views, having studied the letter, 
having observed what was being said in the media that this 
is an unprocedural process that they’ve taken.  I may as 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 131 of 288 
 
well, at this point,  counsel, through you, indicate to the 
Chairperson that this letter that I sent on the 18 t h of March 
was on my own personal letterhead, Dan Marokane, it 
came from me because at that point in time, despite the 
legal help I was receiving, I felt I needed to continue to 
extend some hand of collaboration here with the Board that 
maybe we can find each other before this becomes a 
lawyer talk. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that came from you it hadn’t been 
prepared for you by a lawyer? 
10 
MR MAROKANE:  Well I prepared it in consultation with my 
lawyers, but I needed to remain the face of engagement 
with my Board at this point in time it’s an Executive – in 
engagement with this Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  So, ultimately your 
meeting with Mr Tsotsi and other members of the PMG 
Committee ended and you left on the basis that you were 
suspended with immediate effect? 
MR MAROKANE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Seleka do you want to take it 
20 
from there, what happened, any interactions after that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you Chair.  Mr Marokane 
you say then this letter was not responded to, what 
happens thereafter? 
MR MAROKANE:   Well after that, Chairperson, two days 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 132 of 288 
 
after I sent my letter and it wasn’t acknowledged or 
responded to, my lawyers sent another letter to the, then 
Chairperson, Mr Zola Tsotsi indicating that they’re acting 
on my behalf and would like to understand if we’ll be 
receiving any response to my letters.  More importantly it’s 
– maybe, counsel if you can help me in terms of finding 
where the Annexure is but indicating that this is a 
procedurally unfair process and they would like to start 
engaging with the organisation, I think it’s also in that 
letter that we spoke about, you know, getting an update in 
10 
terms of the terms of reference of the investigation so that 
we could collaborate. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes let’s see, if you turn to page 111 
whether that is the letter you’re looking for. 
MR MAROKANE:   That’s correct Chairperson, that would 
be a letter from Brian Khan Attorneys, that basically is a 
follow up on my un-responded to letter and just detailing 
the process of how we would like to engage in, ultimately, 
leading to the information around the investigation itself. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, this letter is dated 20 March 2015, 
20 
from Brian Khan Attorneys. 
MR MAROKANE:   It is from Brian Khan Attorneys it is 
correct addressed to Mr Zola Tsotsi and copied to the 
company secretary at the time, Mr Malesela Phukubje. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And did you receive a response to this 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 133 of 288 
 
letter? 
MR 
MAROKANE: 
 
 
This 
letter, 
like 
the 
first 
one, 
Chairperson was not responded to or acknowledge as well. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that letter ends on page 113. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then there was another letter at 
page 115 dated 28 April 2015, do you see that one, from 
your lawyers, I think? 
MR MAROKANE:   That’s correct, Chairperson, the letter 
which is marked as DM3 on page 115 was sent on the 28 t h 
of April so this is some good – the last letter is on the 8 t h 
10 
of March so over a month later or some six weeks later, we 
follow up with another letter, this time a number of things 
had happened, you know, by that time we thought surely 
the three month long investigation must be underway at 
this point in time.  We wanted to get some sense of the 
terms of reference, we were not afforded those stellar 
points, we raised, in this letter, a point we raised in our 
first letter in terms of the discontinuity in the rationale of 
our suspension based on what was publicly available in 
terms of the reasons for the rationale all are sitting in our 
20 
letter in our letter but now we also had linked over papers 
that were in the labour dispute with Mr Matona in terms of 
the Chairman’s affidavit responding to that. New reasons 
were actually advanced in that case in as far as, why the 
suspension happened.  So, we wanted to engage with 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 134 of 288 
 
Eskom to actually understand, what exactly is going on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is it because you thought there was 
reasons – the new reasons you referred to, applied also to 
you? 
MR MAROKANE:   Excuse me, please say that again? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What you said – you’re saying they 
advanced new reason in the affidavit of Mr Tsotsi. 
MR MAROKANE:   Yes, they actually contained in – that 
note is contained in paragraph 6.2.  The pleadings that 
10 
were made by the Chairperson, specifically, dealt with 
allegations 
regarding 
the 
eradication 
of 
misconduct, 
reference to wrongdoing or misconduct or negligence and 
performance of the Executives.  This was sitting in the 
Labour Court matter that Mr Matona was dealing with, so 
we sought to understand from Eskom the rationale – the 
real rationale and which of this that we were being paddled 
and moving around is the basis of our suspension which we 
deemed unfair at that point in time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, if you page on, we see that there 
20 
seems to have been a response to that letter from Bowman 
Gilfillan it’s an email on page 118. 
MR MAROKANE:   That’s correct, Chairperson, it says, 
after that letter, we received a response from Eskom’s 
lawyers, 
Bowman 
Gilfillan 
who 
essentially 
dismissed 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 135 of 288 
 
anything that we had raised, did not engage substantively 
on it and just reserved their rights and confirmed that, at 
that point in time the client was not willing – or was not of 
the view that it should share the terms of reference of the 
Commission with us because then we compromise the 
inquiry.  So, that was the only response …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That you ever got. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja, after nine weeks or so of sitting at 
home as a Senior Executive waiting and having no contact 
with my employer, basically I was in the dark for all this 
10 
period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How did the suspension affect you? 
MR MAROKANE:   Well, Chairperson, I think on a 
professional level, you know, how I came into Eskom, I was 
not – I really say this with absolute humility, I was not a 
moderate performer.  I was recruited into Eskom because 
of my abilities and skills. Now to be sitting at home with a 
cloud of suspicion and poor performance on you, it’s very 
painful  on a professional level.  On a personal level it’s 
my name being dragged into all this insinuations that’s 
20 
going on.  It’s my family name being dragged into all of 
this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then when was the next step you 
decided to take after this, and what was the step? 
MR MAROKANE:   So, my assessment of – Chairperson, 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 136 of 288 
 
my assessment of Eskom’s response through their lawyers 
was that they are not going to genuinely engage with the 
issues that I’ve identified as being material.  It takes one 
act, 
one 
act 
of 
inconsistency 
in 
breaking 
a 
trust 
relationship but over a period of nine weeks, this was 
sufficient for me to arrive at the conclusion that the 
working relationship that is supposed to be based on trust 
with 
the 
Board, 
was 
no 
longer 
existing 
and 
having 
experienced in other places, what happens the moment 
you’ve got tension between the Boards and the Executives, 
10 
I did not want the situation to re-visit Eskom, it had too 
many things to focus on, the country needed it to be 
focused on doing the task, I was just one person, Dan 
Marokane, I understood what is going on here, let me 
remove myself and at that point in time, Chair, I picked up 
the 
phone 
and 
called 
the, 
then 
interim 
Chairperson 
because Mr Zola Tsotsi had left, I picked up the phone and 
called Dr Ngubane, Dr Ngubane whom I knew very well 
before he came to Eskom.  Me and him belonged to the 
same denomination and not the same church so we didn’t 
20 
go 
to 
the 
same 
church 
we 
belonged 
to 
the 
same 
denomination, we were both Catholics and I said to him, 
you know, my honest assessment is that our working 
relationship of trust is broken can we find a way of 
peacefully separating with each other.  He was quite 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 137 of 288 
 
grateful for the call, he undertook to identify part of the 
Board 
members 
who 
could, 
perhaps, 
start 
these 
conversations with me and the following day he actually 
reverted 
to 
the 
names 
of 
the 
Board 
members 
who 
subsequently 
met 
with 
me 
and 
I 
think 
over 
two 
engagements and multiple emails back and forth we arrived 
with what is sitting as an Annexure here, separation 
agreement to the organisation and I left. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well when you contacted Dr Ngubane 
and said to him that you thought that, in fact, there was no 
10 
trust anymore between yourself and either Eskom or the 
Board, did he say anything along the lines that – and when 
you said, can you talk about parting ways, did he say 
anything along the lines that, hang on, the Board actually 
contemplates that you should come back it has no issues 
with you, there is no problem of trust, you know, this 
inquiry did not – or is not looking into any wrongdoing, we 
– as far as the Board is concerned we expect you to come 
back in due course, so why are you talking about the 
parting of ways? 
20 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson I stated my position with Dr 
Ngubane of, you know, me having lost trust in the Board 
that we can function together going forth and as a result, I 
requested we engage in discussions for mutually agreeable 
separation.  He heard me, he thanked me for reaching out 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 138 of 288 
 
and he undertook to revert with mandated individuals for 
that conversation and that actually happened very swiftly 
Chairperson. The following day – this call, I do recall it 
was in the evening on a Thursday the following day I had 
the names of the two people who were going to engage 
with 
me 
and 
they 
reached 
out 
and 
we 
began 
the 
conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From your point of view, how were you 
feeling at the time that you decided to approach Dr 
Ngubane, how were you feeling about any future with 
10 
Eskom? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chair, as I said, you know the – 
captured in my first letter I was still fully committed to 
getting back and we get on with the job. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   At that point, nine weeks later, having 
been ignored in the manner that it happened and also 
seeing the various messages coming from the Board at that 
point in time, I was no longer willing to be working with a 
party like that, you know, I had a choice here.  The choice 
20 
is really, me walking because the Board is new, the Board 
is not going to be fired to accommodate one Executive who 
feels that trust issues are done, I understood it very clearly 
that I’m in a space where I cannot work with those – I’m 
supposed to work with – from a position of trust I was 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 139 of 288 
 
disappointed.  It was a very premature ending of a career, I 
thought I’d make, within the SOE and as a matter of fact 
within the SOE’s as well because I came from one SOE 
prior to joining Eskom. It was an abrupt end to what I saw 
as a long career and definitely an abrupt end to anything 
that I was contemplating even in the periods leading up to 
the response of the 30 t h also from the team. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you met with a delegation of the 
Board, or representatives of the Board? 
MR 
MAROKANE: 
 
 
Ja, 
the 
two 
Board 
members, 
10 
Chairperson, who were mandated to engage with me on 
this subject were Mr Romeo Kumalo and Mr Zethembe 
Khoza and both gentlemen – I don’t recall who of the two 
actually reached out to set up our first meeting and it was 
very, you know, social set up, nothing too tense, we had a 
first 
conversation. 
 
We 
had 
a 
second 
conversation, 
probably,  a week apart and I’m very aware they were 
supported by the system back in the organisation because 
they needed to go back and check points or check 
mandates and ultimately with the participation of Ms Klein 
20 
who has also been here we arrived at the separation 
agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How many meetings did you have before 
you reached agreement? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson I had – my recollection is 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 140 of 288 
 
two meetings face to face meetings with those two 
gentlemen and in the process, we may have exchanged 
close to 20 email correspondences back and forth. I 
definitely had at least four email correspondence towards 
the end with Ms Venete Klein on trying to get particular 
aspects of the agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When Dr Ngubane was here as well as 
Ms Klein, when they gave their evidence on different days, 
here one of the issues that arose was whether the 
departure of the three executives, including you, from 
10 
Eskom, that is yourself, Mr Matona and Ms Molefe was an 
issue that arose was whether or not the executives decided 
on their own that they no longer wanted to continue 
working for Eskom or whether it was representatives of the 
board or some board members who interacted with them 
who indicated that those executives were not welcome 
back.  Mr Matona gave evidence that he was told by the 
representatives of the board who met with him that the 
issue of him going back to his job was off the table and 
they could talk about another basis of parting ways.  That 
20 
is what he said.   
 
So with regard to you, how would you describe the 
situation in terms of your decision to approach Dr Ngubane 
about the possibility of exiting Eskom? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, I can confirm that I made 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 141 of 288 
 
the approach with Dr Ngubane.  So if you look at the 
mechanics of it, I reached out.  Those are the mechanics 
but you have to look at the circumstances leading to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   And the trail of evidence of my letters 
and the issues that I raise in them and their respond.  Very 
careful response towards the end suggested to me that, 
you know, I could have done it then or it was going to be 
just a matter of time. 
 
This is now a – this is now how you treat an 
10 
executive that you want to come back to work?  This is not 
how you treat that executive, it is not how you treat an 
executive that to say there is no allegations against them 
and you just want them to come back after you found the 
facts to continue with your work.   
We have broken very important core line of trust 
here and therefore, you have rendered, you know, our 
relationship not to be conducive for working. 
 
So I made the call based on the behaviour that was 
being displayed by Eskom up to – by the board up to that 
20 
point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not know whether you say so in one 
of your letters but is the position that when you looked at 
what had happened from the day of your suspension up to 
the time when you decided to reach out to Dr Ngubane, is 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 142 of 288 
 
the position that you concluded that you were not wanted 
by the board anymore? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chair, that is essentially 
the point I was raising that the manner in which the board 
conducted itself in engaging with me whilst on suspension 
on the matters that raised suggested that I am not welcome 
at the board, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Do you remember whether actually 
do say so in one of your letters?  I seem to remember that 
you say you felt unwanted.  Do you remember whether you 
10 
say anything along those lines?  I do not know whether I 
am confusing what you may have said in letters or whether 
it might be Ms Molefe who says that but I seem to think it 
was you. 
MR MAROKANE:   So maybe if I may refer to some 
semblance of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MAROKANE:   In my first affidavit, Chairperson, 
paragraph 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MAROKANE:   Paragraph 3 there is a sentence that 
starts with: 
“As time progressed it became clear to me that the 
board was deliberately frustrating me.  It was well 
into 
the 
month 
of 
May 
around 
the 
20 t h 
and 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 143 of 288 
 
[indistinct] 04.52 around the 13 t h that I called the 
interim Chairman of the board, Dr Ben Ngubane in 
the evening to indicate to him that I had come to 
the conclusion that I could no longer trust the board 
and as such I wanted us to discuss how to 
separate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   And by the following morning the two 
gentlemen designated to carry out those conversations with 
me were already notified and were ready to engage. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So the two members of the board 
who met with you, Mr Romeo Kumalo and who was the 
other person? 
MR MAROKANE:   And Mr Zethembe Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and Mr Zethembe Khoza.  When they 
met with you they came on the basis or spoke to you on 
the basis that what was to be discussed was the parting of 
the ways, is that right? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, there was no other discussion of 
20 
anything else. 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And ultimately you reached a 
settlement agreement with Eskom, is that right? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chair, and I left the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 144 of 288 
 
service of the utility at the end of May. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
And, 
of 
course, 
the 
settlement 
agreement is here, I saw it.  In terms of that settlement 
agreement were you paid effectively a year ’s salary, half 
month’s salary? 
MR MAROKANE:   No, Chairperson, I was paid an 
equivalent of six months’ salary and I was paid some of the 
bonus schemes that were due but not yet payable before 
10 
the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   So it was really around that, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So, okay, I thought – I think one of 
the people or maybe Dr Ngubane or Ms Klein or maybe Mr 
Tsotsi, I thought that somebody said for all the three 
executives who did not come back they were paid about 12 
months’ salary but you say certainly in your case that was 
not the case. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja.  Chairperson, let me address that 
20 
matter.  In the separation agreement the makeup of the 
separation amount is not explicit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   It is a lump sum number [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously]. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 145 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   I know that if that number meant 12 
months of my salary together with other provisions of 
payments it could have been – the sum total could have 
been a higher number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MAROKANE:   So that I know that it was made up of 
six months’ salary, it was made up of – and it is there, Mr 
Anton Minnaar ’s explanations of how he dealt with this 
retention bonus systems. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   Some components of those, I was made 
it up but in the end it may look like equal to 12 months 
salary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A year ’s salary, yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   But it was made up of different 
components. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  So would it be correct to say 
…[intervenes] 
MR MAROKANE:   The equivalent of …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Irrespective of how it was made up it 
was – the total amount is in the region – was in the region 
of a year ’s salary. 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.  Okay, alright. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 146 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is on page 125, Chairperson, the 
settlement agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Mr Marokane, yes, insofar as you 
say Mrs Venete Klein did the last interaction with you in 
regard to the settlement agreement.  May I quickly just 
refer you to the pages.  Page 299.4.  It is in reverse order, 
I beg your pardon, to 299.1. 
10 
MR MAROKANE:   Okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   You will see it is a string of emails 
from the 21 May 2015. 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The last one being on the 31 August 20 
– no, no, the 27 May 2015. 
MR MAROKANE:   27 May 2015, that is correct. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Would 
that 
have 
been 
your 
engagement with Ms Klein in regard to the settlement 
agreement? 
20 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson, so you will 
see that the first email from her to me was on the 21 May 
2015 and we had a few emails back and forth, almost every 
day, up to the 27 May 2015.  This was essentially the final 
version of the separation agreement, we signed it on the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 147 of 288 
 
28  May, became effective from the 1 June. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I asked Dr Ngubane and Ms Klein 
when they gave evidence here and they told me that the 
board had no problem with these executives and that 
actually the board wanted them back.   
I asked them why the board paid these executives 
so much money if the position was that the executives 
decided by themselves to leave and the board actually 
wanted them to stay.   
I said if the executives said they wanted to leave 
10 
and you wanted them to stay, why did you not say look, as 
far as we are concerned, you are welcome to continue, we 
have in mind that we – you will still part of the future of 
this company but if you decide on your own you want to 
leave then that is your decision, why did you agree to pay 
so much money?  Are you able to say anything to me on 
that issue as to why Eskom of the board was prepared to 
pay the money that they paid to reach a settlement? 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, I can confirm that in an 
engagement the subject of the board’s wish to have me 
20 
back was never broached so this …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was never brought up. 
MR MAROKANE:   It was never brought there, it was never 
on the table, it was never on the table. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 148 of 288 
 
MR MAROKANE:   And, you know, now that you raise it, I 
just remember my contract maybe somewhere in here, 
counsel, but if you look at the provisions of my employment 
contract, I am speaking under correction but I think my 
notice period was actually six months.   
So if the board – ja, say the board did not want me 
to leave the board could have enjoyed the further six 
months of my service without having to pay a cent because 
I would have been obligated to see through my notice 
period.  Ja, so all those instruments were there, whatever.  
10 
Ja, I think it is between three months or six months but I 
do recall it was quite unusually long.  Ja, six months. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your own understanding of why they 
were prepared to pay this, the money that they paid did 
maybe through a discussion with the representatives?  Are 
you able to say what your understanding was of why they 
were prepared to pay? 
MR MAROKANE:   My understanding, Chairperson, is that 
they were prepared to pay for my departure because they 
realised or by then they would have realised that what they 
20 
had carried to us, to me in particular, was procedurally 
unfair and could have been successfully challenged in a 
court.  They could see from my correspondence to them 
specifically the response from my lawyers on the 2 May, in 
response to their lawyers, very light response that they 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 149 of 288 
 
were – my lawyers were taking advice and consultation for 
me in terms of what is the next steps and I - you know, the 
only sense they wanted to avoid a protracted legal battle 
and hence they were ready to pay me to go away. 
 
I 
do 
– 
and 
I 
can 
also, 
you 
know, 
indicate, 
Chairperson, that I listened to Dr Ngubane’s presentation 
here and he said something to that effect himself, but… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, he did, but let me put this to 
you.  If you challenged your suspension on the basis that it 
was – the process was unfair.  Remember that during your 
10 
suspension you were getting your salary, is that right? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the only thing that could happen is 
that your suspension could be stopped by the CCMA or by 
a court and then you would go back. 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You understand that? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I doubt that there will be any money you 
would get because this was not a suspension without pay, 
20 
you understand that? 
MR MAROKANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But at the time that you reached out to 
Dr Ngubane, you were not too far, were you, to the expiry 
of the three months of the inquiry. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 150 of 288 
 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the understanding had been, when 
you were suspended, that you were suspended pending the 
completion of the inquiry, is it not? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the question for me is if you went to 
court at the time you reached out to Dr Ngubane, one, to 
challenge the suspension financially does not look like 
there was going to be anything financially you would get 
because you were being paid. 
10 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But maybe the court or the CCMA could 
say this suspension must be terminated because it is 
procedurally unfair but that would be very close to the 
expiry of the three months anyway. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But also, they could appeal or review 
and then three months would expire. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you would come back anyway. 
20 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
So 
I 
have 
that 
issue 
with 
that 
suggestion, you know, that in terms of going to court, one, 
it was unlikely that it was going to cost Eskom any money 
if you went to court and succeeded.  If the court of the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 151 of 288 
 
CCMA stopped the suspension, one, the three months was 
about to expire anyway but two, there would have been a 
review or an appeal. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which would have allowed the three 
months to expire anyway.  So I have some doubts whether 
or not, to say the least, whether or not that could have 
been a genuine concern on their part. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja.  Chairperson, I mean, I did not know 
fully what was really going through their minds but I can 
10 
tell you two other key considerations from my part which 
you just have reminded me.  You know, you indicate that at 
the point when I reached out to initiate the separation 
discussions we were about a month away from the 
conclusion of the third month.  At that point in time, 
Chairperson, nobody knew, myself in particular, how far the 
investigation progressed and whether it had even started, 
as a matter of fact. 
 
So the three months, whilst know about the three 
months at the beginning, I was uncertain as to whether 
20 
they started on time and were going to finish it within the 
three months period itself. 
 
And then the key other consideration on my side – 
and so this talks to the waking up in the morning and 
basically basking in the sun, that I was being subjected.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 152 of 288 
 
That did not sit well with me. 
 
And then the second issue of course is the fact 
that, you know, if a court of law was to find that this is 
procedurally unfair and Marokane must return back to 
Eskom, this was basically meaning I am going to go back 
and work with the people in whom I have lost trust.  So this 
is a recipe for disaster.   
So my consideration at that point in time to say I 
have been placed in a position where it is untenable for me 
to continue to work with this board so I need to leave. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, you see, I do not have a problem 
with the points you make but those points go towards the 
question of why you decided to reach out in the way you 
did. 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They do not explain why Eskom decided 
to pay so much money. 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because they, the board, the people who 
were doing investigations were reporting to the board. 
20 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So one must take it that the board knew 
how far the investigation was and how far – how much time 
was left before the investigation would be completed, you 
see? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 153 of 288 
 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might not have known. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But they must have known. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja, ja, I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is part of my query to say from 
their side if they wanted the executives to continue, I have 
difficulty understanding why they were prepared to pay as 
much as they offered to pay.  But you are not them, you 
can speak for yourself. 
10 
MR MAROKANE:   Chairperson, now you have made me 
more curious, I will be following you more to hear whether 
you are getting his response, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR MAROKANE:   I say you have now sharpened my 
curiosity, I will be watching carefully as to whether we will 
ever get to that answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Okay, alright.  I do not 
know whether, Mr Seleka, there is anything further you 
wish to get from Mr Marokane. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think from my side I have covered 
most of the things if not all the things I wanted to cover. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, indeed, Chair, you have covered 
nearly everything.  I just wanted to clarify on the evidence 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 154 of 288 
 
they presented here is that the delegation of the board had 
a mandate to settle at a maximum of 12 months. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So they could settle at anything up to 
12 months.   
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that is one thing.  And lastly, Mr 
Marokane, we have the board minutes of 11 March 2015 
before the Minister came there and I see that you could not 
attend the meeting, there is an apology from your side 
10 
together with other people but I that minute it is record 
here that: 
“With 
regard 
to 
Group 
Capital 
and 
the 
Build 
Programme it was noted that the board had visited 
to Medupi.  It was reported that Medupi Unit 6 had 
been synchronized which was a significant event in 
Eskom’s history and was the first time such an even 
had taken place in the last 20 years.  It was noted 
that in future the Minister of PE wanted to be 
included in successful events like this.” 
20 
That will be the Minister of Public Enterprise.  Is that an 
aspect that relates to you? 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja.  Chairperson, the matter being 
referred to – first of all, I was not a board member so I 
only attended board meetings by invitation. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 155 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   By invitation, ja. 
MR MAROKANE:   With fellow Exco members when it 
happened.  This specific incident happened in the week of 
the 
5 t h, 
6 t h 
or 
so 
of 
March. 
 
It 
is 
a 
matter 
that 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the milestone you were talking 
about. 
MR MAROKANE:   The milestone I am talking about, 
Chairperson, it is very difficult to plan it to the T because it 
is about how far you have progressed, you know, with the 
10 
construction but also with the -you know, how you – how 
you tuning the plans in terms of getting it ready for the 
particular event of synchronising into the grid.   
So we could not have found a perfect time where 
upfront everybody is there.  We were there as executives 
because we had sense that it will happen between this time 
and that time and so we were there.  And that is what is 
being referred to in that space. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes but what I thought you could 
explain 
to 
the 
Chairperson 
does 
that 
relate 
to 
the 
20 
milestone 
you 
referred 
to 
at 
the 
beginning 
of 
your 
testimony? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  So this 
milestone of eventually getting the first unit of Medupi 
functional was arrived at around the 7 t h of 6 t h of March, 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 156 of 288 
 
that two days thereafter we were back at the war room as 
far as the progress meetings, the war room in Cape Town.  
I took leave three days later only to come back and be 
suspended.  That is basically the sequence of events, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So around the 6 t h of 7 t h of March this 
milestone was reached, is that right? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were very excited about, I 
would guess. 
MR MAROKANE:   Absolutely, ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it was quite an achievement for your 
portfolio. 
MR MAROKANE:   It was a very important achievement for 
the utility. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, unbeknown to you, two days 
later or so, a day or two later, namely 18 March, you were 
being discussed at a meeting in Durban. 
MR MAROKANE:   So I found out, Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Included – your name was included 
among those who were supposed to be suspended. 
MR MAROKANE:   So I found out, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   Yes. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 157 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, must have quite painful when you… 
MR MAROKANE:   It is, it is, the pains you pay for serving 
the country, but… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Marokane, would 
you have come to know one way or the other about the 
pending suspensions in particular your suspension before 
the 11 March? 
MR 
MAROKANE: 
 
 
Ja, 
Chairperson, 
as 
per 
my 
supplementary affidavit in the closed session – and I also 
10 
listened to Ms Daniels’ testimony.  She is correct in saying 
that when she got home the day after the now famous 
Melrose Arch meeting that she called – she reached out to 
me.  I saw her, I saw her that evening because she 
expressed some real sense of urgency and importance on 
this matter.  I saw her, she told me the story as she 
relayed it out here.   
This, back in 2015, looks unthinkable, you know, 
when 
you 
believe 
in 
the 
power 
of 
the 
governance 
committees and how things are done it looked a little bit 
20 
farfetched. 
And what I did, as per my affidavit, Chairperson, 
upon –as I drove back home I reached out to Ms Molefe, 
who is one of my suspended four, to indicate that there is a 
matter like this that may be happening.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 158 of 288 
 
But other than that, that is really the essence of 
how I got to know of it and so we kept watching things as 
they were unfolding, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that might be quite important.  Ms 
Daniels testified about a number of things.   
One of them is that I think on the 10 March she was 
invited or she was taken to a meeting  by Mr Matshela 
Koko at Melrose Arch where the two of them met with Mr 
Salim Essa and at that meeting Mr Salim Essa asked her 
something along the lines what is the procedure at Eskom 
10 
if you want to suspend somebody or how do you suspend 
somebody at Eskom or something like that and at that 
meeting she learnt that there would be suspensions of 
certain executives. 
 
Now are you saying that on that day Ms Daniels did 
tell you about that meeting? 
MR MAROKANE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   Ms Daniels sent me a text – I think she 
probably tried calling me and my phone was off. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   And left me a voicemail to the effect 
that she needed to see me urgently. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   And she could not wait for the next day. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 159 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   This was in early part of the evening 
and she relayed this story as you have just captured it, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   That she has come across this kind of 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   And she felt that she just needed me to 
know 
because 
she 
was 
still 
in 
shock 
in 
terms 
of 
10 
understanding what is intended for me, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You say she first sent you an 
SMS? 
MR MAROKANE:   Yes, she may have sent me an SMS.  
My phone was off, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   You know, remember I was on leave in 
that short time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is your leave, ja. 
MR MAROKANE:   So I may have been engaged in one or 
20 
two other things that led my phone to eventually be off 
having been out - you know, out there for the whole day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So you actually had a meeting that 
evening? 
MR MAROKANE:   Ja. Chairperson, as I state in my 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 160 of 288 
 
affidavit, once I have reached out to her in the early part of 
the evening, I actually drove to her house. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   I drove to her house.  She relayed that 
story in exactly the same manner that you have captured. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAROKANE:   You know, I indicated to her that, you 
know, we work in very competitive space here, there are 
parties 
now 
and 
again 
who 
are 
unhappy 
about 
the 
decisions we make and some of them openly, Chair, say we 
10 
will go report you at DPE or we will go tell the Minister or 
we will go tell the board.  This is something that in our 
execution of duties as executives in the SOEs you 
frequently come across and I had come, you know, through 
a few of those in a short space in Eskom. 
 
So I took that message, well, thanks for letting me 
know but let us see what is very doable here be a few of 
those in a short space in Eskom. 
 
So I took that message, well, thanks for letting me 
know but let us see what is very doable here because this 
20 
looks very farfetched.   
Because I was not a board member and I did not 
know of the board meeting the following I actually called 
Ms Molefe and said look, can I see you before I get to my 
house, there is a matter I need to think about before 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 161 of 288 
 
tomorrow. 
And, you know, upon engaging with her, Ms Molefe, I got 
confirmation that indeed there is a board meeting tomorrow 
and so I relayed the story to her, we were both a bit 
shocked in terms of the intensity of what is being planned 
here, deep down I always believed in the Board doing the 
right thing, or holding or some governance is going to hold 
on and will see how this unfolds, but by the end of the next 
day it was done, it was essentially done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in a certain way you kind of 
10 
corroborate what Ms Daniels says, obviously you were not 
at the meetings between – among yourself and Mr Koko 
and Mr Essa but you say she phoned you and asked that 
you meet, you drove to her house, she told you that this is 
what had happened and you subsequently same evening 
also shared that information with Ms Molefe? 
MR MAROKANE:    That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Chair the – what Mr 
Marokane referred to as a notice period it is in the 
20 
contract, clause 17.3, I will just read it into the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It says: 
“This contract may be terminated by either party 
giving six months written notice to that effect to the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 162 of 288 
 
other party provided that the company shall be 
entitled to terminate this contract without notice for 
reasons justifying a summary dismissal.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It will be included in the reference now 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you done? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am indeed Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay Mr Marokane thank you very 
much for coming to give evidence, we appreciate it very 
much, I don’t know if you might have something you want 
to say before I release you? 
MR 
MAROKANE: 
 
 
Chairperson 
thank 
you 
for 
the 
opportunity, it has been revisiting painful eras, it has not 
been quite easy, but I am glad it is done, thank you very 
much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, you are excused.  
I guess Mr Seleka we must take a short adjournment before 
20 
we start with the next witness? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Certainly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, we 
will take a short 
adjournment, it is about nine minutes to four, shall we 
resume at ten past. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 163 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That will be in order Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we will resume at ten past four, we 
adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes we are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The witness – the next witness is Ms 
10 
Tsholofela Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  She is present and ready to take the 
oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MS MOLEFE:  Tsholofela Beatitude Lettie Molefe. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking to the 
prescribed oath? 
MS MOLEFE:  No I do not. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MS MOLEFE:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 164 of 288 
 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
MS MOLEFE:  I do so help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Chairperson for this witness 
Eskom Bundle 11 has been prepared.  Eskom Bundle 11 Ms 
Molefe you will have a file before you which is similarly 
marked Eskom Bundle 11.  If you look at the sp – the very 
first page the cover page of the – that file and just for 
housekeeping purposes Chairperson just to confirm with the 
10 
witness.  You have provided the commission with an affidavit 
– two affidavits.  The first is found on page 1 or page 5.  I 
beg your pardon.  We follow the pagination on the top left 
hand corner.  The black pagination as opposed to the red 
pagination.  You see that? 
MS MOLEFE:  That is correct I see it – I can see it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You can see it.  Page 5.  It is an affidavit 
that runs up to page 17.  Well there is page 18 also – the 
Commissioner’s details. 
MS MOLEFE:  That I have got up to page 15.  Am I looking 
20 
at the correct one? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Just concentrate on – ja I see.  That is 
the red pagination. 
MS MOLEFE:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Look at the … 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 165 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:  The black pagination. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The left – the pagination in black. 
MS MOLEFE:  Correct 18. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I beg your pardon? 
MS MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You have it? 
MS MOLEFE:  Page 18 I have it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  The signature appears on 
page 17. 
MS MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Is that your signature? 
MS MOLEFE:  That is my signature. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And the affidavit is dated 22 July 2020.  
You confirm that as well? 
MS MOLEFE:  I confirm that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairperson I beg leave to have the 
affidavit marked Exhibit U12.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The most important part is that you ask 
that it be admitted as evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Ms Tsholofelo Beatitude 
Lettie Molefe starting at page 2 of Eskom Bundle 11 will 
admitted as an Exhibit and will be marked Exhibit U12? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  U12 .1.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit U12.1  yes. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 166 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is admitted thank you Chairperson.  
The next Ms Molefe is your supplementary affidavit.  That 
you find on page 597. 
MS MOLEFE:  597. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is Item 13 if you follow the file 
dividers.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  597. 
CHAIRPERSON:  597. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chairperson.  Between tramlines it is 
10 
supplementary affidavit and that runs up to page 607. 
MS MOLEFE:  I have it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You have it.  The signature – under 
deponent you confirm that to be your signature? 
MS MOLEFE:  That is my signature. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The date of the affidavit is 2 October 
2020. 
MS MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Confirmed that.  And you confirm this to 
be your supplementary affidavit? 
20 
MS MOLEFE:  That is mine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairperson I beg leave to have this also 
admitted into the evidence as Exhibit U12.2. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
The 
supplementary 
affidavit 
of 
Ms 
Tsholofelo Beatitude Lettie Molefe starting at page 597 and 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 167 of 288 
 
going up to page 607 will be admitted as an Exhibit and will 
be marked Exhibit U12.2. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  U12.2  May I add together with the 
annexures thereto Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Ms Molefe you similarly with 
the previous witness you had a closed session interview with 
the 
Eskom 
work 
stream 
which 
you 
confirm 
in 
your 
supplementary affidavit on page 598 paragraph 5.  So just 
remember keep to the … 
10 
MS MOLEFE:  598. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The black pagination.  Are you there?  
Page 598 paragraph 5.  It says: 
“I confirm that I was called to a closed 
session meeting with the commission on 20 
August 2020 wherein I testified under oath.  I 
also confirm that I have been provided with a 
copy 
of 
the 
transcript 
of 
my 
testimony 
attached hereto as TM1.  I have perused the 
transcript and hereby confirm the contents 
20 
thereof 
to 
be 
a 
true 
reflection 
of 
my 
testimony.” 
MS MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is correct.  Now that transcript is 
found on page – it starts on page 609 as the cover page.  It 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 168 of 288 
 
ends on page 737.  Insofar as it relates to you.   
MS MOLEFE:  I have it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Chairperson with that 
housekeeping out of the way we may proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Molefe you were called to testify in 
regard to mainly the suspension of the executives.  Evidence 
has been led already before this commission that you 
10 
became one of the executives that were suspended on the 11 
March 2015. 
MS MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is a bit of a background to yourself and 
the lead up to the suspensions tell the Chairperson what is 
your profession, your qualification and profession as part of 
the background? 
MS MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  I am a Chartered 
Accountant by profession.  I have got a BA Honours in 
Accounting and Finance which I obtained at the University of 
20 
London in the United Kingdom through the British Counsel’s 
Scholarship and I also have a B.Com Honours that I obtained 
through Unisa.  I served my articles with Coopers and 
Leibrandt at the time.  We do training in accounting and 
auditing to enable me to obviously qualify as a Chartered 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 169 of 288 
 
Accountant.  I obviously had to write board exams qualifying 
exams that enabled me to qualify as a Chartered Accountant.  
So in a nutshell those are my qualifications. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  When did you join Eskom? 
MS MOLEFE:  I joined Eskom in July 2005.  I joined as a 
finance manager for the Transmission Division – a division of 
Eskom.  A position that I held for about 6 months after which 
I was promoted to General Manager of Finance and Business 
Support in the same division.  I then moved over after about 
four years.  Having done several projects with the then CEO 
10 
at the time Mr Brian Dames.  I then got promoted to become 
the Group Executive of Customer Service.  A position that I 
held for about three years just – or just under three years 
after which I was then appointed the Finance Director of 
Eskom in 2014 – January 2014.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  At the time of your suspension was 
that the position you occupied of … 
MS MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Of Financial Director. 
MS MOLEFE:  I was the Financial Director of the company. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Now there is a meeting which is referred 
to in your affidavit and it came up during the testimony of Mr 
Tsotsi.  The Chairperson wanted clarity in regard to that 
meeting.  There seems to be a confusion as we read oh 
obviously not on your part but on our part whether the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 170 of 288 
 
meeting you refer to as the one Ms Tsotsi said he was going 
to cancel but nonetheless you made the board to convene 
that meeting and proceeded to convene.  Is it the same 
meeting as the one which was cancelled on the 26 February 
2015?  Could you explain to the Chairperson whether there 
is a distinction? 
MS MOLEFE:  Yes Chair those are two different meetings.  
The meeting of the 26 t h February would have been the first 
board meeting – full board meeting with the new board.  The 
meeting that Mr Tsotsi tried to – or cancelled was the 
10 
meeting that was going to take place around the 30 
November 2014 if I am not mistaken.  And in fact if I can just 
– if I recall it was actually a special meeting Chair because 
the important… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That meeting would have – would have 
fallen under the previous board? 
MS MOLEFE:  It would have been – the previous board that 
is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja  okay. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja it was with the previous board.  What had 
20 
happened Chairman is that we had just completed our 
interim financial result.  The auditors had obviously signed 
on the results and we were then going to do a result 
announcement the following week.  I think it was a Tuesday 
if I am not mistaken.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 171 of 288 
 
The 30 November if I am correct I think it was a 
Sunday and that is why it was a special meeting.  And the 
reason for that special meeting was that the old board had 
been seized with an investigation into the TNA contract – the 
New Age contract which the entering CEO at the time Mr 
Matjila had – had signed without following due governance.  
On finding out about that the previous board decided to 
investigate the matter and once they investigated the matter 
they obviously received a report.   
They had appointed Gobodo Forensics to do the 
10 
investigation into the matter.  Once the report was out the 
external auditors then found out about it before we went for 
the results announcement.  And obviously we would have 
informed the auditors about it as part of practice but 
because the board was still deliberating on the matter we 
had not obviously informed the auditors.   
The auditors then obviously called and said, look we 
understand there is this matter as far as we are concerned it 
is a reportable irregularity by an executive of authority being 
the interim CEO and therefore it requires that we change our 
20 
audit opinion that we have already given and put a matter – 
what they call a matter of emphasis on their report.   
And they also wanted to recommend to the board at 
the time that they need to also amend their directors report 
in the financials to indicate what steps they had taken 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 172 of 288 
 
regarding the matter.   
So that required then we have a special meeting 
because the board had already looked at the financials.  So 
it required that we have another board meeting so that the 
auditors could then explain to the board and give them 
obviously direction in terms what needed to be done.  I then 
called Mr Zola Tsotsi.   
I called him I think it was on Friday evening after my 
meeting with the auditors.  I think he had been overseas if I 
am not mistaken.  We agreed that we would meet in the 
10 
office on Saturday so that I could explain to him why there 
was a need for another board meeting.   
He then agreed with me; he understood after I had 
explained to him that this is the position of the external 
auditors.  He then convened a meeting for Sunday.  So that 
was the meeting that was then to take place.  The meeting of 
the 30 November.   
The meeting was convened through the Company 
Secretary at that time I think it was Melissa [?] and it was 
going to take place at four o’clock in the afternoon.  While I 
20 
was preparing for the meeting on the day I think around 
about twelve – twelve thirty Mr Tsotsi then called me to 
indicate that he is going to cancel that meeting.  Now the 
importance of that – that – those but… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just hang on Ms Molefe.  Did you say that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 173 of 288 
 
your meeting with Mr Tsotsi that was planned for Saturday 
did take place? 
MS MOLEFE:  It did take place at the office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is where he agreed that there 
should be a meeting on Sunday? 
MS MOLEFE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  But now on Sunday around 
about twelve o’clock. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Around about twelve o’clock he then 
called. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He called to indicate his intention to cancel 
the meeting? 
MS MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright continue. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja.  He then indicated that – so I impressed 
the point upon him and said not to cancel the meeting 
because he was aware as well that we needed to have the 
financials approved; have the interim results announced 
because those financials were important for us to go and 
raise funding in the – on the international market.  So he 
20 
understood the importance of those financials.   
I impressed upon him that we cannot cancel the 
meeting we have to go ahead.  He then said to me he will 
speak – he will think about it and he will come back to me.  
He came back to me I think just under an hour indicating that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 174 of 288 
 
– in fact he did not come back to me the secretary – the 
company secretary send us messages to all board members 
to say the – the Chairman has requested the meeting to be 
cancelled and that he is going to have a meeting tomorrow 
with the shareholder, the Minister Lynne Brown at the time to 
discuss the matter.    
I had impressed on him to – I then called him again.  
I said Mr Tsotsi these results are very important.  I do not 
think it is a good idea to cancel the meeting.  And I actually 
asked him but who is asking that we cancel the meeting?  Is 
10 
it the board?  Is it the shareholder?  And he said to me it is 
people from outside.   
He would not tell me who it was but he just said that 
he is getting pressure from people from outside to cancel the 
board meeting.   
What I then did I called all the board members that I 
could find to inform them of this matter.  Fortunately most of 
them had not seen the cancellations from the company 
secretary.  So they were getting themselves ready to actually 
attend the board meeting in the afternoon at the Eskom 
20 
offices at four o’clock.  So the meeting did go ahead without 
Mr Tsotsi.   
At that meeting the board that was – that had 
confirmed that they would be attending they selected a 
chairman to obviously lead the discussions.  The auditors 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 175 of 288 
 
were there.  They – we were then obviously guided by the 
auditors the board members then approved the financials 
accordingly.   
Unfortunately Mr Tsotsi was not happy.  What I had 
done Chairman just to also indicate before the board meeting 
is that I called Mr Matona to find out if he knew about the 
cancellation.  He was not aware of it and I said to him, well 
Mr Tsotsi is going to discuss with the shareholder tomorrow.  
And he said well I am not aware that they have a meeting 
because I have a meeting with the shareholder tomorrow.  
10 
And he asked me to join him for the meeting.   
I then joined him for the meeting the following day 
which was the Monday and while I was there Mr Tsotsi sent 
me a message again to say the – the meeting that was 
convened the day before because he had cancelled it he has 
been advised that it was constituted unlawfully and therefore 
the proceedings of those meetings are null and void.   
So I then informed the Minister – I then in fact 
informed the – the CE Mr Matona because we were meeting 
with the Minister.  He then informed the acting DG as well as 
20 
the Minister in the meeting and the Minister was not happy 
about that.  He said he knows nothing of that.  He does not 
have a meeting.  She does not have a meeting with Mr Tsotsi 
and the board must do the right thing.   
He is not going to – she is not going to interfere in 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 176 of 288 
 
the proceedings of the results announcement.  So I then 
called the board members again individually informed them 
that you know it would appear that there is technicality 
regarding how the meeting was convened on Sunday 
because it had been cancelled by Mr Tsotsi.   
So they then decided that they will convene another 
meeting on that evening to make sure that it has been 
constituted properly so that they can approve again the 
financial statement.   
So that occurred on the evening of the – on the 
10 
Monday I think it was.  But Mr Tsotsi did attend the meeting 
and he apologised to the board members for their – I think 
he called it a misunderstanding but the board did not want to 
get into the details of that.   
But the meeting was then – the meeting proceeded to 
approve the financials.  But that would – that was Chair in a 
nutshell the meeting that he had cancelled and he said to me 
he was getting pressure from outside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – there seems to have been an 
urgency in having the meeting and in having the financial 
20 
statements approved.  Was that because there was a time 
frame within which the date by when they needed to be 
approved was close by or what? 
MS MOLEFE:  Yes Chair if I can just explain?  The financials 
had already been approved but because there had been an 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 177 of 288 
 
investigation into the dealings of the TNA the auditors then 
said they need to before the results are released they need 
to amend their audit report.  And we only had about three 
days before the results announcement.  So that was the 
urgency of that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So you never got to know what 
outside pressure Mr Tsotsi was talking about? 
MS MOLEFE:  Chair I got to find out much later that he – 
10 
and I really cannot remember how I found out that he was 
getting pressure from the CEO of TNA.  I think it is Mr Howa 
if I am not mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Howa. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja that he should cancel.  And the reason for 
that was because of the issue regarding the TNA matter that 
had been approved without due governance.  And I refer it in 
my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:  In my main affidavit Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  Thank you Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Well when Mr Tsotsi 
was here he was asked a question relative to the pressure 
brought to bear on him and he said to the Chairperson he 
would have been more straightforward with you that it was 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 178 of 288 
 
the President putting pressure on him.  Did he say that? 
MS MOLEFE:  No Chair I – absolutely I did hear him say that 
in his testimony and that is not correct because I was quite 
pointed in asking him who exactly asked him to cancel the 
meeting?  I even said is it the board?  Is the shareholder?  
But he just said it is pressure from outside.  He did not 
mention the name of the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How did you find out that it was Mr Howa? 
MS MOLEFE:  Chair I think later – much later and it was 
really just through the grapevine that you know I got to find 
10 
out much later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you did not find out from Mr Tsotsi? 
MS MOLEFE:  No I did not find out from Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you did not find out from Mr Howa? 
MS MOLEFE:  No I did not find out from Mr Howa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it simply a grapevine? 
MS MOLEFE:  It was really simply a grapevine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MS MOLEFE:  Ja but it made sense because the issue was 
he was getting pressure. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:  That we should not amend the financials to 
include reportable irregularity relating to the TNA matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see the problem with the grapevine is 
that some are unreliable. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 179 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:  Absolutely, absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not something you can really rely on. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say that was the position. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see so that is not very helpful you 
know.  But what he did say to you is he was getting pressure 
from outside? 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We do not know who he was talking about 
10 
in terms of what he told you.  You may have heard whatever 
you heard in the grapevine. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And certainly he said to you there was 
pressure from outside. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  So Ma’am when you 
are appointed to FD, Financial Director in January 2014 who 
would – who was the Minister of the DPE at the time? 
20 
MS MOLEFE:  It was Minister Malusi Gigaba that I got 
appointed – when I got appointed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  When you got appointed. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Did you have any interaction with the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 180 of 288 
 
office of the Minister? 
MS MOLEFE:  Yes Chair I mean we – we had quite a number 
of interactions with them.  I think even before then but even 
when I was the CFO on a number of occasions through our 
shareholder report and execution we would obviously see 
them.  But specifically I had an interesting engagement with 
the Chief of Staff. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:  In the Minister – in the office of the Minister  
Thamsanqa Msoni. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Please tell the Chairperson about that? 
MS MOLEFE:  Yes Chair so I think to probably two months 
into my appointment – in fact I was on my way to a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As financial.. 
MS MOLEFE:  As the Financial Director. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Director. 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:  I was on my way to a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was the position of Financial Director 
20 
effectively the same as a CFO? 
MS MOLEFE:  Yes it is the same Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the same job? 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 181 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:  Ja.  So I was actually on my way to a meeting 
at the DPE offices in Pretoria.  Mr Thamsanqu Msomi asked 
to see me when I have time and I said to him actually I am 
on my way to your office to have meetings with some of your 
colleagues.  
After my meeting I will come and see you.  So I do it 
– I did go and see him and when essentially I went to the 
meeting he really just congratulated me for you know my 
appointment and in – actually indicated that they hope that 
they would have a much better relationship – working 
10 
relationship than they had with my predecessor Mr Paul 
O’Flaherty.   
And I said why is that?  He said no it was just really 
you know difficult to work with him and he also said that they 
have also been receiving quite a number of complaints from 
you know black suppliers that Eskom is not embracing 
transformation and I said to him, I am quite surprised 
because we give quite a lot of feedback to the department 
around our you know obviously initiatives as a company in as 
far as Enterprise Supply Development is concerned and 
20 
transformation has been top of mind for our board.   
And he said well there are one or two suppliers that 
would like to meet to just you know allay their concerns.  I 
said to him look I do not have a problem.  We do have a 
Chief Procurement Officer in the company.  In fact I think it 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 182 of 288 
 
was Dan Marokane at the time.   
I said that you know he has been appointed Chief of 
Commercials so you know he would be the right person to 
speak to.  But I am quite happy to speak to whoever has got 
those grievances and then I can obviously refer them 
appropriately to the relevant executive. He then said okay I 
will try and set up a meeting for you.   
And indeed that meeting took place I think around 
about – a couple of weeks later.  And that meeting took place 
Chair if I recall I was actually on my way to Cape Town and I 
10 
said to him, look I actually do not want us to meet in the 
office because I am worried I am going to miss my flight.  
Can we meet somewhere on my way – out of my office?  So 
we met at the Barons just on Woodmead.  There is an Engine 
Garage there somewhere.   
So we met there and I said to him I do not have much 
time just do the introduction and then I will take that details 
and I will take them to the relevant officials just to 
understand what are the issues.  So as I was sitting there a 
gentleman called by the name of Salim Essa.   
20 
I was meeting him for the first time.  So that was the 
gentleman that said that he had concerns.  But when I asked 
him which suppliers do you you know work for?  What do you 
do?  Have you actually pitched for work before from Eskom?  
He merely said no you know I work with various companies 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 183 of 288 
 
and – and he said that we would like to do business with 
Eskom.  And I said well I will take you through you know I 
will refer you to the relevant processes  that you would want 
to make sure you know if you wanted to work with Eskom.  
So I really had to go.  So I really cut the meeting short and 
that was really my first encounter with the chief of staff when 
he introduced me to Salim Essa as well.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   At the Engen Garage you met Mr Gigaba’s 
chief of staff and Mr Essa? 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  So that with the chief of staff.  That 
would have been the second encounter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MS MOLEFE:   Because my first encounter was at his 
offices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MOLEFE:   He then introduced me to Mr Salim Essa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   As... next to the Barons and Engen Garage 
there. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So did you take Mr Salim’s, Essa’s 
particulars in that meeting? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, I did not Chair.  I actually did not take his 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 184 of 288 
 
particulars.  I think I did.  Sorry, I think I did take his card or 
something.   
 
Ja, I think I did take his card if I recall but I did not 
follow up.  So Mr Msomi actually follow up and he kept on 
following up and he kept on following up.   
 
I actually remember telling the chairman that:  You know 
what, I have been getting these constant requests.  Can you 
ask the DPE officials...  
 
In fact, I was asking what is the protocol with, you know, 
officials in the minister’s office and Mr Tsotsi said:  Well, 
10 
they should not be engaging with executives.  Do not worry, I 
will talk with him.  So that was the last I heard of Mr Msomi.  
Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   But did you pass on the message to the 
relevant people at Eskom? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  So Chair, I mean, I spoke about it but 
because there was no specific issue that he was complaining 
about.  He was obviously going to through Mr Msomi bring 
the specifics which obviously really did not come.   
 
All that Mr Msomi wanted was, you know, one meeting 
20 
after the other without providing the necessary detail.  That 
is when I refused to, you know, like to engage any further. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Could you please tell the Chairperson 
whether was this your first and last meeting with Mr Salim 
Essa? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 185 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, it was the... I met Mr Salim Essa twice.  
So that was the first time.  The second time I met Mr Salim 
Essa, I met him with Mr Colin Matjila, who was the interim 
Chief Executive at the time after Mr Brian Dames left.   
 
So what had happened Chairman is that shortly after my 
appointment somewhere around April we had a Board 
Strategy Session.   
 
As part of the Board Strategy Session, I would then as 
the Financial Director present a financial plan to the board 
and our execution plan over the next few years.   
10 
 
After my presentation, Mr Tsotsi was not particularly 
happy with the presentation in terms of what he said.  He 
was not specific on what are the issues.   
 
He just said that it was not robust enough and that the 
minister would like to see a rather very detailed plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Just tell me.  The presentation 
that you are talking about that Mr Tsotsi was not happy with, 
what 
presentation 
was 
it, 
who 
were 
you 
making 
the 
presentation to, what was it about? 
MS MOLEFE:   I was doing a presentation on the financial 
20 
plan of Eskom to the board in terms of what would be our 
execution 
plan. 
 
We 
were 
busy 
looking 
at 
financial 
turnaround 
for 
the 
business 
including 
doing 
business 
productivity programme, looking at liquidity for the next few 
years of the company.  So that was the presentation 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 186 of 288 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And was this 2014? 
MS MOLEFE:   It was in 2014 around April. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Around April. 
MS MOLEFE:   So it was with the previous board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  Around 20 April 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So Mr Tsotsi was not happy with it? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  So he was not happy with it.  Mr Matjila 
said to Mr Tsotsi:  That is quite okay.  I will work with the 
10 
CEO to make sure that we put together something that we 
can, you know, present to the minister in three months’ time.  
So.   
 
And that was on a Friday.  We typically would have the 
Board Strategy Session over a two day period where I 
presented on the Thursday.   
 
And then on the Friday afternoon, I think later that 
evening, I spoke to... Mr Matjila called me.  I cannot 
remember if he called me on the Friday or Saturday.   
 
He called me, requesting a meeting to just reflect on the 
20 
Board Strategy Session and talk about the next steps 
regarding the financial plan.  And so we met on a Sunday.   
 
Both of us live very close to Fourways.  So we agreed to 
meet at one of the hotels in Monte Casino.  I think it is called 
Time Square.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 187 of 288 
 
 
While we were sitting there, he obviously said to me:  As 
you saw the board was not particularly happy with the plan.  
I think we need to find people that can help us.  We do not 
have time.  We only have three months to submit a detailed 
plan to the minister.   
 
And as we were sitting there, he waived his hand up and 
as he was waiving his hand up I thought he was just greeting 
someone, only to find that he was actually ask, you know, 
someone... showing someone where we were seated.  And 
that someone was Mr Salim Essa.   
10 
 
So it appears that obviously he had come to join us for 
our session and I got introduced to him again and he 
indicated...  
 
In fact, Mr Matjila indicated that this is someone that can 
help us.  He knows people that can help us with the financial 
sustainability plan.  And I said how so?   
 
And he said they have done, you know, similar work in 
terms of helping companies unlock cash on the balance 
sheet.  They have got... they have done a lot of work at 
Transnet.  They have done a lot of work at, I think he said at 
20 
SAA and the City Power.  Ja, City Power.   
 
So I said:  Who is that company?  He said the company 
is Regiment Capital.  And I said:  But do you work for 
Regiment Capital?   
 
He said:  No.  You know, I am not an employee of 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 188 of 288 
 
Regiment Capital but I do work with them.  And he said 
essentially to the CEO:  I will arrange that the CEO come 
and meet you guys as soon as you guys are ready.  Mr 
Matjila then said:  You know, they can come and meet us 
tomorrow.   
 
He asked me to check my diary and I said I am happy to 
meet at four o’clock in the afternoon at our offices.  So he 
then... he did not come with the CEO of Regiment Capital, 
Salim Essa.  The person that came to see us was Eric Wood.   
 
So that was really the second time that I met Salim 
10 
Essa.  The meeting took place.  Salim Essa was not there.  
Eric Wood was there.   
 
Mr Matjila joined the meeting together with one of our 
executives at the time, doctor ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   This is now the following day? 
MS MOLEFE:   This is the following day on the Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the venue the following day was 
where? 
MS MOLEFE:   It was at Eskom offices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and the previous day the venue was 
20 
Eskom as well? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, it was at Monte Casino. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   It was on a Sunday.  Ja, roundabout noon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 189 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   On Sunday, ja.  It was at Time Square at 
Monte Casino. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Ms Molefe, do you also recall when 
about this, when exactly?  Which month in 2014? 
MS MOLEFE:   I think it was somewhere towards, it was... 
because we would have had our Board Strategy Session 
around April.  So it was probably towards the end of April but 
it was still in April of 2014. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Okay you were going to your 
meeting at Eskom for a moment but the way we understand 
10 
is that you were to...  Well, you did present the financials.  Is 
it the financials? 
MS MOLEFE:   The financial plan. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The financial plan to the board. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Tsotsi was the Chairperson of the 
board ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   Mr Tsotsi was the Chairperson of the board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...at the time.  He says to you this plan 
is not...? 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   Robust enough. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is not robust enough.  That is in 
April 2014? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And I want... we want to understand.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 190 of 288 
 
What happened thereafter? 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Matjila then said to Mr Tsotsi he 
should not worry because he would work ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   He would work with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...with Ms Molefe to ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to fix the plan. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And subsequently, they had a meeting 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MS MOLEFE:   We had the meeting on the Sunday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...where Mr Matjila said that he knew 
some people who could assist them. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then come in...  then Salim Essa 
comes in at the meeting and then another meeting is 
arranged for the following day when Mr Eric Wood comes in. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is now at Eskom. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  The Chairperson is on top of 
things. 
MS MOLEFE:   [laughing]  That is correct, Chair. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 191 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You may proceed.  [laughing] 
MS MOLEFE:   [laughing]  So we do had the meeting but that 
was the last time I met... I saw Salim Essa.  I never saw him 
again.  But the meeting did continue with Eric Wood. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So Mr Essa... sorry, you will 
proceed.  Mr Essa is then introduced to you by Mr Matjila? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In order to officer assistance in regard to 
...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...your financial plan. 
MS MOLEFE:   Our financial plan.  He said that he knows 
people that can help us. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see. 
MS MOLEFE:   And he then mentioned Regiment Capital that 
worked... did similar work at Transnet, SAA and the City 
Power.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   And then the meeting on the next day. 
MS MOLEFE:   The meeting on Monday was to then 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   At Eskom. 
MS MOLEFE:   ...the CEO, Eric Wood, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Please tell the Chairperson who is 
present in the meeting and what gets to be discussed. 
MS MOLEFE:   So present in the meeting was myself, Mr 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 192 of 288 
 
Colin Matjila, Dr Steve Lemon who was the Group Executive 
for Sustainability at Eskom and Eric Wood himself.   
 
So he did come alone, if I recall.  And he really just 
wanted to tell us about Regiment Capital, what do they do.  
And I recall vividly that Dr Steve Lemon asked him:  But do 
you understand the challenges and the complexity that 
Eskom has and how big the balance sheet is?   
 
And he indicated that yes he does and they actually do 
work normally on large mandates like that with McKenzie, 
the consulting firm.   
10 
 
So he then undertook to prepare a proposal on balance 
sheet unlock for Eskom which he would then submit within a 
few days, I think he said.  So the meeting was on a Monday.   
 
It was agreed that Friday he would then, you know, 
submit his proposal to us.  So after the meeting took place, I 
went to Mr Matjila’s office and I said to him we need to 
follow process.   
 
There are various other firms that have been wanting to 
help Eskom because it is, you know, public knowledge that 
obviously Eskom has got various challenges.  So we need to 
20 
follow our procurement processes.   
 
And he said to me:  We do not have time for those 
procurement processes.  They are longwinded.  This is an 
emergency.  We have worked with all these firms before and 
Eskom would not be in that position if they had successfully 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 193 of 288 
 
been able to help us.   
 
And I said to him, even if it is an emergency, our 
procurement processes do allow for emergency procurement.  
It does not allow for urgency but it allows for emergency and 
it is very clear what you do in case in an emergency.   
 
And we sort of quarrelled a bit about that.  And he said 
to me:  I can see you are uncomfortable.  I will sign the 
agreement when he comes.   
 
So that was interesting because he said:  I will sign the 
agreement 
when 
it 
comes. 
 
So 
two 
weeks, 
later 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Before two weeks later.  He said to you it 
was an emergency as a way of justifying not following 
procurement processes.  And you said:  But our procurement 
processes make provision for emergencies.  Is that right? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what was his answer to that 
argument? 
MS MOLEFE:   He was quite adamant that because we had 
used all these other firms that I was referring to.  I mean, I 
20 
gave him examples and I said, for instance the company like 
Deloitte, for instance a company like this, they have been 
knocking on our doors to help us with certain things.   
 
And he said:  But your company has been using these 
firms for many years and the company would not be in this 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 194 of 288 
 
situation if they had been successful.  We are going to use 
these guys.  We do not have time to wait.  Meaning, 
Regiment Capital. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course, a CFO in the state owned 
entities is usually someone who is expected to be quite 
familiar with the procurement processes in the company, is it 
not? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair.  And that is why 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And you would be quite familiar yourself? 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   That is why I was telling him what we need to 
do.  And that is why I knew that the emergency procurement 
procedure allows for that situation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The timeframe within which you were 
expected to come back to the board with the plan, financial 
plan, if it was a financial plan.  Did it allow... would it have it 
allowed you to go through the processes without problem, 
procurement processes? 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair.  And I mean, it does.  Remember 
that the ultimate goal was to submit a plan to the minister in 
three months’ time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   ...which would have been somewhere around 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 195 of 288 
 
July.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there was enough time? 
MS MOLEFE:   So there was sufficient time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   But if it is an emergency, I said even our 
procurement processes do allow for emergencies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For emergencies, ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS MOLEFE:   In fact, I think I said to him, we can ask one 
of our general managers in Procurement to assist us with the 
process.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright.  Let us continue. 
MS MOLEFE:   So what happened.  He then said to me:  I 
can see you are uncomfortable.  I will sign the agreement 
when it comes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is now after Mr Eric Wood has gone? 
MS MOLEFE:   This is after Mr Eric Wood... after the 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was Mr Eric Wood left on the basis that 
he was going to ...[intervenes]  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 196 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   To put ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...deliver his document within five days? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So you were talking ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the two of you, you and Mr Matjila 
...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...after Mr Wood had gone? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Continue. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  So and I do need to indicate Chair that... 
so the document from Regiment comes back, I think, after 
two weeks.  But during that time, the team internally is 
working.  So we have not stopped because we do not have a 
service provider helping us.   
 
So we had quite a highly skilled team, you know, in 
Finance across the group that we working on whatever 
20 
needed to be done to be able to assist the business.   
 
So the document from Regiment comes back in two 
weeks’ time.  It is emailed to me by Eric Wood himself.  I 
then forwarded it to Mr Matjila and I actually copied the...  
 
I think it was Mr Nemo Solanco.  I think he had already 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 197 of 288 
 
changed positions.  I am not sure.  I could be mistaken there 
but he used to be, obviously, an advisor in the office of the 
chairman.  And I think he was probably on transition to 
assuming Head of Legal at that time, if I am not mistaken.   
 
So I copied him on the mail and I then said to Mr Matjila, 
this now qualifies as an emergency procurement because we 
have taken... they have taken 14-days to come back to us.   
 
So I would suggest that we ask Nemo Solanco to advise 
on how to proceed with this matter.  He did not respond to 
me if I not mistaken.   
10 
 
He then called me later that evening and he asked me 
to, and I hope that I am not confusing the facts here, but he 
asked me not to put such things on email.   
 
And I think he called me, if I am not mistaken, and he 
asked me why am I not supporting him and so forth.  And I 
think we had a meeting on the next day.   
 
Because at the same time, I was also questioning the 
TMA matter which he had approved.  And that at time, I 
thought that he had not been given sufficient information that 
he does not the delegation of authority.   
20 
 
So when I received the TMA, and I know I am digressing 
a bit, but for context.  When I received the TMA contract at 
that time, I copied him and obviously responded to Mr Tsotsi 
who had sent it to me, indicating that he does not have the 
delegation for this.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 198 of 288 
 
 
So essentially, he was reprimanding me on those things.  
And he asked to have coffee with me the following and we 
had at Rivervale which is... used to be called Tintswalo(?), in 
Waterfall.   
 
And he essentially said to me, why do I not support him.  
And I said: I do not have a problem with supporting him.  I 
have got a problem that we are not following procedure in 
doing the things that we need to do.   
 
And he then complaint again to say he does not have 
time.  He does not have any... I think he said that he is only 
10 
there for three months and he is only there to fulfil the 
mandate of the shareholder.   
 
But he did not explain further what that means.  Because 
he felt I was not supporting him in whatever he had been 
asked to come and do.  That is how I understood it when he 
said:  I am here for three months and I am here to fulfil the 
mandate of the shareholder.   
 
Ja.  So I think that is how we ended on the matter.  But 
the day that... you know, once the report came, I also then 
printed it out for him.   
20 
 
This is now the Regiment Agreement.  And I sent it to his 
office and I asked him to sign it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the document that was delivered by 
Mr Eric Wood after 14-days or there about.  Was that a 
proposal?  Was that a proposed agreement?  What was that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 199 of 288 
 
document? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, it was a proposed agreement and I do 
think I have submitted it.  I am not sure if you would have it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, we have been able to retrieve it 
Chair from the server. 
MS MOLEFE:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We have it here with the emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In due course, we will hand it up. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So Mr Eric Wood would furnish you with a 
proposed agreement? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what was expected of him?  What was 
the arrangement?  What was he supposed to deliver? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, they were proposing a number of 
initiatives to help Eskom unlock cash on the balance sheet.  
And I made the point earlier that we were doing work 
20 
already.   
 
Because some of the things that they were proposing, 
we were already working on them.  We did not need a 
consultant to help us with those things.   
 
It had nothing to do with a financial plan that we needed 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 200 of 288 
 
to present to the minister.  It was merely a number of 
initiatives on how, you know, we can obviously help Telkom 
with liquidity.   
 
So it was a number of initiatives.  We can unlock cash 
by, you know, the sale of list back of, you know, some of 
your properties or the sale of you Eskom Finance Company.  
It was those types of things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that is quite interesting. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because you had made a presentation to 
10 
the board. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Tsotsi did not think it was robust 
enough and Mr Matjila had assured him, Mr Tsotsi, that he 
would work with you on the plan and subsequently, you had 
met, that is yourself and Mr Matjila.  And at that meeting, he 
suggested that there were people who could help you. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I assumed that he meant who could you 
help you with a plan? 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair.  And I suppose, maybe to them, 
because the plan was quite a detailed plan.  It was looking 
at Eskom’s financial sustainability.  How do we recapitalise 
the company?  How do we, obviously, strengthen the balance 
sheet?  How do we ensure that we improve the liquidity.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 201 of 288 
 
 
But in his agreement, it was really just a number of 
initiatives to help unlock the cash.  And those initiatives, we 
were already working on internally with my team with the 
support of the various business units as part of the overall 
plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Well, I was going to ask whether 
Eskom did not have the capacity to do what Mr Eric Wood 
then were going to be doing? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  Chair, there was capacity.  I think what I 
should highlight is that from time-to-time... obviously, one 
10 
would obviously want to look at International Best Practise, 
benchmark what you are doing, just to, you know, enhance 
what you are doing in the business.   
 
So 
from 
time-to-time, 
we 
obviously 
would 
go 
to 
consultants to see how we can enhance what we are doing.  
But it was not that there was nothing in place that we are 
doing as a company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS MOLEFE:   And the point that I am making is that 
whatever they were suggesting, half of them or even more, 
20 
we were already working on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Alright. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 202 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Ms Molefe, you 
got the plan.  Or not the plan but the draft from Mr Eric 
Wood. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And she sent ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   You print it out ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And she sent it to Mr Matjila? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think that is where... when I interrupted 
her. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you sent it to Mr Matjila.  And what 
happened? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  So I printed it out.  I sent it to Mr Matjila.  
And I left it.  He was not in the office.  I left it at his desk 
and then I went to have a session at our Eskom, a learning 
academy with the finance team there.   
 
While I was there, he called me and he asked me:  Why 
have you not signed this agreement?  And I said:  Well, I 
20 
have told you how I feel about this agreement.  I made it 
quite clear that I am not going to sign it.  And you said 
yourself, if I feel uncomfortable, you will sign it.   
 
And he responded by saying that:  Well, why should I do 
your work for you?  And I... we then started quarrelling 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 203 of 288 
 
again.   
 
He then said to me:  I am sending a driver to our Eskom 
Academy of Learning, it was in Midrand.  He then said to me 
he will send the driver with the document to sign it.  And I 
said I am not going to sign it.  And we obviously dropped the 
phone.   
 
And I immediately called Mr Tsotsi to inform him that I 
think I would like to have a meeting with him and Mr Matjila.  
We had a disagreement that I think he needs to resolve.   
 
Mr Tsotsi could not make the meeting.  I then, I think, 
10 
had another session with Mr Matjila. No, in fact, before I 
called Mr Matjila... Mr Tsotsi.  Sorry.  Mr Matjila asked me to 
put it in writing why I do not want to sign the document.   
 
So I did that Chair.  I put a detailed memo together to 
tell him that we have not followed process.  This is what the 
process said.  I referred to our own policy.  I referred to the 
constitution in as far as the procurement procedures are 
concerned.   
 
And I said I am concerned that, you know, we are not, 
you know, we would be find wanting when it comes to 
20 
government.   
 
So I put together that memo but I decided then to send it 
to, not only Mr Matjila, I sent it to Mr Tsotsi.  I sent it to 
other board 
members 
who 
were chairpersons of sub-
committees.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 204 of 288 
 
 
And I sent it to them, indicating my dissatisfaction with 
the request from Mr Matjila.  Two days later, Mr Tsotsi called 
a meeting.  In fact, there was a meeting that was scheduled.  
It was one of the sub-committee meetings.  And Mr Tsotsi 
was also in the office.   
 
So he called a meeting with those various chairman’s.  
And we actually sat in his office.  I stated my case.  Mr 
Matjila stated his case.   
 
What was interesting for me was that Mr Tsotsi then 
said:  You... the two of you are busy wasting time with 
10 
longwinded procurement processes and you know that the 
minister is looking for this plan.  So if this plan is not ready 
by the end of June... I think by that time, we were already 
into June.  Maybe in the first week of June.  And he said if 
this plan is not ready, heads are going to roll.   
 
So I said to the chairman, I do not have a problem 
except that I am looking for a mandate in writing for me to do 
that.  If the board is comfortable they want to continue on 
this basis, can I have it in writing?  Then I will continue.  
Because I do ...  
20 
 
I know that the mandate comes from the board.  But in 
that meeting, two board members very vocal about it that 
were there.  And they ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I am sorry.  I thought this was a 
meeting involving you, Mr Tsotsi and Mr Matjila only? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 205 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   No, he... because what happened is that I 
had called for that meeting with him.  But when I... when Mr 
Matjila asked me to put it in writing why I do not want to sign 
the Regiment Capital Agreement.  Before the meeting was 
convened, I sent my reasons to Mr Tsotsi.  I sent it to Mr 
Matjila.  I sent it to other board members.  And two days 
later, Mr Tsotsi convened a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With the board? 
MS MOLEFE:   That meeting was attended by... it was not all 
the board members. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS MOLEFE:   It was a few of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MS MOLEFE:   I think it was the Chairman of the Investment 
and Finance Committee.  I think it was the Chairman of the 
Social Ethics and Sustainability Committee.  I think the 
Chairman of the Risk was supposed to be there but could not 
make it, if I am not mistaken.   
 
And then Mr Matjila was in the meeting, myself and Mr 
Solanco, who was working in the office of the chairman.  Ja.  
20 
So we had that meeting and that is when Mr Tsotsi said:  You 
know, heads are going to roll if the minister does not have 
this plan.   
 
And the two board members then reported to me to say, 
they do not agree with this agreement.  Because what I did 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 206 of 288 
 
is, I also attached the agreement from Regiment when I 
attached my memo to them.  They did not agree with it.   
 
They did not understand the pricing in there because 
the pricing was quite substantial as well.  So it was agreed 
that we would not do it but we recognised that there was a 
possibility perhaps the Minister would be asking for a plan 
end of the month so the agreement was that we would just 
then do a high level desktop exercise to assess this 
initiative but we did not go with the agreement that 
Regiments was putting on the table. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So was the outcome of the meeting that 
the signing of the agreement, the Regiments’ agreement 
was rejected? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes it was rejected, Chair.  And I mean – 
and I think in my testimony at the parliamentary Portfolio 
Committee I did indicate as well the pricing in there was 
also what was non-competitive.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   If I calculate based on their pricing and how 
they started the pricing, for those initiatives Eskom could 
20 
have potentially paid half a billion rand just to do those 
initiatives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   So that was the concern also that one had. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 207 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Ms Molefe.  The proposal 
given by Regiments – so you say it was not a proposal but 
an agreement? 
MS MOLEFE:   It was a drafted …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Draft agreement.  And that was 
ultimately not signed, at least not by you? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, it was not signed, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who is the Minister at the time?  I 
think you said this meeting between you, Mr Tsotsi and Mr 
Matjila and other board members who were chairing the 
10 
subcommittees were in June 2014? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair, I think by that time Ms Lynne 
Brown had already come in …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So when …[intervenes] 
MS MOLEFE:   So, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So when Mr Tsotsi says heads will roll 
the Minister wants this by the end of the month? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Ms Lynne Brown had already just come 
in.  I think she came in around May, if I am not mistaken, 
of 2014.  Somewhere around there, ja. 
20 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
And 
the 
high 
level 
desktop 
…[intervenes] 
MS MOLEFE:   Exercise.   
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Exercise 
you 
say 
was 
then 
commissioned to be done.  Is that done by you and your 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 208 of 288 
 
team? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, that was done by Regiments and 
McKinsey.  It was about – I mean, I think it cost about 
under a million rand to go through with us some of the 
things that we probably had missed, some of the things we 
could have considered because the board wanted comfort 
that, you know, some of – we, as the finance team 
internally 
had 
considered 
everything. 
 
So 
they 
commissioned for that to continue but relative to the 
agreement that I referred to, that that was not supported. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, so are you saying then their 
services were so procured, services of Regiments were still 
procured but for a different purpose? 
MS MOLEFE:   It was still procured, Chair, for a different 
purpose. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And they were paid about a million 
rand for it? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, between themselves and McKinsey, they 
were paid about that much. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And do you know when did they render 
20 
that service?  Exactly when? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, it was around the same time because 
we obviously needed to make sure that when we present 
the plan the board is comfortable that that plan is robust, 
as Mr Tsotsi put it.  So the board was comfortable to say 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 209 of 288 
 
let us assess what they are putting on the table against 
what the team internally has put on the table and that work 
continued but not in the form that it was proposed 
originally by Mr Eric Woods. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So did Eskom meet the deadline of 
providing the financial plan to the Minister by the end of 
June 2014? 
MS MOLEFE:   We did present to the Minister and Chair, I 
think I need to indicate it was a number of streams.  It was 
what we were presenting to the Minister was really just 
10 
over and above the financial plan, it was – if you recall, I 
think somewhere around – and I think we presented to Ms 
Lynne Brown sometime in Cape Town.   
 
Obviously, you know, the power challenges were 
creating financial challenges so we had various meetings 
with the Minister because, you know, it is one thing solving 
the financial plan but if you do not think about the plan 
around, you know, power challenges, obviously it becomes 
a spiralling effect just in terms of your financial challenges.   
 
So we essentially did present to her but I am 
20 
making her understand that there a number of issues 
obviously that would need to be dealt with, that we need 
support from obviously the shareholder.  The board would 
need support from the shareholder on.   
 
We presented I think – I do not think it – I cannot 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 210 of 288 
 
remember if it was exactly end of June, but somewhere 
around there we did present to the Minister because then 
the Minister would have had to obviously work with us 
together with the National Treasury to support Eskom on a 
number of issues that we had proposed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was that the end the matter in regard 
to your financial plan as the financial director and the 
involvement of Regiments in that regard, and McKinsey? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, with regards to Regiments and 
McKinsey in that regard it was the end of it.  But, as I 
10 
indicated, Chair, we continued with our work, we had our 
business productivity programme, we were working with the 
National Treasury team on a number of initiatives around 
how do we recapitalise the balance sheet of Eskom.   
 
So we then did a follow up presentation actually to 
the Minister of Finance later in that year and that would 
have been Mr Nhlanhla Nene which then culminated in 
Eskom receiving a R23 billion injection from government 
with a number of conditions, of course.  So that obviously 
was announced somewhere in October.   
20 
 
So part of that plan and initiative was to actually 
work towards, you know, government supporting Eskom on 
a number of things. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, just before I move on, for the 
benefit of the Chairperson and yourself in regard to what 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 211 of 288 
 
you said what was you heard through the grapevine.  
Chair, you will recall – and this is significant, it would have 
fallen through the cracks.  
 
The evidence of Mr Tsotsi and particularly in his 
affidavit when he talks about his meetings with Tony Gupta, 
that is where he mentions that meeting and he refers to in 
his affidavit that: 
“During the impasse of the TNA contract when the 
award of the contract by Acting CEO Collin Matjila 
was under scrutiny for irregularity, I was requested 
10 
by Tony Gupta to make this problem go away.  I 
responded that this I could not do as there were 
processes in place that must take their course.  For 
the first time in my encounter with him he showed 
visible signs of anger and frustration as he kept 
insisting that I was not interested in assisting him.” 
Then he goes on to talk about – this one you will recall in 
the organogram: 
“Position was open at Eskom for procurement 
division of Chief Procurement Officer.  This position 
20 
was unoccupied.  Tony Gupta approached me to 
request that I help him fill the position with a 
person from MTN.” 
So perhaps Mr Tsotsi will explain to us further in regard to 
what you say was pressure from the CEO of – did you say 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 212 of 288 
 
Regiments? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, no, no, Chair, and I said that is what I 
was speculating on, it is something that I heard through 
the grapevine [indistinct – disturbance with microphone] 
after me …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   ...who had been pressurising Mr Tsotsi to 
cancel the interim financials.  So that was a different 
matter, it was on the interim financial statement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is it on the interim financial 
10 
statements? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, approval by the board of the interim 
financial statements. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see.  Okay.  So the grapevine you 
were saying the CEO of TNA, Mr Howa? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, that is where I was picking up the 
TNA connection.  
MS MOLEFE:   Oh, the TNA matter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Well, let us deal then with the 
20 
issue that develops in 2015, the beginning of 2015, the 
new board has been appointed and you have referred to 
this meeting which gets to be cancelled of the 26 February 
2015. 
 
Briefly to the Chairperson you have mentioned – but 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 213 of 288 
 
let us ask you specifically whether were you given the 
reasons for cancellation of that meeting of the 26 February 
2015? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, I was not given reasons for the 
cancellation, the cancellation came through the company 
secretary at the time but there was no reason given, if I 
recall. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have said earlier in your 
explanation of the distinction between the meeting you 
referred in 2014, as cancelled by Mr Tsotsi, and this 
10 
meeting, that this meeting of 26 February was the first 
board meeting? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair, if I recall – and, I mean, 
thinking about the corporate calendar of the company, 
typically you would have board meetings four times unless 
there is a special meeting that has been – four times in the 
year unless there is a special meeting that has been called 
by the Chairman but you would obviously have the 
subcommittee meetings convening, you know, either, you 
know, every month or every two of months, some of them 
20 
every quarter. 
 
So in my mind that would have been in terms of the 
corporate calendar of Eskom, the first board meeting and 
that board meeting would be the board meeting that 
approves the corporate plan and the borrowing programme 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 214 of 288 
 
because it needed to be submitted to the shareholder and 
National Treasury in terms of the PFMA around about a 
month before, you know, execution.  So we needed to 
submit it by the 28 February. 
 
So our financial year starts April, 1 April of every 
year.  So we would have had to submit it a month before 
one could execute on it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Now you were an ex officio 
member of the board, is that correct? 
MS MOLEFE:   I am a director of the company and 
10 
therefore an executive director of the company. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Executive director of the – so you 
would attend board meetings. 
MS MOLEFE:   I would attend board meetings, that is 
correct, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   By default. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You see – and we need for you to 
explain to the Chairperson.  We understood from Ms 
Venete Klein that prior to the 26 February I think there 
20 
would have been a board meeting but we hear also from – 
we see and hear from the audio recordings of the minutes 
of the 9 t h, the meeting of the 9 March 2015 of the board 
which I believe you attended, is that correct? 
MS MOLEFE:   I did, Chair. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 215 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That some board members say on the 
9 March, we have not even had our first board meeting. 
MS MOLEFE:   I would concur with that, Chair, because we 
would have had subcommittee meetings, we would have 
had the audit and risk committee because the corporate 
plan and the borrowing programme would have had to be 
recommended by the audit committee to the board for 
approval.  That first board meeting would happen on the 26 
February.  I would have also had to present it for – to the 
IFC 
meeting 
which 
is 
the 
Investment 
and 
Finance 
10 
Committee meeting and I think those meetings, two of them 
took place before the 26 February between the - you know, 
beginning of January and the 26 February.  I think what 
could have …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, what meetings were those 
that took place before the 26 February?  
MS MOLEFE:   It was the Investment and Finance 
Committee.  I think two meetings took place, if I am not 
correct.  Why I remember is that the first meeting Mr Khoza 
chaired the meeting because Mr Mark Pamensky could not 
20 
make it but the second one, Mr Mark Pamensky did chair 
and those two meetings happened before the 26 February. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you are able to say the meeting of 
the board that was scheduled for the 26 February was 
going to be the first meeting of the board. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 216 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   The first meeting of the full board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja of the full board.  Whatever other 
meeting may have taken place may have been meetings of 
committees of the board.\ 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And in particular you know about two 
meetings of the Investment Committee.  
MS MOLEFE:    And the audit and risk. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and audit and risk committee. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  And I think there would have been a 
10 
board tender meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   There would have been board tender 
meeting …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, but those were all committee 
meetings. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  I do think, Chair, what probably did 
happen is that the board had requested to have an 
induction, I am aware of that, but I could not attend 
because I was travelling.  In fact Mr Marokane referred to 
20 
that travel.  I am aware that the board met for that 
induction but I could not be at that meeting.  So it is 
possible that after the induction Mr Tsotsi may have asked 
the board members – and it is normal, you know, either a 
board strategy session or some induction he may have 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 217 of 288 
 
called board members to convene for a short meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, my recollection is that it is 
accepted that there was an induction either in January or 
early February, I cannot remember, and my recollection is 
that Mr Tsotsi’s version was also that the meeting of the 
26 t h was going to be the first board meeting. 
MS MOLEFE:   I can confirm that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   Unless there were special meetings for 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   But the subcommittee meetings would have 
taken place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Thank you, Chair.  Then 
let us go into the – then the meeting of the 11 t h.  The 
meeting of the – well, there are various meetings on the 
11 t h in fact and maybe you can take the Chairperson – 
others are common cause, let us deal with your meeting 
when the Minister arrives.  Tell the Chairperson on the 
20 
Minister ’s arrival what gets to be discussed briefly in your 
presence and we understand that you were excused as one 
of the executives and you can tell the Chairperson who do 
you recall said you should be excused from the meeting? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before that and I do not know if I 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 218 of 288 
 
missed it when you might have asked her about it.  The 
meeting of the board on the 9 t h, you did attend that one. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the meeting of the board that 
happened before the board met with the Minister on the 
11 t h, did you attend that one? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is the meeting of the 9 March.  I did 
attend that one, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, there is the meeting of the 9 March 
and then there is the 11 t h March. 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you said you attended the meeting 
of the 9 March. 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now on the 11  March there was a 
meeting of the board before the Minister came. 
MS MOLEFE:   Oh yes, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then there was a meeting that was 
addressed 
by 
the 
Minister, 
a 
meeting 
of 
the 
board 
addressed by the Minister and then after the Minister had 
20 
left there was a board meeting that happened. 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the first one on the 11 t h before the 
Minister came, did you attend that one? 
MS MOLEFE:   I did, Chair. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 219 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I am reminded to 
ask you something.  On the 9 t h, that meeting you attended, 
that is the first meeting we understand Mr Tsotsi introduces 
the proposal to the board as requested by President Jacob 
Zuma to have an inquiry. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And I wanted to add something but let 
10 
me ask you.  Was that proposal made in your presence, 
because you attended the board meeting? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did it include the suspension of the 
executives? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, it did not, Chair, and event that 
proposal was not supported by probably all of the board 
members in that meeting, the inquiry.  So we were 
presented with a memo, it was not on the letterhead.  
Mr Tsotsi indicated that he has been asked to do an 
20 
inquiry and board members raised concerns and they in 
fact said please call the shareholder who is responsible for 
Eskom to come and address us and tell us what this is 
about because we cannot support this, we are worried 
about the extent of time it is going to take particularly in 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 220 of 288 
 
management time.   
We have been meeting management in various 
subcommittees, we clearly understand that the issues at 
hand are quite complex and many and we want them to get 
on with the job.   
 
Now if we are going to ask them to do an inquiry it 
is going to require a substantial amount of time, you know, 
out of their day-to-day activities to be able to, you know, 
participate in the inquiry.  So there was broadly no support 
for that. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Please tell the Chairperson, according 
to your recollection, because two – at least two of the 
board members – well, let us say one in this case, that 
would be Dr Ngubane, because Ms Venete Klein said she 
did not attend that board meeting, has said that there were 
allegations of misdemeanours made by Mr Tsotsi against 
the executives who he said should be suspended.  Do you 
know whether that was made in the meeting of the 9 March 
2015? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, it was not made, Chair, it was not even 
20 
discussed.  The issues of the suspensions were not even 
touched in the meeting of the 9 t h.   
 
Chair, if you look at that memo, if I may add, if you 
look at that memo, at the back of it it has a list of 
resolutions so all the board members, if they agreed to it, 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 221 of 288 
 
including myself and Mr Matona, would have to sign that 
we agree to the inquiry. 
 
That is why I say, you know, it would not have made 
sense if we had agreed to it knowing that we are going to 
be suspended to have signed on such a resolution so the 
issues were not discussed, the issues regarding the 
suspension were not discussed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know where that memo is in the 
bundle?  Is it …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is in Mr Linnell’s bundle. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, can we quickly have a look?  I 
want to have a look at it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Eskom bundle 6. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Eskom bundle 6 page 45.  Ms Molefe, 
they will also provide you with the bundle.  We used it 
earlier this morning.  Well, there is a memorandum and 
there is a proposed resolution.  So the page number I have 
given to you, E45, relates to the memorandum.  The 
resolution is on page 47 so you could explain to the 
20 
Chairperson …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, there is a memorandum at 
pages 45 and 46.  There is a resolution at page 47 and 48 
and onwards. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And to 49, Chair. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 222 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   To 49.  The one you are talking about, 
Ms Molefe, is it the one at 47, the resolution of the 
decision record? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair, the page 47, 9 
March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   I suppose it is a resolution that supports 
the memorandum on page 45. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So your explanation is we should look 
10 
here and we find that the suspensions are not here. 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair, I mean I am sure I have gone 
through it, there are no discussions on suspension and if 
my memory serves me well it was not covered but the point 
I am making is that if the board had agreed, each one of us 
were have been asked to sign because there is a page 
right at the back which – with names of all the board 
members, my name and Mr Matona’s names are on there, 
so we could not possibly have been signing a resolution 
that requests executives to be suspended.  It would have 
20 
been discussed, that is the point I am making. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that page 49? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is page 49. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I see your names there. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 223 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Your name appears at number 3. 
MS MOLEFE:   Number 3, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You would have signed resolving to 
suspend yourself? 
MS MOLEFE:   I am saying if we had discussed that 
suspension in that meeting but they were not discussed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the suspension mentioned in the 
memorandum starting at page 45 because I am wondering 
why the suspension would not be covered by the resolution 
10 
seeing that both the memorandum appearing at pages 45 
and 36 and the resolution appearing at page 47 onwards 
were prepared by Mr Linnell who was present at the 
Durban meeting which meeting resolved that the board - Mr 
Tsotsi must talk to the board with a view to getting it to 
support the idea of an inquiry as well as the suspension of 
the executives. So it was prepared by somebody who knew. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That there was supposed to be a 
suspension of the executives and there was supposed to 
20 
be an inquiry.  So I am just wondering whether – why it 
would not be the – maybe it was oversight, I do not know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, we have put it to Mr Tsotsi that 
question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ah hah? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 224 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That there was not an explicit 
reference here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   To the suspension of the executives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I cannot recall what was his answer 
now presently. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But there is indeed no explicit 
reference to suspensions. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In either the memorandum or the 
proposed resolution. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, there might be no significance to 
the omission when one has regard to the fact that it is 
common cause that the suspensions were discussed at the 
Durban meeting and it is common cause that at the meeting 
of the 11 t h of the board the suspensions were raised and 
20 
ultimately they were affected.  
 
So you have a situation where on the 8 t h  - at the 
meeting in Durban on the 8 t h, suspensions were discussed, 
names were mentioned.  Of course three names, not four at 
that time.  And then this resolution does not expressly 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 225 of 288 
 
refer to the suspensions on the 9 t h but we know that on the 
11 t h the board was asked to approve suspensions and then 
there was a fourth name that was added.  Okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, under oath Mr Linnell has testified 
to that effect, Chairperson, Mr Tsotsi as well. 
 
Ms Molefe, so we go then to – those were my 
questions in regard to the meeting of the 9 t h.  We go into 
the meeting of the 11 t h.  This is the meeting before the 
Minister arrives and I am going to ask you the same 
10 
questions again, whether the suspension – well, the 
proposal made by Mr Tsotsi on the 9 t h, was it discussed in 
that meeting before the – rather, of the Minister? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, it was not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second, Mr Seleka.  Yes, let us 
continue 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  So your answer is 
no, the proposal was not made? 
MS MOLEFE:   The proposal was not made in that meeting 
20 
of the 11 t h, before the Minister arrived.  What took place, if 
I recall Chair, I was still hoping that the corporate plan 
would actually be presented in that meeting, but the – Mr 
Matona started giving what he called his first 150 days 
since joining Eskom.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 226 of 288 
 
He actually touched on a number of things that you 
know he has been dealing with, the financial challenges, 
the power delivery challenges, even mentioned by the way 
because I had in testimony even mentioned if I recall just 
you know issues that have been occupying executives 
including the work we are doing at the War Room but he 
actually did not finish giving his report.   
I 
think 
about 
less 
than 
45 
minutes 
into 
the 
discussion, less than 45 minutes after the meeting started 
the Minister came in.  The Minister came in so Mr Tsotsi 
10 
asked to adjourn the meeting to allow the Minister to come 
in so that everyone could greet the Minister.  So when the 
Minister came in he really just thanked the board and was 
happy to see the board members there and he started 
complaining to the board about the lack of responsiveness 
from the CE specifically about leaking of reports to media 
and so forth and he said he understands that boardrooms 
have been leaked and he would have thought that that 
would be top of mind for the chief executive to give that 
matter attention and the chief executive indicated that he 
20 
has actually started the investigation and he is waiting for 
a report and we have been taking measures you know in 
terms of debugging all the boardrooms that obviously all 
the board members use for meetings.   
He did say that no it is not happening urgent 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 227 of 288 
 
enough there is just too many issues that Eskom – and he 
then asked she then sorry, she then asked us to recuse 
ourselves the Minister herself.  So she asked me and Mr 
Matona to recuse ourselves.  I think it was about 35/40 
minutes after she came in that she asked us to recuse 
ourselves, ja.          
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did the Minister give reasons why she 
was asking that you recuse yourself? 
MS MOLEFE:   No she did not Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   That was you and who? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was myself and the chief executive 
Mr Matona, Tshediso Matona.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is interesting it maybe that it 
was simply because you were part of the executive team 
and he might have wanted to…[intervene]  
MS MOLEFE:   To have an in-committee discussion with 
the board.  
CHAIRPERSON:   With the board. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe that is as far as it goes and 
20 
therefore it had nothing to do with the proposed or the 
impending suspensions but to the extent that it may have 
had something to do with an impending suspensions that 
maybe interesting because at that stage it would seem your 
name had not as yet been on the list of those to be 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 228 of 288 
 
suspended.  Is that not so or you would not know or had it 
begun to be mentioned?    
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, Chair and I guess if I go back to the 
meeting of the 9 t h I did not even think that she was coming 
there to speak about suspensions…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MS MOLEFE:   Because the board had asked Mr Tsotsi to 
call the Minister to come and explain why this enquiry is 
required and who has asked for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
10 
MS MOLEFE:   So I had understood that at that time she is 
coming there to explain to the board the reason for that.  
So it was also surprising to us why we are being asked to 
recuse ourselves but we did not ask, the chief executive 
did not ask, I did not ask. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, because you were both members of 
the board.     
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And one would have thought that what 
other members of the board should hear about the enquiry 
20 
you should hear as well.  
MS MOLEFE:   Unless of course they are discussing the 
two of you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course.  
MS MOLEFE:   And they want you out of the meeting. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 229 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is where I say in my – the fact 
that you were asked to leave the meeting you in particular 
is interesting because Mr Tsotsi has given evidence that 
somebody in the board and I think he said it was Dr 
Ngubane but I may be mistaken.  But he said somebody in 
the board said that it was the Minister who said your name 
should be added to the list of the executives to be 
suspended and therefore if she had knowledge that you are 
10 
supposed 
to 
be 
in 
the 
list 
one 
would 
understand 
why…[intervene]     
MS MOLEFE:   Whys she asked.  
CHAIRPERSON:   If she wanted maybe to talk about 
suspensions she would want you and Mr Matona to leave 
the meeting.  
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  So you and Mr 
Matona then steps out of the meeting and you do not know 
what gets to be discussed.  Correct? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So this happens at a time when Mr 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 230 of 288 
 
Matona had not finished his presentation? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And he never got to finish it.  
MS MOLEFE:   He never got to finish it.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair in fact, ja the minutes do reflect 
that the CE was busy: 
“The CE had developed a turnaround plan he is 
reporting which was being updated and put onto a 
firm foundation the initial presentation has been 
10 
used at the board induction and presented to the 
Deputy President.”   
I skip one paragraph, I go to the next the CE stated: 
“That 
the 
turnaround 
strategy 
considered 
all 
initiatives and tabled them at the War Room for 
consideration.  At the last War Room meeting the 
Deputy President Eskom had advised that they had 
responded to all request for information from the 
War Room and had requested that management be 
advised of any gaps.”   
20 
Then it says: 
“At this point the Chairman was excused from the 
meeting to meet the Minister of PE, Ms Klein took 
over as acting Chairman.” 
Then…[intervene]    
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 231 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.      
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, so and I guess I mean even that when 
Mr Tsotsi excused himself to meet the Minister it was 
probably five, ten minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.    
MS MOLEFE:   So even the acting of Ms Klein was really 
just, very short.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay you do not know what 
happens in the meeting you are – where are you in this 
intervening period? 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair I was sitting in my office because the 
Minister had asked us to recuse ourselves.  I went into my 
office I continued with my work.  I obviously did not know 
what was going on in the board from time to time I would 
see board members during tea break, I did not even realise 
that the Minister had left, I do not know what time she left 
until I was called much, much later.  In fact, before I got 
called I went into Mr Matona’s office I think it was 
somewhere around five if I am not mistaken around there 
to say I do not know you know what is happening in the 
20 
board meeting, he also did not know.  I said to him I think I 
am going to leave and as I was saying that he was then 
called to come back to the board and I was asked to stay 
and not go by the – and I actually remembered asking the 
company secretary but how long and he said well he does 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 232 of 288 
 
not know.  Ja, so that is what happened.     
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you were called back into the board 
meeting? 
MS MOLEFE:   Mr Matona was called alone back into the 
board meeting Chair and they asked me to ha what hang 
around but they would call me later.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, so tell the Chairperson what 
happens when you were ultimately called, who is there in 
the meeting and what are they telling you?  
MS MOLEFE:   So I go into the meeting obviously Mr 
10 
Matona has left the meeting, Mr Tsotsi was chairing the 
meeting, Ms Chwayita Mabude was there, Mr Zithembe 
Khoza was there, Dr Pat Naidoo was in the meeting, Mr 
Norman Baloyi was in the meeting, Dr Ben Ngubane was in 
the meeting and Ms Venete Klein.  I do not think Ms 
Verushnie Naidoo and Ms Carriem-Weber; I think it is 
Carriem or Cassiem I cannot remember but I do not think 
they were there.  So Mr Romeo Khumalo came in after I 
had joined the meeting probably maybe for about five 
minutes and he left.  So he really did not stay long.   
20 
So as I walk into the meeting I sit to the right of Mr 
Tsotsi and he explains to me that you know you would have 
been in our meeting of the 9 t h you would recall that I 
informed the board that we have been asked to do an 
enquiry into the state of affairs of Eskom and the board 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 233 of 288 
 
had decided that in order to have unaffected access into all 
the information that are required to enable such an enquiry 
they are going to ask the executives that looks after those 
areas that would be looked into, to step aside while this 
enquiry is happening.   
He explained that it would take three months, they 
foresee that it would take three months and he was at 
pains explaining that I must understand that they are not 
alleging any wrongdoing on our part this is merely to 
facilitate you know a very seamless process because they 
10 
would like us to come back as soon as possible.  He then 
asked me if I had any objection to being asked to step 
aside and this was even before he presented me the letter.   
And I said to him I am surprised Mr Tsotsi you of all 
people who is serving a second term together with Ms 
Chwayita should know all the challenges in this company 
we have been through this on many occasions there has 
been task teams after task teams to us executives to solve 
the challenges at Eskom.  So I am surprised that I am 
being asked to step aside and in fact if I recall while I was 
20 
saying that before I even finished what I wanted to say Ms 
Chwayita interjected and said listen the Minister was here 
and is not happy about a number of things including the 
financial challenges and she is therefore asked the board 
to do an enquiry and that enquiry requires that we make 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 234 of 288 
 
sure that we have access to all information that we require 
that is why we are asking everyone to step aside.   
So I was then presented with a letter of suspension 
and Mr Tsotsi then just took me through it and I think by 
that time I had really switched off because the minute they 
said to me shareholder was there it is not happy about a 
number of things including the financial challenges, we 
asking you guys to step aside.  I just said if that is what 
the board wants if they believe that it is in the best interest 
of the company I cannot stand in the way of the board.  I 
10 
therefore signed the letter Mr Chair and I left.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it is also interesting that you say 
somebody said the Minister was here and she said she was 
unhappy about among other things…[intervene]               
MS MOLEFE:   A number of things including the financial 
challenges, yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Including your portfolio.  
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, and thinking about it I do not think I 
20 
was specific about that in that in my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS MOLEFE:   But essentially it was triggered by the fact 
that they were asking me if I have a problem.  Are there 
any reasons I believe that I should not step aside? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 235 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS MOLEFE:   And as I was saying to Mr Tsotsi I do not 
understand 
why 
you 
would 
not 
know 
yourself 
these 
challenges when you have been with the company for 
several years that is when you know Ms Chwayita who had 
been in the board before as well interjected.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Now prior to you hearing at this stage 
when your suspension was being discussed that the 
Minister had said she was not happy with among others 
something in your portfolio had there been anybody within 
10 
the board who had expressed any unhappiness about your 
portfolio within Eskom?    
MS MOLEFE:   Chair the only thing that I can really think 
of is Ms Chwayita herself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MS MOLEFE:   When we went to raise an international 
bond – by the way the way the process works is that the 
borrowing 
program 
once 
approved 
because 
it 
is 
an 
integrated plan on a yearly basis.  It is detailed enough to 
also provide the borrowing program which the board would 
20 
then have approved and it actually tells you what sought of 
funding solutions we would be pursuing to support the 
business requirements.  So in that shareholder compact 
that we have as well as the borrowing program which is 
submitted to the shareholder as well as the National 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 236 of 288 
 
Treasury we do the detail the borrowing program.   
So the board would have been fully aware of you 
know what we were doing but Ms Chwayita if I recall 
because some time in January towards end January of 
2015 we went overseas to raise an international bond and 
while I was there she sent quite a number of emails to 
myself and the Treasurer of the company Ms Caroline 
Henry expressing he dissatisfaction with the fact that we 
were going overseas to raise a bond it is expensive and so 
forth.   
10 
So that is the only thing that I could think of, I was 
once told by the acting DDG at that time Mogale while I 
was at DP offices that it appears the Minister is not happy 
about that as well.  But I then said to her well you need to 
explain to the Minister because you were with us on the 
international 
road 
show 
to 
go 
and 
raise 
the 
funds.  
National Treasury officials were there so if there is any 
doubt in our Ministers mind she can then ask the officials 
in government about that bond.  So that is the only thing 
really that for me at that point I could really think of.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the Minister will come at some 
stage and give evidence but I just note that Mr Tsotsi said 
somebody and I think he said Dr Ngubane told him that the 
Minister was the one who added your name who said your 
name should also, you should also be suspended and now 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 237 of 288 
 
you have somebody in the board saying when the Minister 
was speaking to the board she expressed unhappiness 
about among other things your portfolio or certain aspects 
in your portfolio.  So she will come and she will come 
and…[intervene]              
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, and I mean I suppose Chair I will also 
listened to the testimony from Ms Venete Klein and I think 
they mentioned that the Minister was always complaining 
about information that management or executives were 
providing to the War Room. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MS MOLEFE:   But then again you know it was quite a 
detailed process the War Room process.  I was part of the 
process the CE Mr Matona was part of the process, we had 
support from our general managers and other executives 
but nobody had ever come to us and say we are unhappy 
with the War Room.  The Deputy Minister of Energy chaired 
the War Room, the coordinating or secretary was Dr 
Phillips and there were the amended DG of Treasury use to 
attend the War Room and so forth.  So we presented to the 
20 
Deputy President at that time who is the current President 
now on the 5 t h of March our obviously findings but it would 
have been work that we would have been doing with the 
officials.  If anything to what Mr Marokane said it would 
have been maybe discomfort that the board seems to be 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 238 of 288 
 
not part of that process but it is my view that they could 
have asked for further information.   
We 
have 
reason 
to 
believe 
that 
there 
is 
dissatisfaction with the information you are presenting can 
you come and present to us.  As I indicated on the 9 t h of 
March on the 11 t h of March before the Minister came the 
CE had started giving an account on amongst others work 
of the War Room.  So I had never been approached by 
anyone or the Minister to say they are not happy with it, ja.  
Ja, it was announced by end of December 2014 but it 
10 
kicked off ja…[intervene]       
ADV SELEKA SC:   The mic if off Chairperson.  
MS MOLEFE:   But it kicked off beginning of January. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay when I asked that the earlier 
question it was off?   
ADV SELEKA SC:   I realised it was off.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I asked just for the record I asked 
the question how long the War Room or how long the War 
Room had been around by March 2015 and the witness 
said the War Room had been announced towards the end 
20 
of December 2014.  So it was fairly new…[intervene]  
MS MOLEFE:   Fairly new.  
CHAIRPERSON:   By March 2015.  
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, it started kicking off in January 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In January, now by March when you 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 239 of 288 
 
were suspended how many – do you remember how many 
times you had had as Eskom, you had had to furnish 
information to the War Room?   
MS MOLEFE:   We presented to the War Room every week 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Every week? 
MS MOLEFE:   Every week we met at the Union Buildings 
with government officials every week. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you were always part of the team 
that did that from Eskom? 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, myself and the CE were always there.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Matona?  
MS MOLEFE:   Myself and Mr Matona were always there, 
yes Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, would there be other executives 
there sometimes or it was just the two of you? 
MS MOLEFE:   No we always had executives I think Dan 
Marokane would have joined from time to time it depended 
on the topic for the week in terms of what they wanted us 
to cover so that we could come up with a plan. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
Mr 
Matjila 
Koko 
would 
have 
attended…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sometimes.  
MS MOLEFE:   Sometimes and I think one or two 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 240 of 288 
 
executives you know from generation in the main from the 
head of generation would have attended as well and then 
we would have been supported by general managers as the 
executive in the office of the CE and one of the general 
managers that was supporting me attended the meeting on 
a weekly basis with me.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But are you able to say positively that 
nobody from the War Room had complained to you or Mr 
Matona as far as you know that you people were not 
providing accurate information to the War Room?  
10 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair I mean if they did they really did not 
– I mean we had quite allot of engagements with them.  
They challenged our assumptions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.    
MS MOLEFE:   But the fact that you know they challenged 
our assumptions it does not necessary mean that our 
information is inaccurate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MS MOLEFE:   So we would explain to them I mean if I 
give you an example of the financials as an example.  So 
20 
today you know I present these are the forecast for the 
year we then have a power system challenge we have to 
run our open cycle guest turbines it means we need to buy 
diesel which was not initially in the forecast.   
I then have to revise the financial forecast because 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 241 of 288 
 
I have to take that into account.  So when I present to the 
of course I would show a different number to the one that I 
showed last month but I would explain to them that there 
has been a change is due to one, two, three, four.  So that 
is the sort of thing and that is why I talk about assumptions 
in forecast why it is different to but it was never an issue 
of the integrity of the numbers for me.  It had never been 
challenged in that way, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there was an engagement.   
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, there was engagement. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   People serving on the War Room with 
your presentations but nobody ever said what you were 
presenting was not helpful? 
MS MOLEFE:   Absolutely no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Nobody ever said that? 
MS MOLEFE:   No Chair, ja and I mean we obviously went 
through 
a 
lot 
of 
detailed 
work 
internally 
before 
we 
presented to the War Room and then we did actually you 
know power point presentations to the War Room and they 
would challenge, they would ask us questions. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.    
MS MOLEFE:   But nobody said you know we – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well…[intervene] 
MS MOLEFE:   At least I was not told Chair; I was not told. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were never – nobody ever said that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 242 of 288 
 
to you or in your presence? 
MS MOLEFE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and Mr Matona…[intervene] 
MS MOLEFE:   No, not Mr Matona.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Also said nobody ever complained as far 
as he knew? 
MS MOLEFE:   No.  
CHAIRPERSON:   There is an affidavit by Ms Lynn Brown if 
the legal team has not given it to you they must give it to 
you so that you can comment on it because in it she talks 
10 
about these things, about these complains so that you can 
maybe do an affidavit in respond to those things.  
MS MOLEFE:   To that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MS MOLEFE:   That will be helpful Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you Chair.  What Ms Lynn 
Brown says Ms Zulu Molefe is that she met with the 
President earlier in the year and that the President 
complained about information, well President Zuma not the 
20 
Deputy President complained about information from the 
executives to the War Room that was inadequate and 
inaccurate.   Now obviously the question is did you become 
aware of that? 
MS MOLEFE:   I was not made aware of that Chair I mean 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 243 of 288 
 
the last War Room meeting would have been the meeting of 
the 5 t h of March where we would have been presenting to 
the then Head of the War Room as I indicated the Deputy 
President and various Ministers that had been appointed to 
support the Deputy President in the War Room were there 
as well.   
So I think we presented and we were then asked to 
leave, I do understand that out of that meeting there would 
have been a cabinet memo that then talks about where to 
from here having understood the challenges that Eskom is 
10 
facing.  So that is all that I know.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But that last meeting of the 5 t h of March 
you said, is that right?     
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you detect any unhappiness on the 
part of the War Room personalities the people on the War 
Room about Eskom’s your work or your presentation any 
unhappiness that would drive anybody to say Eskom is not 
providing reliable information? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair as I say it was never about reliable 
20 
information it was really about to the point I am making in 
fact Ms Lynn Brown when the discussion around where to 
from 
here 
she 
actually 
asked 
as 
the 
shareholder 
representative she has not had sufficient time to socialise 
with what Eskom’s executives had presented in the war 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 244 of 288 
 
Room. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MS MOLEFE:   But and I am not sure if Mr or Ms Temetuna 
covers it in his affidavit but I know that he made various 
attempts to make sure that the Minister is sensitised of 
what we are presenting and I do not think he was able to 
do that because I would have had to go with him.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.    
MS MOLEFE:   And I think the intention was that before it 
is presented to the War Room the Minister must be taken 
10 
through the outcome of that but we were not able to do 
that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Now Ms Molefe, you are in 
the suspension meeting.  I cannot recall whether you 
mentioned whether or not Mr Mark Pamensky was present in 
that meeting? 
MS MOLEFE:   Sorry.  He was not in the meeting.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   He was not? 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   Pamensky was not in the meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Were you in that meeting when Mr Tsotsi 
present to you what the intention of the board is.  The 
resolution, rather to suspend you.  Did he mention the War 
Room, what we have been talking about now, as one of the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 245 of 288 
 
reasons why you needed to be suspended? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, Chair.  He said that the inquiry is... 
would be concerned with the power delivery challenges.  
The, obviously, the delays in the construction of the power 
stations and the financial challenges.   
 
I think he mentioned that as well.  So the inquiry would 
cover that but it was never about issues regarding the War 
Room.   
 
But, ja, so I think that is what he said to me.  In fact, it 
was interesting because I obviously signed the letter.  I 
10 
understood that they are concerned about the power delivery 
challenges.   
 
He mentioned three things.  Financial challenges, power 
delivery challenges, as well as the construction of the power 
stations.  The delays in the construction of the power 
stations.   
 
So at that time, I did not know who was been asked to 
step aside as he put it.  I only found out the following who 
had been asked or who had been suspended.   
 
In fact, that is why I wrote them the letter on the 17t h.  
20 
Because my concern was that what they said to me when 
they presented me with the letter of suspension and what 
had 
transpired 
in 
the 
media 
the 
following 
day, 
was 
inconsistent.   
 
Because if they were consistent, then the Head of 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 246 of 288 
 
Generation should have been suspended.  So, and I said I 
reserve my right to challenge those things at a later stage. 
 
Because it seems there is consistencies between what 
they said to me, they are trying to achieve, and what they 
presented the following day in media reports.  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Well, let us go into that.  The 
letter, as you are writing to them.  So you mentioned the one 
of the 17t h.  You are now, what, six days into the suspension.  
You were suspended on the 11t h of March.  Just tell the 
Chairperson going forward because I believe you deal with 
10 
that in your supplementary affidavit. 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just relate to the Chairperson whether 
they respond to your letters and what transpired going 
forward. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  So I wrote to the Chairman, Mr Tsotsi, on 
the 17t h of March and I did not get a response but later found 
out that obviously the board was... had also removed him.  I 
found out through a media report.  I did not get a response 
back from him.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us... when you wrote... was it 
17 March or 17 April? 
MS MOLEFE:   17 t h of March.  It was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, he had not been removed that time as 
yet? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 247 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   He had not been removed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   I think he was removed end of that month. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you want to talk about what the main 
features of your letter of the 17t h of March were? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes.  So the main features Chair, if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Counsel will help you to identify it.  To 
find it ...[intervenes]  
10 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...where it is. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, it is dealt with on page 599 
of the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   599? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   599. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The letter itself is TM2.  That is on page 
827.  Eight, two , seven.   
20 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair.  Essentially, I was writing to Mr 
Tsotsi, indicating that having seen his press briefing on the 
12t h of March, I was quite disturbed by the term of events, 
particularly, the inconsistencies between the discussion we 
had when they were, you know, giving me notice of 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 248 of 288 
 
suspension and what he said at the media briefing.   
 
And I indicated that I would, you know, want to obviously 
engaged at a later stage.  So those was essentially just to 
make him aware that it is concerning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just tell me what those... what reasons he 
gave or they gave in media briefings that were different from 
the reasons he gave to you. 
MS MOLEFE:   So Chair, essentially my concern here was 
that when they issued me with the letter of suspension, they 
said that they need to do an inquiry and they want to make 
10 
sure that there is access to information required to be able 
to do an inquiry.   
 
That inquiries went to focus on the financial challenges 
of the company, the delays regarding the construction of the 
power stations and then the power delivery challenges which 
is mainly the, you know, the power plant challenges.   
 
So when I saw the briefing, because at that time, I then 
did not know who... I made assumptions around who would 
be suspended because they did not share with me who would 
be suspended.   
20 
 
When I realised that the General Group Executive was 
not part of the suspensions, I then said to him but you know 
there are inconsistencies here.   
 
If you are asking us to step aside so that you can deal 
with those number of things.  So in my mind, why you know, 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 249 of 288 
 
have you suspended myself, the Head of Group Capital, the 
CEO and the Head of Technology and Commercial?   
 
So those were the inconsistencies Chair that I was 
referring to, to say, you know, General challenges are 
causing power delivering issues.  So why is there... Ja.  So I 
did not say that in my letter ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Who was the Head of Generations? 
MS MOLEFE:   Shu, Chair I cannot remember at that time 
whether it was Mr Thava Govender or Mongezi Ntsokolo 
because Mr Thava Govender was Head of Generation for a 
10 
while and then he moved over to Transmission.  I think it 
could have been Mr Mongezi Ntsokolo if I am not mistaken.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And he had not been suspended? 
MS MOLEFE:   He had not been suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And the investigations were going 
to include his portfolio? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   Like, that was my point.  So I did not receive 
any response regarding my letter of the 17t h.  But obviously, 
we were hearing quite a lot in the media about what was 
happening at Eskom.   
 
We were not getting any communication from the board.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 250 of 288 
 
And I was quite concerned because they said to us...   
 
In fact, they said to us we must, you know, be available 
as when we are required because they would be... we would 
be required to participate in the inquiry.   
 
So I think sometime in April, towards end of April, I 
learnt through media reports they had appointed a law firm 
called Dentons to do... you know, to do the investigations or 
the inquiry.   
 
I then wrote to them on the 29 t h of April and that would 
have been my second letter where I said to them I am 
10 
concerned that they are not communicating with us.   
 
It is almost six weeks since the suspension.  They said 
to us it would take three months.  We are concerned that we 
do not know what is going on.   
 
How long are we expected to be home?  Can they share 
with us the terms of reference of the inquiry because we 
understand that Dentons would start their investigation.   
 
I particularly also wrote them Chair because I need to 
obviously prepare myself of the inquiry.  I did not have any 
information.  I have taken all my work tools.  And I also 
20 
wanted to consult if I needed to prepare myself.   
 
Because there were a number of things that were you 
know going on in media around, you know, either what has 
happened, what is the reason for our suspensions.   
 
So I particularly asked them for the directors on offices 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 251 of 288 
 
liability policy which I believe I was entitled to as an 
executive of the company should I need legal advice for me 
to be able to cover my legal expenses.   
 
I 
also 
pointed 
them 
out 
to 
the 
Memorandum 
of 
Incorporation 
which 
actually 
says 
that, 
you 
know, 
an 
executive can be covered under those circumstances.   
 
So that was the basis of my letter.  They then responded 
using Bowman Gilfillan. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just before that Ms Molefe.  Just turn 
the page to 829.  Eight, two, nine.  Is that the letter you are 
10 
referring to of 29 April 2015? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair.  That is the letter.   
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC:   And I 
think 
you 
have already 
summarised the contents of that letter to the Chairperson. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then you can turn the page to 832.  I 
think that is what you were about to speak about, a response 
from Bowman Gilfillan, Mr Jerry Kapu.   
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair.  So I then received a 
response on behalf of Eskom from Mr Jerry Kapu who, 
20 
obviously, who works for Bowman Gilfillan and clearly 
indicating that they acknowledge receipt of my letter but 
really being dismissive about some of the requests that I had 
made to the board.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can you turn the page to 836? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 252 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is a letter dated 3 May 2015.   
MS MOLEFE:   836? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, eight, three six.  You follow the 
left... right hand corner again? 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Tell the Chairperson whose letter is this? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, this is the letter I then wrote to Dr 
Ngubane.  In there, I indicate to him that, you know, the 
matter refers to the letter that I had written to them date the 
10 
29t h of April which I have received a response from Mr Jerry 
Kapu.   
 
And I actually indicated that I totally reject the contents 
of Mr Kapu’s letter and that I fully reserve my right to take 
this matter.  Because I was quite sure that I am entitled to 
tell Eskom, covering my expenses should I need to, as part 
of the inquiry because if this in relation to Eskom’s services 
essentially.   
 
So I also pointed out to them, as you can see under 
paragraph 9, in terms of my suspension letter where they 
20 
indicated that I am instructed to remain in telephonic contact 
with the chairman during the period.   
 
We are expected to be contactable in the event that it is 
necessary for your to attend to the company premises and so 
forth.  So I think the point I was making there Chair is that 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 253 of 288 
 
essentially, you know, we are not... You know, they... we...  
 
The manner in which the board is conducting themselves 
is not fair.  Firstly, they have appointed lawyers to speak to 
us.  We do not have or share the same benefits that...  
 
And that is essentially the reason why I was asking them 
to provide me with the... as the policy.  Escap is the Eskom 
cell captive which is our insurance which houses our 
insurance policy.   
 
So that was essentially this... the sense of the meeting.  
And what I indicated, as we can see in the last paragraph.  I 
10 
think where I say lastly... if I may read it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [No audible reply]  
MS MOLEFE:   “Kindly be advised that on the 30t h of April  
pursuant 
to 
receiving 
communication 
from 
Ms 
Daniels 
regarding 
the 
meeting, 
I 
immediately 
responded and advised her of my availability and 
further requested her to provide me with the agenda 
for the meeting in order to enable me to prepare for 
the meeting.” 
 
They had sent a letter... the chairman had sent a letter 
20 
through I think Ms Daniels, after I had written these letters to 
have a discussion with me on the way ahead.   
 
So I was responding to that as well in the letter to say 
that can they just furnish me with the agenda for that 
meeting that they have asked for. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 254 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Now just, I think carry on in regard 
to this meeting.  Do you... tell the Chairperson, when was 
the meeting, did the meeting take place, who was present at 
the meeting?  The meeting you say Ms Daniels... 
“And I have been advised by Ms Daniels that the 
purpose of the meeting is to discuss the way 
ahead.” 
 
You say: 
“I find the letter to be very vague, evasive and I am 
highly concerned and uncomfortable in attending the 
10 
proposed meeting in view of that fact.  On the one 
hand, I am receiving communication directly from 
your office and yet at the same time from Mr Kapu 
for and on behalf of Eskom.” 
MS MOLEFE:   So the meeting Chair was called by Dr Ben 
Ngubane, obviously, through Ms Daniels.  We then spoke 
over the phone around what time the meeting would take 
place and where.  So the meeting was set for the 4t h of May 
at Protea Hotel in Centurion.  At the meeting...  
 
Chair, if I recall the meeting, all that it says was the way 
20 
ahead.  I was really not provided with the agenda and the 
objective as I had discussed... I had asked.  It just said to 
discuss the way ahead.   
 
At the meeting present was Dr Ben Ngubane himself, Ms 
Venete Klein, Mr Romeo Khumalo and I think Mr Zethembe 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 255 of 288 
 
Khoza was there as well, if I am not mistaken.  I could be 
wrong there.  But Ms Daniels was also in the meeting.   
 
So I think Ms Klein introduced the meeting.  Why they 
had asked me... and I really have to think about this because 
there was a lot of discussion between myself and Mr Romeo 
Khumalo.   
 
And Dr Ben Ngubane did not say anything at all.  It 
almost became a dialogue between myself and Mr Khumalo 
and with him doing most of the talking.   
 
And essentially what he started by saying to me is that:  
10 
We understand that you have been writing to Eskom, wanting 
to talk about your exit.   
 
And Chair, the reason I say that.  I could be confused.  I 
remember Ms Daniels indicated that Ms Venete Klein 
introduced the meeting.  I do not remember that but I could 
be wrong.   
 
What I remember is Mr Khumalo actually saying to me 
that:  We understand you have been asking, you know, you 
have been writing a number of letters to Eskom.  You are 
being, you know, uneasy.  You would like to exist.   
20 
 
And I said to him no that is not the reason why I have 
been writing to Eskom.  The reason I have been writing to 
Eskom is that it has been almost eight weeks since we have 
had... since the... our suspension.   
 
You said we should keep in touch.  We should be 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 256 of 288 
 
contactable.  You said that you would keep in touch.  You 
would inform us of the inquiry.  You said that it will only take 
three months and it has been eight weeks.   
 
We have not had any form of communication regarding 
the inquiry.  And I wanted to have the terms of reference so 
that I could prepare myself for this inquiry.   
 
And he blatantly said to me:  I am going to be very 
honest with you.  The process has been compromised by Mr 
Tsotsi.  It is not where we had anticipated it to be.  We have 
just finalised the terms of reference and only just appointed 
10 
a law firm.   
 
So we are still far from even, you know, starting the 
inquiry or going into the inquiry itself.  So we think that you 
are not going to be called back in June as we anticipated.  It 
is going to take a much longer period.  So that is why we 
want to find out from yourself, would you be amicable to 
having a discussion... amenable to having a discussion 
around, you know, amicable as parting of ways.   
 
And I said to him:  Well, that was not the reason I was 
asking.  I emphasised the point that that was not the reason 
20 
I was writing.  And I raised my concerns about the fact that I 
am having an very unfair...  
 
They are having an unfair advantage in that they had 
been able to appoint very expenses lawyers.  I have asked 
for certain things.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 257 of 288 
 
 
I have not received it and I believe that I am entitled to 
get a fair process in a way that Eskom is as well.  And they 
said to me, they hear where I am coming from but 
unfortunately this process has been compromised by Mr 
Tsotsi and they would like to see whether we should have a 
discussion of a way forward.   
 
And they asked me if, can they put something together 
that I can consider and come back to them.  And I said if that 
is what the board would like to do, please put something 
together.  I will consult with my lawyers and think about it.   
10 
 
Within, you know, three... because we met on the 
4 t h of May.  The following day, I received a request for a 
follow up meeting and that meeting took place on the 
8t h of May.   
 
The meeting was at the same hotel.  The meeting was 
this time only with Ms Venete Klein and Mr Zethembe Khosa 
and Ms Daniels was also present in the meeting, taking 
notes.   
 
And essentially, Mr Venete Klein already had a proposal 
of what looked like an exit package which she had already 
20 
signed and she took me through it line-by-line what it means.   
 
I did say to her and in my own words if I recall.  I said 
this is a slap in the face considering that I was not thinking 
to exit the company but anyway, I will take it away and I will 
go and consult and I will come back to them.   
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 258 of 288 
 
 
So essentially Chair, that is what happened.  I wrote to 
the, I think , on the 11t h of May ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just before ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just before that Ms Molefe.  If you can 
turn please to page 839 and just identify the document to the 
Chairperson? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair the document on page 839 is my 
letter.  It is the letter, sorry, from Eskom to myself signed by 
Ms Venete Klein and this is the letter that she brought to the 
10 
meeting where she took me through this proposal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   On the 8t h of May 2015? 
MS MOLEFE:   On the 8t h, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then you may proceed.   
MS MOLEFE:   So I then went away Chair.  And if I recall, I 
wrote to them on the 11t h of May and I see I referred to Ms 
Venete Klein here as dear sir.   
 
But I was writing to, essentially to Ms Vente Klein, 
indicating I have received their proposal and that I ask for 
further information because I wanted to know. 
20 
 
Because in their proposal, they were also offering the 
low turning incentive which Grant 8 and Grant 9 that were 
due to on the 31s t of March 2015 and 31s t of March 2016.   
 
So essentially I wanted to know how they arrived at such 
a package.  So what informed them to arrive at such a 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 259 of 288 
 
package. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, may I ask you?  We understand 
from the board members, those who have come to testify, 
that in fact they had wanted the executives back.   
 
I think we have shown a minute of the Audit and Risk 
Committee that the Audit and Risk had minute that they want 
the executives to come back and the board members said 
they wanted you to come back.  The first meeting on the 
4t h of May.   
MS MOLEFE:   4t h of May. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is it May?  Ja, 2015. 
MS MOLEFE:   4t h of May 2015. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Did those... wait on my question.  
Did those ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   I mean, I do not believe that and I heard that 
is what they said giving testimony here.  Because they 
started by saying...   
 
As I say, it was a dialogue between myself and Mr 
Khumalo who started by saying:  We understand that you 
want to leave.  And I outrightly rejected that.   
20 
 
I said that the reason for my letters was one, two, three, 
four.  And reiterated that I have asked for this, I have asked 
for this, I have asked for that.  And it has been eight weeks 
and we all...  
 
All we hear is media reports that you have appointed.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 260 of 288 
 
You have not even informed us that you have appointed a 
law firm.   
 
Because essentially we expected that they would be in 
touch with us to tell us where the process is, this is... even if 
they have not started but that communication was not there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.   
MS MOLEFE:   I... ja.  So essentially, I do not believe that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay.  Then page... you can go 
back to page 841.  You were talking about the letter dated 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before that.  So is the position that at the 
commencement of the meeting of the 4 t h of May 2015 
between yourself and representatives of the board, one, your 
position was that you are wanted to go back to work.  Your 
position... you had never had any intention not to go back to 
work or to want to part ways with Eskom at that stage? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, I was willing to go back to work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And I use that word very carefully. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   Because they... and I suppose in my level as 
well, as a director of the company.  I sit on the board.  It is 
an issue of trust between myself and the board.  But I could 
clearly see that they did not want me there.  At least, that is 
how I felt. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 261 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   I felt that we had been ostracised. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And just by their manner of communication 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   How they are using, you know, expensive 
lawyers 
to 
communicate 
with 
us. 
 
They 
are 
not 
communicating with us directly.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   When our letters, we were communicating 
with them directly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   So.  But in that meeting, I was quite specific 
to say:  I am writing to you because I want to leave.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MOLEFE:   And if you think about it Chair.  If we leave 
before the inquiry has been completed, it would have been at 
our disadvantage because then we would not have had the 
opportunity if we left before to make our case in an inquiry.  
20 
So we would have left Eskom.   
 
And I think that is what happened with the cloud on our 
shoulders.  What have they done?  Because the inquiry has 
not been completed.   
 
So in my mind, it would have actually made it difficult for 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 262 of 288 
 
me to move on and find employment without anyone 
questioning why I left because I would not have been given 
the opportunity to actually present my case.   
 
So those were the main concerns that I had.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you were concerned about issues of 
trust but you were willing to go back to work? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair.  And firstly I wanted to participate 
in the inquiry ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In the inquiry. 
MS MOLEFE:   ...so that I could clear my name. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   That was very important for me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   So that we can put those matters to rest. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And obviously giving them the benefit of the 
doubt ...[intervenes]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   ...that they want to do an inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   They do not know what has been going on.  I 
was quite willing to participate in that inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And I was quite confident Chair that it would 
clear me. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 263 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And one would have expected that once they 
received the outcome as well.  You know, in your mind you 
think, once they...  
 
Even if they have any doubt in their minds about 
yourself, if those things are put to rest, then they would be, 
you know, willing to work with you.   
 
I suppose those are the things that were playing but I 
could clearly see that, you know, these people are not willing 
to have us back, coming back to the office. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you say the first thing Mr Romeo 
Khumalo 
said 
was 
that 
they 
understood 
that 
the 
correspondence you had sent to the chairperson indicated 
that you wanted to part ways. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you make it quite clear that that was 
not true. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And but he, nevertheless, said maybe you 
should talk about a separation package. 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because the inquiry was still going to take 
quite some time. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And that is how you ended up 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 264 of 288 
 
discussing the possible separation package? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was initiated by their side. 
MS MOLEFE:   It was initiated by their side, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Molefe, then take 
us to that letter.  You can summarise it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the extent that the letters speak for 
themselves, we might not... she might not need to go through 
it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She may highlight if there is some 
important feature. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think what is important is to go to 
how the settlement happened. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if there is something that she wants to 
highlight in the letters, that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because at this stage, what is clear from 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 265 of 288 
 
her evidence is that when Mr Khumalo said they understood 
that she wanted to discuss separation, she made it clear that 
that is not what her letter said. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   So this letter Chair to Ms Klein following the 
8t h of May meeting where she presented me with seeking to 
understand what was the basis of their proposal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   So in the main those are the questions I 
10 
asked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And you can see that I referred to also Mr 
Anton Minnaar. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   Where I ask can I be furnished with certain 
information? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And essentially that – because already a 
package had been presented to me. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And I said before I consult let me ask for all 
the information required but I think I left the meeting, 
Chair, both on the – particularly on the 4 t h feeling that, you 
know, this board obviously want to part ways. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 266 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And that was my feeling in that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Thank you, Ms Molefe.  
Then 
just 
tell 
the 
Chairperson 
how 
the 
settlement 
agreement – because we see it is different from that 
proposal. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which is a one pager, given to you – 
you say given to you by Ms Klein in the meeting of the 8 
10 
May.  The settlement agreement you will find on page 849 
and it is a document of some length, considerable length.  
You can tell the Chairperson quickly how you received that 
and how it was concluded. 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair, and I see – Chair, this is not the 
final settlement agreement that I signed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes? 
MS MOLEFE:   And I am just looking at – ja, I presume this 
is the settlement …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is no signed either. 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   It is… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got the signed one, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The indication that we have it in 
another Eskom bundle which I will look for. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that is fine, she can talk to the main 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 267 of 288 
 
features. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She can talk to the main features as 
long as we have got the settlement agreement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In Mr Tsotsi’s bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the file.  What were the main features 
of the settlement agreement that you reached with the 
board? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, Chair, and I have to think because I 
think I have another copy elsewhere. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   So which I did not submit because I thought 
you had the right one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We will print it out for you, Ma’am. 
MS MOLEFE:   Okay.  If my memory serves me well, this is 
the first agreement that Ms Venete Klein would have sent 
to me, so I would have asked for …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which you rejected. 
MS MOLEFE:   So she sent me a – ja, which I rejected.  
Because, if I recall, Chair, and I cannot remember because 
20 
I was still writing to them on the 1 June, on the 3 June and 
so forth.  I just want to – because the one that signed was 
eventually I think finalised on the 25 t h but Ms Venete Klein 
was not part of the discussion.  It was – I received another 
one because we rejected this one with my lawyers and Mr 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 268 of 288 
 
Khoza, sorry, then met with my lawyers to discuss my – the 
proposed agreement, settlement agreement. 
 
So if I look at these things, there are certain things 
that – firstly, I think the 12 month package I said no to and 
this is the original one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see. 
MS MOLEFE:   I think they talk about grant 8 and 9 but 
there was also – also grant 10 is also there on 4.5.  But I 
think in addition to that, I think to the point earlier on, I 
also ask for the six months that I would have served and I 
10 
think they did grant me that, the six months notice period.  
So that is why I know that this is not the correct one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay, so that – this one seems to 
go with the emails exchanged on page 847. 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, so …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The first email is 11 June 2015 at 8.24.  
It is written by Ms Venete Klein. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair, so this is the one 
that Ms Venete would have sent to me.  So remember that 
she brought the proposal on the 8 t h which was that one 
20 
page what we spoke about and then she sent me this 
proposal which is a draft settlement agreement which we 
then did not accept as well. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 269 of 288 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So we will provide …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us talk about the settlement 
agreement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have understood from the board 
members who testified that in effect the principle that they 
followed was that the executives should be paid around 12 
month’s salary/remuneration and Mr Marokane testified 
that what he ultimately got in terms of the settlement was 
more or less equivalent to a year ’s salary/remuneration. 
10 
I think Mr Matona also said or his settlement, what 
he was paid was about a year ’s of 12 months’ salary, I 
leave out other things.  Was yours different on this – in 
regard to this point or was it not? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, it was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   It was different, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   It was different.  As I indicated that that is 
what they proposed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   And mine took a lot longer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   In fact, Chair, to digress a little bit, I also 
met with Mr Romeo Kumalo who was convincing me to 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 270 of 288 
 
accept that package. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And I said to him I have got a serious 
problem, I should have participated in the inquiry because 
for me, my professional integrity and being able to find 
employment was the most important thing when people out 
there know that you have left Eskom under a cloud, it has 
not been made clear why you left.  So for me that was very 
important.  
 
And when he reached out to me to say I need – I am 
10 
coming to you in my personal capacity and I am advising 
you please consider taking this.  He said actually the 
Minister is not going to allow, you know, giving you more 
and I said to him it is not about being greedy, I am looking 
at my situation, what has happened, it could take me even 
much longer to find employment so I do not believe that 
you are compensating us enough if you want us to leave 
and he – and I actually said to him otherwise I am going to 
go to court.  That is what I said to him and he said to me 
you do not want to take on the state. 
20 
 
So in fact I think I mentioned – I do not know if I 
mentioned in my testimony, I was actually prepared to go 
to court.  I was preparing to go to court but the only reason 
that I decided not to is that it was taking a toll on my 
family, especially my mother.  So I eventually sat down 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 271 of 288 
 
with him but they brought Mr Khoza to come and speak to 
my lawyers but I refused the 12 month’s deal.   
So they then added six months notice period 
because we would have had six months notice period.  So 
essentially 
mine 
would 
have 
been 
higher 
from 
that 
perspective.  I did hear the other – ja, the other 
testimonies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   That – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so do you think it is – yours may 
10 
well have been about – or equal to more or less 18 months’ 
salary? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes, that is correct, Chair, including the 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because the negotiations with you took 
much longer. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe because you were also 
saying you were thinking of going to court and so on. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So ultimately you settled on that 
basis. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ultimately I settled, Chair, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  So but with you it seems they 
were even prepared to pay much more than they were 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 272 of 288 
 
prepared to pay the others for you to go. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja and I really cannot tell what their motive 
was, whether they were prepared to pay me more than the 
others or what – how they were thinking about this but my 
conversations really with Mr Zethembe Khoza and Mr 
Kumalo, I made it clear that I am taking the matter to 
court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   So I did not tell them when I decided not 
but obviously the fact that we sat down and – ja.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   I am aware that my lawyer did tell me 
Zethembe Khoza that this lady is prepared to court and 
maybe that is why they decided to offer more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, interestingly, in all of this there was 
nothing that they were saying to you you have done wrong, 
is that right? 
MS MOLEFE:   No, Chair, there was nothing that they were 
saying …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The discussion was never on the basis 
20 
that there was something wrong you had done. 
MS MOLEFE:   No, there was nothing and I guess we were 
looking at what is happening in the media, what is being 
said, we have not been cleared, our name has not been 
cleared. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 273 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   They want us to leave before the inquiry is 
concluded. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   So we were always concerned about that, 
ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now when you said to Mr Kumalo you 
were thinking of going to court had you – were you clear in 
your own mind probably with the benefit of legal advice as 
to what you were going to go to court about, if you went 
10 
court? 
MS MOLEFE:   So, Chair, in my …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, what you were going to 
be asking the court to do? 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja and I suppose, you know, under a lot of 
emotion, you are not even thinking about the outcome but 
all you are thinking about at that is that clearly these 
suspensions are unlawful and you do have a leg to stand 
on.  So if we cannot agree outside of the court, let us 
rather go to court.  Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, in your own mind, what you had in 
mind is that you would go to court to challenge the 
suspensions? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes.  I was going to challenge the 
suspensions, Chair. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 274 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I take it if you challenged the 
suspensions successfully it would mean going back to 
work? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair, I mean, that is what it meant. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what it would have meant, ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja and I mean there is a lot of 
correspondence I think that we shared and at some point I 
thought I had written to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   Actually indicating that I had been with the 
10 
company for nine years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   And I had not had any intention of leaving 
the company until I was suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   So – and I mean, I could not find that letter 
but if I recall I think I did write a letter, a very long letter to 
them to just express my dissatisfaction around how they 
have treated us and how they have dealt with this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   And I was essentially saying that I have 
never had any intentions of leaving the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   I had been with the company for nine years 
and so forth. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 275 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja.  But it was - as I said, when I was 
called to have the discussion to say please take – accept 
what we are giving you, this thing is bigger than you think. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   I thought, you know what, let the courts 
decide, you know?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
if 
you 
do 
find 
that 
letter, 
10 
communicate with the legal team. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that we can have it. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And did it take you long 
before you got another job? 
MS MOLEFE:   Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   After the settlement? 
MS MOLEFE:   I think I left 2016 – sorry, 2015, I got a job 
2016. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   But I suppose one of the things actually 
that came from time to time when you were - you know, 
unless people knew you personally it was difficult for them 
to offer.  I mean, I did go to interviews, a few of the offers I 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 276 of 288 
 
got were a lot lower than, you know, my position at Eskom, 
so obviously I would have had to take quite a big cut in my 
salary.   
Even, you know, going into my new employment 
now, I went in as a Deputy CFO to re-establish my career 
but there were one or two potential employers that actually 
wanted to know what had I – what have you done at Eskom 
why have you been suspended?  So it took a while but I 
think initially I decided let me rather just, you know, take a 
step back, you know, get over this Eskom matter before I 
10 
become active but I found employment by July 2016.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MS MOLEFE:   So it took me a year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just two aspects from my side 
Chairperson.  The settlement agreement is here Ms Molefe, 
which is signed by yourself and Dr Ngubane.  Chairperson 
just for completeness I will beg leave to hand it up and to 
give the witness as well a copy to confirm. 
 
Chairperson I – just before I asked the witness 
20 
about it I think we will have insert it with your permission 
Chairperson under page 285. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think shouldn’t replace the one that is 
at the end of the bundle with this one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That one belongs there because it is a 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 277 of 288 
 
draft which was attached to the email. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I think the mistake was on my part. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So this one is the final, the sequel to 
that draft. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It could be a separate exhibit on its own. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Either that or we add it Chairperson if 
you turn to page 285 provision is made for the settlement 
agreement there. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just two aspects from my side 
Chairperson.  The settlement agreement is here Ms Molefe, 
which is signed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But there was no settlement agreement, 
provision 
was 
made 
but 
there 
was 
no 
settlement 
agreement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But there was no settlement, yes 
correct chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   285. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   285.  So we will paginate it accordingly 
and inserted there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine.  Ms Molefe do you 
confirm that this is the settlement agreement that you 
signed with Eskom? 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 278 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair, this is the correct 
one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is the final one. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is the final one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We will regularise it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was 25 June 2015 when it was 
signed, was the Dentons – when was the Dentons report – 
when was the inquiry finalised? 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   The report is dated 2 July 2015, but they 
explained that they were directed on the 11 t h of June to 
provide a report, so they then stopped the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it doesn’t seem that it would have 
been correct as at the 4 t h of May for a member of the 
Board to say that the inquiry could still take much longer, 
because, one, the inquiry had been given three months to 
complete the investigation and it looks like it completed 
the investigation more or less within that time.  I don’t 
know exactly when they started but I don’t they started 
20 
before April. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    They say the commence date was 20 
April.   
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, 20 so it looks like they completed within 
the time that they were given or more or less, 20 April, 20 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 279 of 288 
 
May, 20 June, ja.   Ja, okay alright.   
 
I think that this will be put in here.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   We will regularise that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes the other question that I have been 
asking I asked all the other executives, I already asked 
you about the Board’s position or at least certain members 
of the Board, Dr Ngubane and Ms Klein, that they had no 
issues with the executives coming back, actually they 
expected them to come back.   You have dealt with that to 
say you don’t believe that. 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   No, I don’t believe that Chair, I mean on 
the 4 t h of May already and that’s why I was emphasizing 
the point of I almost went into a dialogue with Mr Kumalo, 
because they – I suppose they didn’t want to be seen to be 
the one saying it, but we actually went to and fro, because 
eventually he was saying would you look at something like 
this and I mean I think I did mention they said Mr Tsotsi 
has messed the process up so it is going to take a lot 
longer than what they thought and they said they don’t 
know when it is going to completed, he did say that to me. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well 
actually 
we 
nearly 
missed 
something Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Somebody 
who 
reported 
to 
you 
apparently told you on the 10 t h of March about something 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 280 of 288 
 
that Mr Koko had talked to her about.  Tell me about that? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes Chair it was Ms Nonkulequ Veletti now 
Dlameni on the 10 t h of March we had our finance strategy 
session.  I think around lunch time or one of the breaks 
she came to me and said that Mr Koko has been calling her 
and he wants her to come to Melrose Arch immediately, so 
she was saying do I know anything about that, what is 
going on at Melrose Arch, and I said I don’t know so ask Mr 
Koko to call me if he wants you to go there, because we 
are busy here. 
10 
 
So that was the end of it Chair and she said to me I 
will tell him, and I never heard from Mr Koko.  However I 
can confirm what Mr Marokane said earlier on, he then you 
know called me in the evening of the 10 t h to say you know I 
have just had – be to Ms Daniels house, can I see you, and 
he then told me that it looks like executives have been 
called to Melrose Arch to be informed that their bosses are 
going to be suspended the following day, are they ready to 
take over, from them.  
CHAIRPERSON:   The senior managers, or executives? 
20 
MS MOLEFE:   No Mr Marokane was relating this to me 
indicating that Ms Suzanne Daniels had said that it looks 
like people are being called to Melrose Arch if I am not 
mistaken to say that executives would be suspended 
tomorrow, ja, and I mean on the day as well of the 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 281 of 288 
 
suspension while I was waiting I kept on getting text 
messages from general manager that is it true that you are 
being suspended and I said but where did you hear from 
and they said well it is all over the offices now, most 
people are hearing this, it is rumoured that you are going 
to be suspended today, before I got to be suspended ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now the meeting that Ms – is it 
Valetti ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   Nonquleko Valetti Dlamini. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the – she said she had received 
10 
messages or she had been called by Mr Koko, who was 
saying she should come to a meeting at Melrose Arch. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, to meet some people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To meet some people? 
MS MOLEFE:   Some people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but there was no information who 
those people was? 
MS MOLEFE:  No she did not mention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And do you know whether why she would 
have been selected, is that something that she shared with 
20 
you or did she know? 
MS MOLEFE:   I do not think she knew as well Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As well ja.   Did she finally act in one 
position or another? 
MS MOLEFE:   She acted as the finance director when I 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 282 of 288 
 
got this outstanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In whose position did she ...[intervenes]  
MS MOLEFE:   My position when I got suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your position, oh, okay, okay.  Thank 
you.  Is there anything else that we haven’t covered that 
you think is important, you want to mention? 
MS MOLEFE:   No Chair I think we have covered of most of 
the 39 and most important points. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MS MOLEFE:   There is obviously quite a lot but I can’t 
10 
think of anything else. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka are you done? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am done Chair, I think that issue 
you’re right, needed to be asked, I would have done so, 
but you may want for the purposes of those who are 
wondering why did you leave Eskom refer them Eskom’s 
media release, which said that Molefe was never suspected 
of any negligence, misconduct of wrongdoing, and you will 
find it on page 265 of your bundle. 
MS MOLEFE:   265. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair there are other aspects – 265.  
There are other aspects which Mr Molefe deals with her in 
her supplementary affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But they are like curriculum issues.  
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 283 of 288 
 
They are matters ancillary to the main points. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay do you want to tell me what 
they are, maybe they are important? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Maybe they are.  There’s one where 
she talks about her meeting with Mr Tsotsi, after Mr Tsotsi 
had been removed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes I have read that, that – I think that 
is something that she can just – as long as her affidavit is 
confirmed that’s true I don’t there’s much that turns on 
that, she met and she sets out in the affidavit. 
10 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The discussion that took place ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   Ja, that I was not supposed to be 
suspended yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   And that he did say that to me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he said you were not supposed to 
have been suspended, ja, ja. 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have also Ms Molefe mentioned an 
20 
additional private meeting which Mr Kumalo had with you 
outside of their delegation. 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes Chair that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That was the one where he said he was 
there in his personal capacity. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 284 of 288 
 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you dealt with that one. 
MS MOLEFE:    Where he had wanted me to accept the 
package. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja you dealt with that.   
MS MOLEFE:   The package ja and when I indicated that I 
would want to go out, consider going to court he said I 
should not take on the State. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I think that is the one that is important 
Chair, the last – well there may be another one, but the 
10 
allegations that the FD had engaged with bidders during 
the bidding process. 
MS MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, I might have thought she dealt 
with it but maybe it is because I read in her affidavit, 
because in her affidavit she sets out what the true position 
is.  Do you want to say that quickly? 
MS MOLEFE:   Yes Chair I felt that having listened to both 
Dr Ngubane and Ms Venetta Klein referring to the matter it 
is a matter that is hanging and I am aware of what they are 
20 
talking about.  During the tenure of the old Board when the 
Board was just with the investigation of Mr Matjilla on the 
TNA matter Mr Matjilla himself brought to the Chairman at 
the time, Mr Tsotsi, to complain that I have been engaging 
suppliers during a bidding process, so Mr Tsotsi mentioned 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 285 of 288 
 
that at one of the Board meetings where we were 
discussing these TNA matters, or this investigation rather 
so the Board was hearing for the first time, I was hearing it 
for the first time, so I then persistently asked him in front 
of the Board to investigate the matter, and I even went as 
far as going to  his office to say you cannot leave this 
matter unattended to, you need to investigate, because I 
do not know what Mr Matjilla is referring to. Eventually he 
wrote me a letter and unfortunately the letter I cannot find 
Chair, it was written to me and sent to me on my Eskom 
10 
email by the Executive in the Office of the Chairman at that 
time, Mr Dlamini, that he has found – Mr Tsotsi said I 
found no evidence that if is sufficient enough for me to 
investigate, I believe these investigations are baseless and 
unfounded, so I did receive the letter, because I made sure 
that I get such a letter, because I felt that the allegations 
were very serious. 
 
So when it was – it came out here I could only think 
that that is the only  matter that I know which I persistently 
requested that it be investigated, ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   Is everything covered now? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, the important question of course 
Ms Molefe is whether at the suspension was that given as 
a reason for your suspension? 
MS MOLEFE:   No it was not Chair.  I think the Board was 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 286 of 288 
 
quite clear or Mr Tsotsi in the meeting together with the 
Board 
that 
they 
want 
us 
to 
step 
aside 
so 
that 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, thank you very much Ms 
Molefe for coming to give evidence and to assist the 
Commission.  If something else arises we will ask you to 
come back, but thank you very much, you are now excused.   
MS MOLEFE:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are going to adjourn now, tomorrow 
which witness is coming? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We have three, we have scheduled 
three witnesses Chairperson, Ms Veletti who has been 
mentioned, Mr Baloyi and Ms Venetta Klein. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay alright, those are the witnesses 
for tomorrow.    
ADV SELEKA SC:    For tomorrow I understand there’s 
strike action, I don’t know whether it impacts on us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t want to say anything publically.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am  hoping that it will be possible for 
20 
the Commission to continue with its work because it has 
got very little time left in order to finish its work and its 
work is in the public interest, so as things stand we will 
hear the evidence of those witnesses tomorrow. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair. 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 287 of 288 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Starting at ten o’ clock.  We adjourn. 
ADVE SELEKE SC:   Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 7 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
 
  
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
20 
 
 
 
 
 
06 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 277 
 
Page 288 of 288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
