 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 304 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 404 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH, D MILLS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 3 of 404 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 11 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Kennedy, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: Are we ready? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us continue.  Mr Ntshepe good 
morning. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The oath you took yesterday will continue 
10 
to apply today you understand? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Morning Mr Ntshepe. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Morning, morning SC. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I ask you to return to a document 
we were looking at yesterday. It is in Bundle 1 – Denel 
Bundle 1.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And if I may ask you please to turn to 
20 
page 824.  You recall this; this is the motivation that was 
sent to Mr Mlambo for his approval as Group Supply Chain 
Executive of the single supplier contract between DLS and 
VR Laser.  We looked at this yesterday; remember? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 4 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And Ms – Ms Malahlela indicated at 
page 824 that the reason for the request was that there 
was a Denel Supply Chain Policy which required that 
approval be obtained from the head of Supply Chain for a 
deviation of the normal rule which was that such contracts 
should be kept in-house for and inside supplier – inside 
Denel unless there were good business reasons to go 
outside and she indicated that she was instructed to 
request this and Mr Mlambo refused to give that approval 
at least at that stage he said what would be needed was 
10 
that there would have to be proof that the internal entities 
DVS and LMT could not meet the requirements.  Now you 
remember you gave evidence yesterday that you overruled 
Mr Mlambo’s decision. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Despite the – were you aware that 
DVS and LMT did not submit proof to Mr Mlambo that they 
could not satisfy the requirements? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I was not aware of that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  In fact the evidence is that no 
20 
such proof was submitted and yet your approved the 
transaction. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now I said to you last night when we 
adjourned that yesterday evening that we would now give 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 5 of 404 
 
you an opportunity this morning to explain why you 
overruled Ms Mlambo. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Thank you SC.  Thank you Chair.  I think 
the facts are there for themselves to prove that Denel has 
always been late and sometimes being very bad penalties 
in terms of deliveries because their programs were late or 
their programs did not meet the specifications of the client. 
 
When Mr Mlambo – when this motivation came to 
me it came to me after they had taken to Ms Mlambo and 
Mr Mlambo did not approve.  And to me what was urgent 
10 
was for the work to be done not for people to – if Mr 
Mlambo really wanted to find out to exactly why is DVS and 
LMT not submit any proof that he cannot do this work.  I 
think it was upon him to go and find that information out.   
 
In other words I am saying that it could be – could 
have been a mutual responsibility between DVS and LMT.  
Now for me what was – as the memorandum is explaining 
that this was an urgent request which this vehicle was 
prepared for a demonstration and the parts that were going 
to be used were specialised fabrication parts which VR 
20 
Laser at that point in time was the company that we knew 
that were able to do that. 
 
So when this request came to me it came to me on 
an urgent basis to say that we really need this thing 
otherwise we will not be able to have this vehicle for a 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 6 of 404 
 
demonstration. 
 
So I approved it based on that and further to note 
that Mr Mlambo claims that I scratched his name out in this 
document which is false.  I did not scratch his name out.   
 
So I – I believe that I took the right decision to 
approve it and also to further explain that you know Denel 
though is a state owned entity it is an enterprise which 
competes with private enterprises. 
 
If you are not able to deliver a product at a certain 
point in time you will pay the penalty either financially or 
10 
by 
losing 
the 
sale 
or 
by 
losing 
the 
opportunity 
to 
demonstrate your capabilities. 
 
So 
where 
those 
were 
the 
things 
that 
were 
motivating – motivated me to – to overrule – to overrule 
not to say that I undermined him, I did not undermine him.  
But for me it was for the best interest of the company to 
make sure we are able to do this on time and we do not 
have much time to be dilly dallying and being given the 
label that Denel cannot deliver on – because in the market 
place as you have indicated also SC that Denel was late 
20 
eleven years on some products or on a project which 
should have been delivered eleven years ago. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I just unpack a few of the points 
that you raised Mr Ntshepe.  You are aware are you not 
that the agreements the MOA had already been signed 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 7 of 404 
 
before Mr Mlambo was asked for this approval. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I was aware. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you had been involved in that 
signature? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I was as a witness. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now as I understand it one of your 
reasons was in fact – well the memorandum of agreement 
has already been signed and so we cannot cancel it now 
even if Mr Mlambo is advising us to based on procurement 
requirements because the – because the horse is already 
10 
out of the stable. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The agreement has already been 
signed. You already committed to VR Laser. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  But how did it come about that 
an agreement was signed before the person most senior in 
the organisation responsible directly for Supply Chain 
Management Mr Mlambo had never been asked for his 
approval which was required under the procurement policy? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  The agreement was signed as per the 
instruction for – of the – the then CEO the SY CEO Mr 
Saloojee and the people who were involved in it were the 
executives.  As I have indicated before SC Mr Mlambo 
although he called himself an executive he was not an 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 8 of 404 
 
executive he was a senior manager – Group Senior 
Manager Supply Chain.  The executive was the CFO he 
was reporting to the CFO.   
 
In terms of the titles in Denel I think there is a blur 
because if you are invited as permanent invitee as EXCO it 
does not necessarily mean that you are an executive. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Well let us – let us leave aside for a 
moment 
the 
question 
of 
whether 
his 
title 
was 
truly 
executive or truly Manager.  What I am particularly 
interested in is that we had – you had a situation where 
10 
you signed an MOA where the procurement policy required 
approval from the Supply Chain Manager in your language 
Mr Mlambo because VR Laser was not a Denel subsidiary, 
correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Were you aware of that requirement 
at the time that you signed it – the MOA? 
MR NTSHEPE:  That VR Laser is not a Denel subsidiary? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Were you aware that there was a 
requirement in the procurement policy that where goods 
20 
were being bought from an entity outside Denel that the – 
there had to be a good business reason for going outside 
the divisions of Denel or its subsidiaries and that good 
business reason had to be approved by the Supply Chain 
Manager.  Were you aware that the procurement policy 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 9 of 404 
 
required that? 
MR NTSHEPE:  As a Group Business Development at that 
point in time I would not have been very [00:10:17] with all 
policies of the organisation.  I was familiar in particular 
with policies that are pertaining to business development.  
 
However the signature – why Mr Mlambo’s signature 
was not in the MOA it was the prerogative of the [00:10:38] 
Group CEO. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry the prerogative of? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Mr Saloojee. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Saloojee? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But will you not answer my question 
please?  I appreciate that as the executive dealing with the 
business development you may not have known everything 
in the organisation.  My question was not whether you 
knew everything in the organisation.   
My question was specific and may I ask you please 
to give a specific direct answer.  Specifically in relation to 
the requirement of the procurement policy of the Denel that 
20 
if you were going to buy goods from outside company 
divisions or entities you would need to have a good 
business case and that had to be approved by Mr Mlambo.  
Were you aware of that rule? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I was aware of the rule that if you were 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 10 of 404 
 
procuring services from outside you will have to have the 
processes in order for their approval.  The final approval 
whether it was Mr Mlambo of the – or the division head I 
was not aware – was not totally aware of that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Well – well it is true that the Chief 
Executive had authority to sign such a contract that is true.  
It is also true that the Chief Executive was the Chief of the 
Administration so that Mr Mlambo was subordinate to Mr 
Saloojee in terms of power and authority.   
All of that is true but you will see on this page 824 
10 
that Ms Malahlela has taken the trouble to quote from the 
Supply Chain Policy the provision in question and it says 
and here the Supply Chair Policy itself uses the term 
Supply Chain Executive but leave that aside that it has to 
be approved by the Group Supply Chain Executive based 
on sound business reasons. 
 
So apart from the fact that the Group CEO would at 
the end of the process of recommendations and evaluation 
and all of that sign the actual MOA before it could get to 
the CEO there had to be approval by the Supply Chain 
20 
Executive or Manager.   
 
And you were aware of that rule not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I was. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  So are you saying that this fell 
away simply because Mr Saloojee was prepared to sign the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 11 of 404 
 
MOA? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I think in my affidavit I have explained the 
relationship that had now evolved between VR Laser and 
Denel in terms of the relationships – in terms of the MOA. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes but I am not talking about 
relationships with VR Laser. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am talking about compliance with 
the Denel policy within Denel. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before you answer Mr Kennedy’s 
question and do not forget it Mr Kennedy.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you agree that this rule or policy as 
quoted n Ms Malahlela’s memorandum actually prohibits 
the procuring of products or services from outside of Denel 
when there is a group entity or division within from which 
such product or services can be obtained unless there are 
sound business reasons.  Do you accept that this – you 
accept that? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes – unless – yes I accept that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Kennedy’s question 
then is, are you saying that this policy or this rule fell away 
in these – in this case? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I believe it did because she – the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 12 of 404 
 
motivation was to say that after an EXCO meeting they had 
agreed on an exception that they – they should procure the 
services. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  In this case of course 
there was no open procurement process, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  As there had been at least in the 
sense of three quotations were sought for the platform 
hulls contract that went before, correct? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct as per the memorandum. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So – so there was no competitive 
process for the single supply contract and there was not 
good business reason that was approved by Mr Mlambo, 
correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  There is nothing that I have 
seen in the Group Procurement Policy that says that if the 
Supply Chain Executive or Manager refuses approval 
based on good business reasons if he or she is not 
20 
satisfied that the CEO then has the power to override him 
or her.  Are you aware of any such provision? 
MR NTSHEPE:  There is no policy like that but at the same 
time I am totally responsible for the board not Mr Mlambo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Kennedy I may have 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 13 of 404 
 
caused some slight confusion on the meaning of the rule.  
This rule here as I read it I think I may have put it slightly 
differently.  Seems to prohibit the procuring of products or 
services from outside of Denel when there is a division or 
group entity within that can provide such a product or 
services unless there is approval by the Group Supply 
Chain Executive. 
 
So it seems that it is a condition that the approval 
of this particular specific person or incumbent is obtained.  
And the sound business reasons it seems are sound 
10 
business reasons for him approving that you go outside.  I 
may – I may be wrong but you are free to indicate your own 
understanding.   
 
It seems to me that what the rule says is he is the 
one who will approve or not approve the procuring of 
products or services from outside if there is a division or 
group entity which can provide the same product or 
services. 
 
But when he approves in those circumstances 
where he approves that services or such a product or 
20 
services be obtained from outside he must have sound 
business reasons. 
 
So he is the one who must have sound business 
reasons if he is going to approve that such product or 
services be obtained from outside.  Not somebody else. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 14 of 404 
 
 
Do you share the same understanding? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair I share the same understanding with 
limitations in the sense that the ultimate responsibility of 
the organisation lies with the CEO.  If there are things that 
are not done in the company I cannot go to the board and 
say so and so refused to do that.  Or then they would – the 
question would be why did you not put him through a 
disciplinary which I – I am not sure if Mr Mlambo works for 
Denel now or not but I – I believed that I needed to 
expedite the work of Denel and be able to have this demo 
10 
ready on time because this is a demo vehicle.   
I think it was going to be shipped and they are 
limited – and there are limitations in terms of time where 
the ship and where it was going to be shipped to it is a 
long way.  If I still believe this was probably Pakistan 
because it is the [00:19:28} 
 
If you delay the process then it is either the vehicle 
will not go and we will therefore not be able to demonstrate 
or the – and then we will lose the opportunity for other 
clients in the world to see what type of capability we have. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy I know I interrupted you but I 
thought I may have given a different understanding of this 
rule.  But maybe even the one with the meaning that I have 
given might not be hundred percent.  I do not know what – 
but you can go according to how you understand it. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 15 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair with respect we are comfortable 
with the proposition that you have put to the witness Chair 
so – but if I may just develop the questions that arise from 
that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Are you saying Mr Ntshepe that 
because it was urgent that gave you the right to deviate 
from procurement policy? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I am saying that there was a motivation.  
To me the motivation made sense and we had also the 
10 
urgency of doing the – making sure that the vehicle is 
ready therefore with the responsibility that I bear on my 
shoulders that gave me the right to be able to do that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That … 
MR NTSHEPE:  And the authority to do that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So where did you get that right from – 
from the fact that it was urgent and you needed to report to 
the board on the progress, is that what you are saying? 
MR NTSHEPE:  It was urgent and secondly that I cannot 
have an excuse that we could not demonstrate because Mr 
20 
Mlambo delayed the process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes but what I am suggesting to you 
is this that even if it was urgent you still have to comply 
with the law not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I – in my view I complied with the law.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 16 of 404 
 
I might not have complied with Mr Mlambo. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  With the? 
MR NTSHEPE:  With Mr Mlambo. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  With Mr Mlambo? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
And 
we 
have 
just 
seen 
the 
procurement policy provision that says that Mr Mlambo’s 
approval had to be obtained for this going outside Denel’s 
operations.  He had to do that only if he was satisfied that 
there was a good business reason.   
10 
 
Now you saying that where Mr Mlambo decides that 
there is – that there is not evidence before him to show a 
good business reason so he does not approve it but 
therefore you could override his decision because it was 
urgent? 
MR NTSHEPE:  To me Chair that was not reasonable for 
him to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat that? 
MR NTSHEPE:  To me Chair that was not reasonable for 
him 
to 
do 
that 
because 
he 
knew 
exactly 
what 
the 
20 
consequences thereof will be in the event that we do not 
complete this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But Mr Mlambo has given evidence 
and I would like you to comment on it.  He was saying that 
his job included the responsibility of enforcing this as well 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 17 of 404 
 
as other provisions of the Supply Chain Management 
Policy.  He took it seriously.  He was not even asked for 
his approval before the MOA was signed.  Are you aware of 
that and do you dispute that? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I will not comment because I was not the 
one who put the MOA together and the person who signed 
the final signature is the one who decided who should be in 
– consulted or not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I understand that you may not 
have had active involvement in the MOA at that stage but 
10 
you are aware of it now, not so?  Were you not aware of it 
at the time that you saw this memorandum and actually 
signed to have it approved?  You see page 824 actually 
makes it clear that the MOA has already been signed.  If 
you look at the second last paragraph on page 824 it says 
in the second line 
“In May 2015 DLS signed a MOA with VR 
Laser for this scope of work.” 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then Ms Malahlela says the last 
20 
paragraph. 
“Due to the these contradicting positions 
Supply Chain approached DLS EXCO to 
make a decision as to whether to honour 
the MOA and place the order on VR Laser 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 18 of 404 
 
or to follow the Supply Chain Policy and 
procure from inter group namely DVS or 
LMT for this project. Given the time frame 
urgency 
and 
history 
EXCO 
has 
recommended that the work be done by VR 
Laser.” 
So Ms Malahlela makes it clear in this memorandum 
that you signed to give approval  She makes it clear that 
what is now being sought – what is now being requested 
from Mr Mlambo is approval retrospectively after the fact 
10 
because the MOA has already been signed.  Not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So I get back to my question. What do 
you say about the fact that the MOA was signed at a time 
in May 2015 when Mr Mlambo had not even been asked 
whether or not he wants to give his approval? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I repeat again SC that the MOA – the 
individual or the erstwhile GCEO is the one who decided 
who should be involved in signing the MOA.  I cannot 
create something that I have no idea of why he did not do 
20 
that.  I can speculate but and saying yes now I understand 
but he did not do it.  The fact is he did not do it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you were not aware at the time the 
MOA was signed that this had not been done? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No I was not – I was… 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 19 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  What is this?  Sorry SC? 
CHAIRPERSON:  And at the time when he read this 
memorandum? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No I asked Chair the witness was he 
aware at the time that the MOA was signed that Mr Mlambo 
had not given his approval – at that time? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I was not aware of that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You were not aware – I understand 
that.  But now you – you then become aware because you 
10 
are asked to override Mr Mlambo’s refusal.   
You are aware by way of this memorandum of 29 t h 
October 2015 so that is more than five months since the 
MOA had already been signed.  You are aware now as 
Group CEO that people in the organisation had signed a 
MOA without following the procurement policy provisions 
specifically requiring Mr Mlambo to give his approval.  And 
now what she is trying to do Mr Malahlela instructed by her 
DLS board is to get Mr Mlambo retrospectively to authorise 
the deviation.  Is that correct? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  With due respect can I continue SC? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry. 
MR NTSHEPE:  With due respect Chair five months after 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 20 of 404 
 
the MOA has been signed the Group Chief – the Group 
Chief 
Procurement 
is 
not 
aware 
there 
is 
tardiness 
somewhere there. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The is what – tardiness somewhere 
did you say?  What did you say I did not hear you. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Tardiness.  In other words there is neglect 
of responsibility. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  After five months that has – it has been 
signed. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you … 
MR NTSHEPE:  And Ms Malahlela was responsible for the 
Supply Chain in the division.  Whereas his boss is not 
aware of that.  Five months to me that is tardiness, there is 
neglect of responsibilities. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 Yes. 
 There 
is 
a 
neglect 
of 
responsibility.  
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you – are you .. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On whose part.. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On whose part? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Both Mr – especially Ms Malahlela because 
if she knew that the – because she is the one who is 
writing that the MOA has been signed.  She should have 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 21 of 404 
 
informed the head - there was group meetings of the 
Supply Chain at Denel like there were group meetings of 
the business development.  Ms Malahlela should have 
made sure five months that his boss is not aware.  I do not 
know what they were discussing then in the group Supply 
Chain meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Kennedy – Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Is it not a bit unfair 
of you to be pointing the finger of blame at Ms Malahlela. 
She has already given evidence to this commission in 
10 
public on TV that she in fact specifically recommended to 
her board at DLS and her EXCO that there were breaches 
of the procurement policy and it should not go ahead.  And 
in fact as I pointed out to you her evidence has been that 
she specifically used the words for example 
“I hereby request permission to implement 
the EXCO decision” 
Because she disagreed with that decision.  Is it not 
a bit unfair to blame the person who was in fact strongly 
recommending to management that they should not sign 
20 
the MOA; that it was signed without the necessary approval 
being obtained.; that it was signed without the necessary 
approval being obtained. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair honourable SC asked me if Mr 
Mlambo was – was he aware of that the MOA was signed 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 22 of 404 
 
five months thereafter in October meaning that it was 
signed five months before October; the MOA.  And he was 
not aware of that.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So are you blaming not Ms Malahlela 
and you now blaming Mr Mlambo 
MR NTSHEPE:  No I am not blaming Mr Mlambo. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Or are you blaming both? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Sorry SC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja let us give Mr Ntshepe a chance 
to answer. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  I am not blaming Mr Mlambo I am saying 
there is a relegation of responsibility here whereas there 
were individuals who holding meetings almost every two 
weeks I remember in the Group Supply Chain in the – at 
head office and this matter should have been discussed 
there.  And I am acting only and only on the document that 
is laid before me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  .Yes.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, do you remember Mr Kennedy 
whether Ms Malahlela indicated whether how she became 
20 
aware that the MOU or MOA had been signed.  I know that 
with regard to Mr Mlambo, one got the impression that there 
was an attempt to ensure that this did not get to his attention 
or something.  One got that impression.  I do not know 
whether you got the same impression. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 23 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now I do not know, I cannot remember 
Ms Malahlela’s evidence as to when she would have become 
aware of the fact that the MOA or the MOU in May had been 
signed.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, as I recall the evidence, she was 
resisting the signature from the outset of the process and 
was then aware that she was being overridden.  So it was 
not as if she find out only after the event. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Whereas Mr Mlambo did in fact only 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He was only asked for this approval 
five months after the MOA had been signed already. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Ja-no, that is fine.  Well, one of the 
questions which I think Mr Kennedy had asked at some stage 
Mr Ntshepe which I would like you to deal with because I am 
not sure that you have dealt with it properly is.   
 
I understood Mr Kennedy to want to find out what your 
20 
attitude was when you became aware that Mr Mlambo’s 
approval had not been obtained before the MOA was signed.   
 
When you discovered this, that which at the latest, I 
guess, would have been when you signed the approval when 
he had refused.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 24 of 404 
 
 
In other words, when you realised that there had been 
no compliance with policy, what was your attitude to that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   My attitude Chair was that, because of the 
nature of the request, there was an urgency to go ahead and 
that is why I wrote approved.  So my attitude was that I 
supported the memo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I want you to distinguish between 
two things because I want to make sure I understand your 
attitude in regard to each one of them correctly. 
 
That is the request which was then before you in 
10 
October 2015 after Mr Mlambo said that he needed certain 
requirements to be – he needed to be satisfied about certain 
requirements before he could approve and you approved.  
Now, that is one thing.  That is your attitude to that request. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And one of the things you have said is, 
because of urgency, you thought approval should be given.  
Okay, that is one thing. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the other one is, you become aware 
20 
that there has been a breach of policy sometime back when 
the MOA was signed without his approval.  His approval has 
been sought after but it should have been sought before. 
 
So what was your attitude to the fact that there had been 
a breach of policy by those who signed that MOA without 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 25 of 404 
 
first obtaining the approval? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In my understanding Chair.  The Group CEO 
applied his mind when he signed the MOA.  In his mind, I 
trust and believe that he would not have breached any policy 
at that point in time.  I trusted him.  Otherwise, why would he 
want to breach a policy purposely? 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is your answer that when you heard – 
when this came to your attention, your view was that either 
Mr Mlambo...  Well, I guess you could not say Mr Mlambo’s 
approval had been obtained.  So I guess you would have 
10 
said there must have been good reasons for the MOA to be 
signed without his approval.  Is that what you thought? 
MR NTSHEPE:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that what you thought? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you did not check whether there were 
actually good reasons?  You took the view that the person 
who was Group CEO at the time, approved and you left it at 
that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The representative for Group Supply Chain 
20 
as it reported to the former or the erstwhile Chief Financial 
Officer, in my mind, that represented the whole function of 
that organisation and he signed it.  So I had no doubt – I had 
no reason to believe that there was a breach of policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 26 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Ntshepe, but you 
did have good reason.  You may not have had reason at the 
time that Mr Saloojee signed it originally to believe that 
there was a breach of the policy but here there was an 
attempt being made by DLS to cure what had already been 
identified as having been a breach in the policy.   
 
So the mere fact that you thought Mr Saloojee would not 
have signed unless – at least where he knowingly was aware 
that the policy had breached.  That must have fallen away.   
 
You had been alerted now as his successor to the fact 
10 
that something had been signed by your predecessor in 
circumstances where the necessarily approval had not been 
obtained.   
 
So I am suggesting to you.  It may not be appropriate for 
you to say:  Well, because Mr Saloojee signed, therefore, I 
assumed everything was in order.   
 
You now knew, surely, that everything was not in order 
specifically this provisions of the process had not been 
complied with.  Was it not your duty as Group Chief 
Executive to take corrective action? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Honourable SC, I am – cannot be hundred 
percent certain that mister – erstwhile Mr CEO, Mr Saloojee, 
would not have signed this motivation, number one.  So I 
cannot attest to it ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, but sorry Mr Ntshepe, I think we 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 27 of 404 
 
are at cross purposes.  I am not talking about Mr Saloojee 
singing 
this 
motivation 
because 
this 
motivation 
was 
submitted when you were Group CEO, not when Mr Saloojee 
was.   
 
I am simply saying this.  You are now faced when you 
signed to approve this motivation.  You were aware that the 
MOA had previously been signed ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...in circumstances where the 
necessary approval under the procurement policy had not 
10 
been obtained.  You were aware of that.  Mr Saloojee may or 
may not have been aware of that but you were aware of that.   
 
There is a problem that the memorandum is asking:  Can 
we fix it by way of approval where there has been a breach 
of the procurement policy?   
 
Mr Mlambo said:  Well, maybe but I need to be satisfied 
there is a good business reason before I give my approval.  
And you overruled him.  Not so? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe...  Can I put it this way?  I think 
what Mr Kennedy is saying to you is.  You have said to me in 
20 
answer to a question I had put to you that you would have 
thought that there would have been no breach of policy 
...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...because ...[intervenes]  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 28 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ... Mr Saloojee, as far as you are 
concerned, you did not think he would approve if there had 
been a breach of policy. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which might mean, as far as you are 
concerned, either there was no breach of policy or if there 
was a breach, it was a breach – there were good reasons for 
him to approve. 
 
So what Mr Kennedy is putting to you now, effectively, is 
10 
to say.  But Mr Ntshepe, you could not have thought along 
those lines when you had to make a decision on this memo. 
 
Because the facts which emerged from the memo, were 
that no approval – Mr Mlambo’s approval had not been 
obtained.  That is number one. 
 
Number two.  Those concerned were now bringing to you 
the fact that there had been no approval.  And they are not 
saying Mr Saloojee signed because here were the grounds 
that justified him to approve. 
 
They were simply saying, in effect, no approval was 
20 
obtained from Mr Mlambo but we think it should be obtained 
now.  That is what I think Mr Kennedy is saying to you.  So 
you could not have thought along the lines that you say you 
thought. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  Correct, Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 29 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I accept. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So Mr Kennedy, you want to take it 
from there? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, thank you Chair.  I would like to 
explore the issue of urgency a bit more.  The memorandum 
just refers to urgency but it does not say what the reasons 
for urgency were, correct? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   H’m.  I see.  Do you know how long it 
might 
have 
taken 
for 
an 
answer 
to 
be 
provided 
to 
Mr Mlambo? 
MR NTSHEPE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Because if you look at page 852.  He 
is not saying:  I will never approve this.  He is saying that 
DVS and LMT must submit proof that they cannot meet the 
requirements.  He also says:  Prior to the contract being 
awarded.  Of course, it had already been awarded.  But do 
20 
you know how long it would have taken? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In my view SC, it could not have taken a 
day or two. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Even more than a day or two? 
MR NTSHEPE:   [No audible reply]  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 30 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And yet that was not done.  Nobody 
came back to Mr Mlambo to say:  Well, actually Mr Mlambo, 
DVS was saying X, Y, Z.  They are not able to do it.  And 
LMT are saying X, Y, Z.  They are also are not able to do it.  
That was not done even that could have taken no more than 
a day or two.  You are aware of that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I am not aware of that but you are informing 
me right now, SC.  I am aware of it now. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You cannot dispute it, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Sorry, I missed that? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can you dispute it or not? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I am not disputing it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You are not disputing it? 
MR NTSHEPE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  And is it correct that 
nobody came to you to say:  Well, actually Mr Mlambo – the 
answer to Mr Mlambo’s questions are the following:  Nobody 
came back to you.  Is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I think the individual – I do not remember – 
the individual who brought this to me, because it was not 
20 
directed to me, would have pointed out that Mr Mlambo did 
not sign this thing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   And when I read it, this is what I read and I 
asked him why did he sign this thing.  The answer I got was 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 31 of 404 
 
that he is delaying the process.  And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well...  Ja, probably, that is what you were 
told and maybe you also bought into that.  But you have said 
that checking these requirements that Mr Mlambo wanted to 
be checked could not have taken more than a day or two. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the challenge, therefore, is, why could 
you not say:  Look at whether the requirements that 
Mr Mlambo is asking to be checked and go back to him.  
Because as Mr Kennedy says, he had not said he will never 
10 
grant the approval.   
 
He just wants to be satisfied that the requirements of the 
policy are met before he can approve.  So if it was somebody 
that could not take a day or two, what is it that was so urgent 
that you had to approve it yourself. 
 
Rather than say:  But Mr Mlambo is following policy.  
You people must respond.  Check these requirements and 
respond to him.  Let him make a decision after that because 
it is not something that is going to take a month.  It is just a 
day or two and then he can make up his mind.  Maybe he will 
20 
approve, maybe he will not but he has raised certain issues.  
Attend to them.  Why did you not say that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, the individual who brought this 
memorandum to me, I believed he brought it in good faith. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  You say you believe...? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 32 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   He brought the memorandum to me in good 
faith because he wanted the expedition of the work.  And I 
believed what he told me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I did not doubt because I believed what he 
said and I trusted his views.  And I then acted appropriately 
as I deemed fit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he – is what he has told you that 
Mr Mlambo was delaying the process. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but then your answer – why was your 
answer not this?  Mr Mlambo, seeks to ensure that the policy 
of the company is complied with.  It is not going to take long 
to check whether this requirements are met.  It is a day or 
two.  You go and attend to that.  Go back to him on those 
requirements.  Come back to me only after he has looked at 
your response and if he still says no...  Why did you not do 
that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I did not do that as I – I will repeat again 
Chair.  That I believed that DVS and LMT, the individual who 
20 
brought this to me is aware that DVS and LMT might not 
necessarily or does not have a capability and capacity to this 
specialised requirement for the T-file(?).   
 
And therefore, he brought it straight to me because he 
realised if we do not do it now, we might never do it or it 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 33 of 404 
 
might take a long time ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Ntshepe, the heavens were not 
going to fall if in two days’ time they went back to 
 Mr Mlambo. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you are the acting Group CEO.  You 
are supposed to, among other things, make sure that the 
policies of the company are followed. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Here is a functionary or somebody who 
holds a particular position in the company and his duty 
includes enforcing this policy and he is not saying:  I am 
refusing.  He says:  I want to make sure that the policy is 
complied with before I make up my mind.   
 
And in your own version, it is not going to take long to 
satisfy him one way or another.  Do you not agree that your 
approach – your response should have been:  No, no, no, 
no.  Mr Mlambo is raising legitimate issues here.  This thing 
20 
of saying he is delaying, I am not buying it.  He is raising 
legitimate issues here.   
 
The policy of the company requires that he must satisfy 
himself about this.  Deal with this.  Go back to him.  Only 
after he has made a decision, after he have gone back with 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 34 of 404 
 
this, can you come back to me.  Do you not accept that that 
is how you should have handled it? 
MR NTSHEPE:   On hindsight, Chair.  As you are pointing it 
out to me now.  Yes, I should have done that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, Chair.  May I just check 
something with my colleague? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Okay.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You see, the memo starts on page 6...  
Oh, sorry 824, the first paragraph or first two.  Previous 
10 
situation, as which as you pointed out, relates to the TS 
Demo Model which was prior to this particular single source 
contract, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  T5. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry? 
MR NTSHEPE:   T5. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   T5.  I beg your pardon. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But that is correct, is it not? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That was a previous contract.  And 
Ms Mahlalela is pointing out to the Group Supply Chain 
Executive to whom it is addressed, that he had previously in 
relation to that contract had given instruction that DLS must 
first explore whether and to what extent DVS and LMT could 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 35 of 404 
 
be used to do that.   
 
And it was precisely because of the same provision.  So 
she effectively was saying in this memo:  We are aware - (at 
her level).  We are aware that you, Group Supply Chain 
Executive, previously required the DLS to make sure whether 
we could do it in-house.   
 
That has not been done for the contract for the single 
source supplier.  She has taken it to her executive to DLS to 
say:  We have got on the one hand a violation of this policy.  
On the other hand, we have the fact that the MOA has been 
10 
signed in violation of the policy.  We have this problem.   
 
And she was recommending to DLS Management:  You 
are going to have to scrap this contract and start the process 
to do it, to do it in compliance with the policy.  But her DLS 
Management overruled her.   
 
And so, she was now saying to Mr Mlambo:   My board, 
my executive at DLS are now asking you if you will 
retrospectively approve it.   
 
So did this not ring alarm bells in your mind to know that 
there was in fact a violation of the policy that you were now 
20 
being asked to approve?  Sorry, not you  Mr Mlambo was 
being asked to approve. 
MR NTSHEPE:   In terms of what is written here, there is a 
violation of the policy.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry?  The what? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 36 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   There is a violation. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   There is a violation. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   However ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Can I...? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ms Mahlalela was part of Exco.  She was 
not outside of Exco.  She was part of Exco herself. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But she has given her evidence that 
she was overruled by the rest of Exco.  Are you saying that 
she should be blamed? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I am saying she was part of Exco.  She 
was part of the decision.  I cannot say if we make South 
Africa a decision.  Then I am saying, I, individually refused 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry.  When she answered my 
question.  We know that she was part of Exco.  We know that 
Exco decided by a majority view ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...that Mr Mlambo should be asked to 
give approval.  Not...  It is addressed to Mr Mlambo, not to 
you. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 37 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We will get in a moment to how it came 
to you.  But Exco at DLS accepted as the evidence go and 
the minutes reflected, accepted that there was a violation of 
the policy but said:  Well, if there is a violation of the policy, 
it can be ignored effectively because the MOA has already 
been signed.   
 
So if it was done unlawfully, we are now stuck with it and 
we may face litigation from VR Laser if we cancel it.  So it is 
then sent to Mr Mlambo against Ms Mahlalela’s views.   
 
Is it fair to suggest that she should be blamed because 
10 
she sat in the same Exco meeting that took that decision 
when she was a minority view that strenuously resisted it? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Honourable SC, I am not saying she should 
be blamed.  I am stating the facts that according to me as I 
see them in front of me.  She says:  I hereby requests 
permission to implement.  I am not blaming her but she is 
the one who is saying:  I hereby request.  She does not say:  
I hereby...  To implement the Exco decision.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Being part of Exco, I would believe that she 
20 
was implementing the Exco decision. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let us put it this way Mr Ntshepe.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 38 of 404 
 
Ms Mahlalela made it clear in her evidence that in the 
particular Exco meeting where this issue was discussed, she 
was the minority.  She had a different view from the majority.   
 
But she was instructed to write a letter to Mr Mlambo 
and request permission.  So when she wrote this letter, she 
says:  I was complying with an instruction from Exco.   
 
And as Mr Kennedy said, I think she particularly said 
that last sentence of the memo, where it says:  I hereby 
request permission to implement.   
 
She deliberately put it like that because she was really 
10 
against it but she had been instructed.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I understand now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You now understand her position? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that was her position.  That is the 
context in which she said she wrote the letter.  Ja.  You 
accept that she should not take any blame for that if she was 
carrying out the instruction of the majority in the Executive 
20 
Committee? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, my honest opinion.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I have to be honest here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 39 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   It might not be a popular opinion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NTSHEPE:   My honest opinion.  She is part of Exco. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   And whether she was instructed by Exco or 
not, I am outside Exco of the division and I am seeing a 
letter and she is part of Exco and she is asking for 
permission to ask as an Exco decision.  She does not say 
there was a minority view to say that she is not agreeing 
with it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, she might not be saying this here. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But one, she said it in her evidence here.  
Two, there is documentation to which Mr Kennedy might refer 
you if necessary, which shows her different view in regard to 
this issue.   
 
So I am not sure what the point is that you are making 
because she is saying:  I was against this in the Exco 
meeting and I expressed my views.  The matter was 
discussed.  I believe that what was being done was wrong.  I 
20 
believe that even the route to ask Mr Mlambo to approve was 
wrong.  But I was the minority.   
 
So I am not sure what you expected her to do if she felt 
what was being sought to be done by the majority was 
wrong?   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 40 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, I would have expected her to write 
something here to say that there is also a manual to use that 
this should not be done.  Then – because this is what I only 
had in front of me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   And my understanding is that, Exco 
including her ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   ...had agreed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but now I guess you can take it from 
us who have listened to her evidence. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And we have looked at some documents 
that she had the minority view.  If you accept that, then 
...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   I accept it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...Mr Kennedy can take it from there. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now you dealt 
20 
previously in your evidence with your view that you never 
undermined Mr Mlambo.   But now that you know the facts, at 
least in relation to Ms Mahlalela, it seems that she was 
undermined.  She, in fact, gave evidence.   
 
And if you watched it online, you may have seen how 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 41 of 404 
 
moving it was, how she was – in fact, how she came to the 
point of tears before the Chairperson in these proceedings 
when she was concluding her evidence and talked about how 
demoralising and undermined she felt, where she was giving 
advice and just being overruled.   
 
Now, it just seems to me – I would just want to suggest 
to you that perhaps it is unfortunate that your finger of blame 
has been repeatedly pointed at Ms Mahlalela, despite the 
points that the Chairperson has raised with you.   
 
And we have not heard any criticism from you, I believe, 
10 
as to the colleagues who were in the majority who, in fact, 
undermined Ms Mahlalela.   
 
Does that disturb you now as the former Group Chief 
Executive that this went on?  Whether you knew about it at 
the time, you know it now.  Do you have any comment on 
that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In my ten year Chair at Denel, I had – it was 
my priority to make sure that everybody at work has the 
freedom and the ability to do their work without fear or 
favour.  Now I was not aware that Ms Mahlalela was being 
20 
undermined.  Not that she ever came to me to say that she 
was being undermined.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   She might have said it here but she never 
told me. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 42 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ms Mahlalela gave evidence, not only 
that she was against going out...  Sorry.  Giving the contract 
directly to VR Laser without at least exploring whether LMT 
and DVS could do it.  But from the beginning, she had in fact 
strongly advised her colleagues within DLS that it should be 
put out to tender.  She gave that advise as well and she was 
ignored.   
 
In 
fact, 
she 
gave 
evidence 
that 
she 
put 
in 
the 
recommendation in the motivation that that is what should be 
done.  And Mr Teubes then changed it and he has given 
10 
evidence to similar effect.  He changed it.  Again, she was 
undermined, according to her evidence.  Does it not disturb 
you that this took place? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I...  Honourable SC, I cannot dispute that 
because I was not in those meetings. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  Now I want to go back to the 
point.  Who, in fact, brought this memorandum to you?  
Because it was addressed not to you.  It was addressed to 
Mr Mlambo.  Mr Mlambo said:  Well, DVS and LMT will have 
to provide proof.  Which he did not receive.  Nobody gave 
20 
that to him.  You did not give that to him.   
 
How did this memo come to you and how did you come 
to approve it?  Who as this individual that you have referred 
to earlier without naming him or her? 
MR NTSHEPE:   If I remember Honourable SC, it was 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 43 of 404 
 
Mr Stephan Burger. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Stephan Burger? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And did you have a discussion 
about …[intervenes] 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, just let me put the question 
please. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Sorry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you have a discussion with him 
10 
about Mr Mlambo’s concerns? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what was his answer? 
MR NTSHEPE:   His answer was that Mr Mlambo is 
delaying this process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So he criticised Mr Mlambo? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But was it not Mr Mlambo’s rights and 
perhaps his duty to ensure that there was compliance with 
the procurement policy?  
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   I do not dispute that, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does your – does it mean that he did not 
– that is Mr Stephan Burger, he did not address Mr 
Mlambo’s concerned on their merits, he just said Mr 
Mlambo is delaying the process or something like that? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 44 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Well, he did address the fact that DDS 
and LMT in his understanding will not be able to do this 
work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Which is required here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes because we had a discussion, it was 
not just – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now it seems that the problem 
then arose with you because once he had said that, should 
10 
you not have said to him then you must address those 
requirements that Mr – those concerns of Mr Mlambo on 
the merits and send him a response so that he can make a 
decision, do not come to me at this stage until you have 
responded to his concerns. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, as I said, there was urgency to do 
this work, number one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR NTSHEPE:   There was urgency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   To do and complete this work on time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   And, number two, there were numerous 
incidents, it is whereby Mr Burger and Mr Mlambo were not 
agreeing on issues and especially in terms of who is 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 45 of 404 
 
responsible for what.  Ja, because we had a federal type 
organisation whereby the CEOs will be totally responsible 
because they will be evaluated at the end of the year in 
terms of their performance, one. 
 
And number two, however the supervisory part will 
come at group.  So there was a group responsibility 
whereas largely it was a divisional responsibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But is the position not that everyone has 
got their own role? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, everyone has got their own 
functions and everyone must be given space to do that 
which they are employed to do. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and sometimes somebody will look 
at an issue and think he would have liked that issue to be 
handled differently but is the responsibility of the one who 
is given the function... 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to do it in the way that he or she is 
20 
expected to do it? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the policy which was quoted in the 
memo that Mr Stephan Burger came to you with makes it 
clear that Mr Mlambo was the one who should approve.  So 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 46 of 404 
 
it seems to me that your approach ought really to have 
been it is Mr Mlambo’s function to ensure that we follow 
policy in this regard, supply chain management policy.  He 
has asked for certain requirements, go back to him and 
deal with what he is raising because they are legitimate 
issues he is raising.  It is his function to give approval, do 
not come to me, go back to him, he has raised legitimate 
questions, go back to him, you know?  And then once he 
has made a decision and you are aggrieved maybe you can 
come to me but at this stage he has not made a decision to 
10 
refuse or – he simply says I want to be satisfied about this, 
go back to him.  You appreciate when you look at it now? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I hear what you are saying, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And you have said that there was 
urgency but I thought you and I agreed that there was no 
urgency that justified that approval be given within two 
days, all that was required for Mr Mlambo’s concerns to be 
addressed was a day or two.  There is nothing that was 
going to happen that was going to harm Denel if there was 
a delay of a day or two while Mr Mlambo’s concerns were 
20 
being addressed.  You accept that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   A reasonable man will accept that, so I 
accept it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Because it would have been 
different if you said in a day or two we had to comply with 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 47 of 404 
 
x and if we did not comply this is what Denel was going to 
suffer.  That would be different but once you accept, as I 
think you do, that addressing Mr Mlambo’s concerns for 
him to make a decision one way or another did not require 
more than a day or two, then it seems to me there was no – 
there were no grounds to rush to approve in circumstances 
where, as I see it, this whole process was still within Mr 
Mlambo, it had not been completed, he was still seized 
with the matter, he just wanted to apply his mind and that 
you should have said go back to him, let him apply his 
10 
mind, make a decision.  If you are aggrieved after that then 
you can come to me and then we can take it from there. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct,  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Thank you, Chair.  May I just pick up 
on 
something 
you 
said 
earlier, 
that 
Mr 
Burger 
was 
expressing frustration that this would take – this would 
delay things and that there was also a frequent – pattern of 
20 
frequent problems between Mr Burger and Mr Mlambo, is 
that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And that it was desirable to let 
these things be dealt with at the divisional level, is that 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 48 of 404 
 
correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But the trouble is, even if there was 
a good business reason for it to be dealt with at divisional 
level rather than head office, your own policy required – 
and we have seen the provision – that it be dealt with, this 
issue be decided by the group head of supply chain not the 
divisional 
supply 
chain, 
not 
the 
divisional 
CEO 
and 
effectively where Mr Mlambo was saying I cannot approve 
this yet, I need certain things, that would have only taken a 
10 
day or two, instead you have Mr Burger coming along and 
saying Mr Mlambo is obstructing me, it is delaying us, even 
though the delay does not seem to have been really 
significant, as the Chairperson has pointed out and he is 
saying he always frustrating me, should you not, as a 
responsible GCOE have said look, if somebody has to 
approve this, it is not you, Mr Burger.  If you think there is 
a good business case, even if you persuade me, that is not 
good enough, it should not be left to you, Mr Burger, it 
should be left to Mr Mlambo because surely, Mr Ntshepe, 
20 
do you agree that you were bound, as the Group Chief 
Executive of Denel by its own procurement policy, legally? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I was bound by all policies of Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Including this, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 49 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    But effectively you seem to be 
saying well, because Mr Burger was complaining that Mr 
Mlambo was taking too long and the project was urgent and 
so forth that you should just approve it but that would 
breach the policy, not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Not as you put it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see, so how do you put it then? 
MR NTSHEPE:   There is a motivation of why this should 
be done by VR Laser and I believed in this motivation that 
this motivation represented the true facts of what was 
10 
decided by Exco of the division and that Mr Burger said Mr 
Mlambo is always delaying him or whatever, of course, as I 
say, there were issues now and again between the two but 
I was looking at this as an individual memorandum to be 
settled so that we can be able to move the products and be 
able to deliver this product. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But can I take you back to the heart 
of my question and that is that however you felt that there 
was a good business reason to get things moving and not 
to get into a dispute with VR Laser, you have been alerted 
20 
to the fact that there is a violation of a procurement policy 
which is legally binding on Denel and legally binding on 
you as Group Chief Executive Officer.  Now you seem to 
have been persuaded by the urgency and the Chair has 
already debated that with you, you seem to have been 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 50 of 404 
 
persuaded by Mr Burger ’s complaint that Mr Mlambo was 
taking too long or obstructing, you seem to have been 
persuaded by Mr Burger that LMT and DVS could not do 
this even though Mr Mlambo asked for a proof which was 
never provided and you also seem to have been persuaded 
by a concern that if you cancel the agreement or you do 
not place an order under the agreement already signed 
with VR Laser they could raised claims and bring litigation.  
Have I summed up your attitude correctly? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, sir. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Yes.  But against all of that, even if 
one assumes in your favour, that all of those were good 
reasons, surely there was a very bad reason for approving 
this and that was a simple point of the law.  The law says 
in order to award a contract you have to get the approval, 
not of the CEO but the head of group supply chain to find a 
business reason and you were aware here that that was not 
complied with.  You seem to have gone in with your eyes 
open into approving something that could not be approved 
under the policy. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   I was aware of the policy, I was aware that 
there is deviation from the policy.  I was aware that there 
is a motivation to deviate from the policy.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I was not aware there is a minority view to 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 51 of 404 
 
say that Ms Malahlela is not agreeing with this and 
…[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Ntshepe, I am sorry to interrupt 
you.  You are referring to various issues that you have 
already dealt with.  I understand your evidence, you were 
not aware of Ms Malahlela.  I understand that you believed 
there was a good motivation.  I understand all of that but 
my point is, let us accept all of those as being sensible 
reasons that were concern that gave you concern.  Let us 
assume in your favour all of that.  Did you not have one 
10 
serious problem?  However strong the other reasons might 
be, there was a legal obstacle, you could not approve this 
because the procurement policy, it is a legal – legally 
binding measure, bound you.  That is the simple question. 
MR NTSHEPE:   With due respect, Chair, I would like to 
differ.  I believe that I had the authority to approve this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Where did you get that authority 
from? 
MR NTSHEPE:   As being the Group CEO, Acting Group 
CEO. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Group CEO? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Acting Group CEO. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Acting Group CEO? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes but as Acting …[intervenes] 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 52 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let us put it this way because I 
was about to ask you this question.  Do you know whether 
the policy -  that the policy had a provision as to what 
should happen if somebody is aggrieved by Mr Mlambo’s 
decision not to approve? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I would not know all the policies, it has 
been a long time now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, no, ja, ja. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  And you could talk to HR, I believe, 
you could also talk to Mr Mlambo to say I am not happy 
10 
with the way you have handled this matter.  I mean, for me 
that would be the logical things to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, it is very important or it would 
have been very important for you as Group CEO generally 
or at least before you approved this, it would have been 
important for you to establish whether there is a provision 
in the policy which says what should happen if somebody is 
aggrieved by a decision taken by Mr Mlambo.  Does it say 
they may appeal to the Group CEO or does it not say 
because when policies or rules in any organisation are 
20 
prepared, those who prepared them make decisions for 
reasons that they regard as good as to why certain 
decisions must be – or the responsibility for certain 
decisions must be given to certain specific people and not 
to so and so and why there should be an appeal or should 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 53 of 404 
 
not be an appeal and, if there is an appeal, to whom that 
appeal should lie.  They exercise their judgment, you see?  
They might say, you know, in regard to this matters, these 
types of matters, the decision of the person occupying Mr 
Mlambo’s position is the decision …[intervenes] 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because he will be having certain 
expertise that even the Group CEO might not have.  So he 
is the one who must make this decision and somebody else 
might like it or not like it but that is how the framers of the 
10 
policy have decided and in that case, nobody can pick and 
choose when they do not like decisions, just like the Group 
CEO.  As the Group CEO, you had power to make certain 
decisions.  There would have been many people under you 
who might not have liked some of your decisions but the 
fact that they do not like them did not mean that they could 
disregard them or that they could do as they pleased.  
Everybody is bound by the rules and policies of the 
organisation, that includes the Group CEO. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   If the policy says the responsibility for 
this decision lies with so and so, the Group CEO must 
respect that, that those who drafted the policy wanted it 
that way and if they wanted it differently they would have 
put it different.  You understand that?  And if the Group 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 54 of 404 
 
CEO and other functionaries might start to say well, I am 
going to disregard policy when I feel like, that is a recipe 
for …[intervenes] 
MR NTSHEPE:   Disaster. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Disaster.  You see? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It instils a wrong culture, people start 
not respecting policies of the organisation, they start not 
respecting the rules and so on and the Group CEO must be 
exemplary in this regard.  You understand that? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but you say that you are not aware 
that there was any provision which dealt with – in the 
policy which dealt with what should happen if you are not 
happy with – if somebody was not happy with Mr Mlambo’s 
decision on these matters. 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I was not aware. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were not aware. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Kennedy? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  In fact we have 
had regard to the supply chain management policy of Denel 
as well as – at both group and divisional level as well as 
the National Treasury regulations and the PFMA.  We are 
not aware of any provision that actually says that if 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 55 of 404 
 
somebody like Mr Burger is unhappy with a decision of 
somebody like Mr Mlambo they can go to the Group CEO or 
Acting Group CEO and ask him to overrule the supply chain 
executive in relation to this.  You are not aware of such a 
provision either? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I am not aware. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What we are also aware of, Mr 
Ntshepe, I know you may have had a fair bit to do with 
legal issues but you are not a trained lawyer, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I am not. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    So it may be unfair for you to have 
this put to you but I just want to put it on the record that in 
fact there is provision in the PFMA that allows a deviation 
from a supply chain management policy to be authorised.  
It does not say it can be authorised by the Chairperson or 
the Group CEO of the entity, it can be – a deviation can be 
authorised 
in 
appropriate 
circumstances 
by 
National 
Treasury.  Now were you saw of that …[intervenes] 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I am not aware of it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And are you aware with any attempt 
20 
made by Denel, by you or anybody else to approach 
National Treasury to approve this deviation from your 
procurement policy? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In particular this deviation, I am not aware 
of it. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 56 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Kennedy.  With this 
discussion that has taken place, do you accept now that 
your decision to approve this in circumstances where the 
policy said it was Mr Mlambo who had the power to 
approve, number one.  Number two, in circumstances 
where he was still seized with the matter, he had not made 
a decision yet.  You accept that your decision then to go 
ahead and approve was in breach of the company policy 
because the company policy gave that responsibility to him 
10 
and he was still applying his mind. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, I cannot totally agree with what you 
are saying.  I am saying that with the facts before me, the 
decision for me to approve was based on what I saw and 
what the discussion I had with Mr Burger. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but remember that what I am putting 
to you is not whether your decision was justified or not or 
was correct or not, but it is whether it was in breach of the 
policy and I am suggesting to you that this discussion that 
we have had reveals that there is nothing in the policy and 
20 
you were not aware of anything in the policy that allowed 
you to override – actually I do not even know if it is correct 
to say it override Mr Mlambo because he had not made a 
decision yet but there seems to have been nothing in the 
policy to allow you not to wait for Mr Mlambo to make a 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 57 of 404 
 
decision whether he was approving or not. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair, I hear what you say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that …[intervenes] 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …that was in breach of the policy?  
Approving it where the policy says Mr Mlambo is the one 
who has the responsibility to approve and in circumstances 
where he was still seized with that matter. 
MR NTSHEPE:   It is a bit confusing for me, Chair, I have 
to be honest to say whether …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, but it is important that you 
should understand. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not want you to say you agree when 
you do not agree. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I want you to only say you agree if 
honestly that is what you… 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But because, you see, if the law says 
20 
this decision must be taken by Mr Mpshe and while Mr 
Mpshe is busy with matter, applying his mind, where do I 
get the licence to usurp this responsibility for him and 
exercise this responsibly myself unless the policy does say 
under the following circumstances I can intervene while he 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 58 of 404 
 
has not finished, you see? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I hear what you are saying, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, in this case it seems to me that Mr 
Mlambo was still seized with this request for him to 
approve.  He had raised certain issues because he wanted 
to satisfy himself that everything should go according to 
the 
policy. 
 
Mr 
Stephan 
Burger 
comes 
to 
you 
and 
effectively asks you to carry out a responsibility that is Mr 
Mlambo’s 
responsibilities 
in 
circumstances 
where 
Mr 
Mlambo has not said I am not approving, he said I just 
10 
want to be satisfied about one and two.  So I am seeking to 
get your concession that you accept that in that situation 
your decision to approve in those circumstances cannot be 
said to be in compliance with the policy and was in breach 
of the policy. 
MR NTSHEPE:   If you put it that way, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  On reflection after this discussion. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I will concede. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay, alright.  Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Thank you, Chair.  May I just ask 
20 
one question that relates to the operational issues you 
referred to of the difficulty between Mr Burger and Mr 
Mlambo and Mr Burger ’s frustration and the feeling that 
maybe this should be dealt with at divisional level.  You 
agree that if there was a good reason to take the group 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 59 of 404 
 
head of supply chain out of the requirements for approval, 
that could have been done by way of approaching the 
board to change the delegations of authority and the 
procurement policy, not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  In fact I think this new policy, 
this was a new policy because the structure of the 
organisation changed from a totally federal to a semi-
federal organisation and this was a fairly new policy.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So …[intervenes] 
MR NTSHEPE:   Was a fairly new policy. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So this was a fairly new policy which 
had given the right and the power to Mr Mlambo to decide 
this issue, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    If you felt that that policy was not a 
good one, the newish policy was not a good one because it 
should rather be left to the division, surely the way to do it 
would not be to violate the policy but to go back to 
20 
whoever prepared it and approved it.  We know that the 
board approved these policies to go and persuade the 
board, not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 60 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you could even actually say the 
policy should be amended to give you the power to 
override Mr Mlambo’s decision or to intervene if he is 
delaying in making a decision but that would have to be 
within – that would have to be part of the policy because 
then if it is part of the policy and you do that, you would be 
acting in accordance with the policy.  But when you do that 
when the policy does not say that, you act in breach of the 
policy.  You understand that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  I think we must take the tea 
break, Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As you please, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We have gone past – why past quarter 
past.  We will take the tea break now  - or were you keen 
to ask one or two questions before we take the break? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am happy to take it now, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, let us take a tea break now 
and we will resume at quarter to eleven. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or no, I am sorry.  No, I am getting 
confused because we started early.  I thought it was 
quarter past eleven. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But because we started at nine… 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 61 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, it is almost half past ten. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is only half past ten.  No, we can 
continue, I am sorry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, maybe we should decide when we 
will take the tea break, whether we will take it normal time 
or… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I expected – but it depends on how 
many question I will put to the witness and how long he 
takes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But I would expect that we will 
probably finish his evidence in the next half an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, then – which will be eleven 
o’clock, then maybe we can take it then. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes but perhaps we can review it at 
that stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.  Let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I would like to 
deal with one final aspect, I believe, in relation to this 
20 
issue of the single source – single supplier contract that 
was awarded to VR Laser.  You have confirmed that one of 
the reasons that persuaded you to give this approval 
despite the requirements of the procurement policy was 
that the agreement with the MOA had already been signed 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 62 of 404 
 
with VR Laser and there was concern that if you then said 
well, we are not going to place an order with you now 
because there has not been compliance that they could – 
that could result in VR Laser bringing claims against you 
and possible legal cases, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Now there are two points I want to 
explore with you on that.  That could have been avoided if 
within the next day or two a proper business case had 
been put to Mr Mlambo to get his approval, not so? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, it is not  a long time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If he had given that approval.  If he 
had not then you would have still faced a problem, not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  The other point is this, that I 
can understand you would be concerned that VR Laser 
might take you to court if you did not honour the MOA but 
were you not aware of the possibility, the danger that if you 
did approve this and you implemented the MOA where 
officials such as Mr Mlambo had said this provision of the 
20 
procurement policy had been violated, were you not aware 
that the Auditor-General, for example, might query how this 
contract had been signed in breach of the procurement 
policy?  Or some other entity, maybe a competitor, might 
have taken you to court and were you not aware that there 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 63 of 404 
 
was a risk that because there was this violation of the 
procurement policy and Ms Malahlela has identified a 
whole lot of others, as did Mr Mlambo, that you would then 
vulnerable to having the contract set aside?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, I trust, my belied was that every 
year we have internal auditors who go through all these 
matters, this matter was never, ever brought to me in that 
year of – end of the financial year as a matter that need to 
be investigated.   So I believed that there was no need for 
condonation or the Auditor General would have questioned 
10 
our financials, and I trusted the judgment of the Auditor 
General. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you know whether the Auditor 
General was aware of this conflict, this violation of the 
Procurement Policy? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I am not aware of it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   You seem to be suggesting Mr 
Ntshepe, but correct me if I am wrong, but you seem to be 
suggesting well we got away with it, they had not picked it 
so let us carry on with the problem. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I – it is not correct SC what I am 
saying is there is a fair assessment of our performance 
every year by external auditors.  I am not – if there was 
any problems, there were problems that were picked up 
especially in like irregular expenditure that we picked up 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 64 of 404 
 
and this matter was never brought up to say that it is a 
problem so I am not suggesting anything that we got away 
with it.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you see that is what concerns Mr 
Kennedy.  He is saying he is not talking about what 
happened months later he is saying at the time of giving 
approval bearing in mind that Mr Mlambo was saying 
certain requirements should be dealt with first.  Were you 
not concerned that if you approved that this is something 
that could be picked up later by the Auditor General to say 
10 
that there was a violation of policy because then it would 
come back to you to say you approved how did you 
approve something that was in violation of policy that is 
what he is asking.  Were you not concerned about that?    
MR NTSHEPE:   In my honest opinion Chair I was not 
concerned because I believed it was correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But now when you look back do you 
accept that you should have been concerned?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright Mr Kennedy.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright thank you Chair.  Does this 
not illustrate the importance for a GCEO like yourself to 
actually 
be 
taking 
seriously 
the 
concerns 
of 
your 
colleagues such as Mr Mlambo when they are raising 
issues like this to investigate them properly and not simply 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 65 of 404 
 
go along with what Mr Burger told you? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair I have always taken the concerns of 
the people I worked with at Denel very seriously and this 
matter in my judgment at that point in time was an urgent 
matter I am as you said I cannot be able to expatiate more 
than that and start speculating that I was not taking them 
seriously I took him very, very seriously that is why he 
worked there.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair with your leave may we then 
move on from this topic to the next issue that is dealt with 
10 
in Mr Ntshepe’s affidavit and that is the single source 
agreement between DVS as opposed to DLS and VR Laser.  
You deal with that Mr Ntshepe at page 517 of your 
affidavit.  Sorry you can put away File 1. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Okay.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I should have told you put away File 
1 if you would and then Chair we are going back to File 8.   
MR NTSHEPE:   517? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   517 yes.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you were asked questions by 
the investigators that gave rise to these answers, correct?  
MR NTSHEPE:   I missed that pardon me SC.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The investigators asked you certain 
questions about how it came about that you approved the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 66 of 404 
 
section for single supplier contract from DVS we have 
moved away from DLS.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And there has been evidence from 
other witnesses to the effect that you gave an instruction 
particularly to Mr Steyn and Mr Wessels that they negotiate 
with Mr Van der Merwe to secure this contract, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, in fact at page 517, 4.1 you say: 
“There is nothing unlawful about my instruction that 
10 
Mr Johan Steyn and Mr Jan Wessels negotiate with 
Mr Peter Van der Merwe because we had already 
signed a single source agreement with VR Laser.” 
Now that single source agreement had already been signed 
was the one that you had approved for VR Laser to be a 
single supply at DLS, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I was a witness, correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, were a witness to that and you 
then approved the overriding of Mr Mlambo’s concern about 
the policy that we have just dealt with, correct? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct there were other contracts which 
were signed also.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, so as I understand it you do not 
dispute that you gave an instruction to Mr Steyn and to Mr 
Jan Wessels that they should negotiate this contract with 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 67 of 404 
 
VR Laser for DVS’s single supplier.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and why did it come from you 
though why did this instruction come from you?  This does 
not appear to have been something that came from 
divisional level.   
MR NTSHEPE:   There was a resolution from the Board 
whereby the three divisions that were land based divisions 
should merge as one division because basically they are 
just apposed and they complement each other.  One was 
10 
DLS, the other one was DDS and the other one was LMT 
and the Board was expecting that in the end they should 
have been cost savings and I should be able to show those 
cost savings.   
So 
when 
I 
gave 
the 
instructions 
to 
the 
two 
gentleman was because of the resolution from the Board 
saying they should come together and secondly that the 
matter of service should bear fruit.  There will be no point 
in having three divisions come together and then you find 
the costs increase.  So the issue of saying that I instructed 
20 
them yes I concede and I agree that I did instruct them and 
the motivation was that the Board had taken a resolution 
that they should come together which I believe Chair when 
I hear is that currently they have done that now.       
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry there is currently? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 68 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   They have done that now at Denel.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes but let us turn specifically to the 
instruction to appoint VR Laser as single supplier for DVS.  
I understand that there was an intention to rationalise your 
divisions the three divisions that you have identified 
including DVS but we know that the single supplier 
contract awarded to VR Laser by DLS was done without 
following a tender process or a procurement process, 
correct?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, so the fact that you had already 
awarded that Denel had awarded that contract without 
following a procurement process in favour of VR Laser that 
surely did not entitle you to do the same thing for the DVS 
single 
supplier 
without 
complying 
with 
procurement 
processes.  
MR NTSHEPE:   As I have explained in my affidavit I think 
it, is it 2.5.5 if I am not mistaken.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes or perhaps just tell the Chair 
what you want to say about that.  
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   2.5. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You want to refer us to page 215, two 
one five did you say? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No page 514 and page 515.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 69 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   2.5.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
MR NTSHEPE:   As I have explained that the MOA had 
already been signed with DLS it is one organisation and for 
me it did not make any business sense to go out and find 
other suppliers whom the products still have to be qualified 
because every product that the suppliers that supplied to 
Denel must be qualified to meet the Denel standards and 
Armscor standard and if you go out again and do a 
qualification and the cost of qualification is very high.  In 
10 
other cases, it surpasses more than R10million.   
So now that we have an agreement with an 
organisation which had already qualified its products with 
Denel and also with Armscor many years ago not even 
before the acquisition by Essa and we had signed a single 
source agreement it made sense to me and it was logical 
for me to rationalise the organisation and show cost 
savings and in my understanding the cost savings came to 
about R80million.       
ADV KENNEDY SC:   How would those cost savings be 
20 
achieved by appointing VR Laser without a competitive 
process? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Well cost savings in the sense that there 
will be one organisation in the end there was going to be 
one organisation.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 70 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   One Denel organisation?  
MR NTSHEPE:   One land systems organisation in Denel.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Your divisions, you three divisions 
would be incorporated into one, yes.    
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, therefore there is a duplication of 
staff one will be a reduction in staff and number two we will 
have more power to negotiate prices and be able to 
squeeze prices to our suppliers to say that we are now a 
bigger organisation we might, we have therefore a bigger 
need and you will be getting more revenue as a supplier in 
10 
any organisation whereby you get a bigger order the price 
goes down.      
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I understand that but surely 
those two reasons that you have just given are reasons 
why it may have made sense from a business and a 
financial point of view to merge the three entities of Denel. 
It does not seem to me unless I have missed something 
that that is a good reason why you should not allow a 
competitive process assume for a moment that we accept 
that if you merged your three divisions you would have 
20 
greater purchasing power.    
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You would have more bargaining 
power suppliers would give you better prices, correct?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 71 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But that would happen also if you 
went out to on a tender or a competitive procurement 
process perhaps even more so.  So I am not – I am 
struggling to understand unless I am missing something.  I 
am 
struggling 
to 
understand 
why 
merging 
the 
three 
divisions is being raised as a reason why you were 
deviating from procurement processes which would have 
allowed a competitive process, if you would please focus 
on that.      
MR NTSHEPE:   It is not the only chief focus as I have 
10 
indicated.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay what else? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The other focus was that we already had 
an agreement...[intervene]   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   …a single source agreement at this point 
in time within the organisation with its production and as I 
have said yesterday that those products it is not just a 
product it is something that protects our soldiers and if 
anything happens there will be bigger problems that Denel 
20 
is experiencing therefore the goods must be of high quality 
of high value quality and it takes time and what you call 
evaluation to make sure that those products meets the 
standard of Armscor and also of Denel.   
So I would therefore believe then that with the VR 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 72 of 404 
 
Laser being a qualified supplier and we have a single 
source there should be one agreement and we will be able 
to – in fact I think they also consulted Mr Stephan Burger 
on how he did his agreement, I think it is in one of the 
reports I do not remember or in one of the emails it does 
say that to see how they did it.       
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well let us leave out of account what 
Mr Burger says his still going to give evidence this week he 
can speak to that himself from his own perspective, I am 
asking you for your perspective.  Now I have no difficulty 
10 
with your points that VR Laser was already accredited with 
Armscor.    
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But they were not the only party that 
was accredited with this Armscor or was capable of being 
credited by Armscor.  This was not a situation for example 
that there was only one single supplier of this type of 
component or equipment in the world namely VR Laser, not 
so? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No we are talking about it because we 
20 
have to grow the economy of South Africa we are a South 
African company.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay so if you confine it to the South 
African market this was not the only potential supplier, not 
so?  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 73 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   The other suppliers as far as I know I am 
not an engineer they did not meet the requirements and the 
standards of in particular of Denel and Denel has to meet 
the standards of Armscor.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   DVS itself was manufacturing this 
type of component and equipment.   
MR NTSHEPE:   DVS had closed its fabrication division 
and I see that they are claiming that they did not they did 
after the Iraq contract which was done for the Americans.  
They 
went 
from 
a 
R3billion 
company 
to 
less 
than 
10 
R800million company within a year and one of the reasons 
they had was today of – but up to today after I had made 
this decision they had not made any retrenchments.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, are you aware that Ms 
Geldenhuys has testified in these proceedings.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, Sir.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And are you aware that she gave a 
very, very different picture to you.  She was part of the 
EXCO senior management team at DVS.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Ms Geldenhuys I rarely interacted with 
20 
her.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I am asking you are you aware 
that she gave evidence?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I am aware.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And are you aware that she gave 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 74 of 404 
 
evidence that it made absolutely no sense from a business 
point of view for this contract to be given to VR Laser 
where DVS could make the items themselves.  
MR NTSHEPE:   I do not agree with her.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And she gave evidence that Mr Steyn 
her boss who was the divisional CEO of DVS, correct?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And he also was unhappy about 
exactly this and in fact recommended against giving the 
single source, single supplier contract to VR Laser for the 
10 
same reason.   
MR NTSHEPE:   I am aware but I do not agree with what 
Ms Geldenhuys is saying.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you disagree with Mr Steyn as 
well.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I do not agree because he is saying 
that I forced him, his far experienced in the business than 
me. His a mechanic, his far, far experienced and he is 
senior than me in the business, he actually grew up in the 
business who am I to force him to do something that he 
20 
does not – he knows the process.   
If he had be grudgingly or a grievance he knew 
what 
he had to do.  Why did he then agree to exercise this 
process there is no way – I have never ever in Denel 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 75 of 404 
 
forced anybody to do anything but I would put my authority 
and say that this is what is required because my operating 
style was that this is a business, this is not a department 
of government.        
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But is that not exactly what you did 
you told Mr, you gave Mr Steyn the instruction that he must 
contract with VR Laser an outside company as a single 
supplier and he was against that.  Aare you saying that he 
actually was in favour of it?    
MR NTSHEPE:   He had reservations but I said this needs 
10 
it be done I did not force him I mean if he had reservations 
to such an extent that he felt very strongly against this 
instruction from me he knew exactly where to take it.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When you say he had reservations 
were they not very serious reservations?  Were they not 
serious reservations?   
MR NTSHEPE:   To me it was not serious reservations.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In fact he – the emails that Ms 
Geldenhuys took us to previously in fact showed that he 
was very unhappy about it, were you aware of that? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   I have never had a discussion with Ms 
Geldenhuys on this issue so it was for me even a shock to 
see that she is saying all the things and being very 
dramatic about it all the things that she said about this 
contract.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 76 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You see Ms Geldenhuys has given 
evidence that she felt that she and her colleagues were 
being undermined at DVS.  Ms Malahlela has given 
evidence that she was being overridden at DLS by her 
EXCO 
and 
ultimately 
you 
overrode 
Mr 
Mlambo, 
Ms 
Malahlela and Mr Mlambo has given evidence that they felt 
that they were being seriously undermined by what was 
being done and Ms Geldenhuys has given similar evidence.   
There just seems to be a pattern Mr Ntshepe of 
senior people responsible for procurement issues and also 
10 
in Ms Geldenhuys’s case for legal issues, legal compliance 
issues and a member of senior management where they felt 
undermined.  Are you saying that they did not feel 
undermined or are you saying that if they did feel 
undermined they had no reason to?       
MR NTSHEPE:   I am saying that if they did feel 
undermined then they knew the due process on how to 
voice their grievances they can even have gone to the 
department if need be.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Gone to the? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Department of Public Enterprise.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Gone to the Department of Public 
Enterprise.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, if you are saying that the CEO is 
undermining to do our job.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 77 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Does that not put somebody in for 
example Ms Geldenhuys or Ms Malahlela positions both 
holding senior positions within their divisions that way 
below 
you 
within 
the 
organisation. 
 
Is 
it 
seriously 
suggested that they could and should have escalated to 
the Department of Public Enterprises to go right over your 
head would that not have been extremely difficult for them 
to do?  
MR NTSHEPE:   In my understanding our government has 
got an open policy whereby individuals if he have a 
10 
problem he can find a way to express your grievance.  If 
they are professionals, they are lawyers both of them Ms 
Geldenhuys and Ms Malahlela I would actually expect them 
to do exactly what to do but whether they go to the 
department or not go to the department or go to HR they 
should know exactly what to do.      
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Instead all three of them ultimately 
resigned.  
MR NTSHEPE:   I was not there when they resigned.  One 
went overseas because he was recruited by another 
20 
country for his own benefit and the other two I left Denel 
they were still there.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We have already heard your 
evidence that there was good business reason to leave 
many decisions in the hands of the divisions and that is 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 78 of 404 
 
was one of the reasons that informed you to support Mr 
Burger at DLS in implementing the contract already 
awarded to VR Laser.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But the contrary seems to have 
happened in the case of DVS where Mr Steyn and Ms 
Geldenhuys objected or at least raised serious objections 
or as you put it reservations and you then said well I am 
group chief executive officer you are going to do what I am 
telling you effectively.   
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   It is not correct SC this is not what I said, 
what I said was to say that there was a Board resolution to 
rationalise the companies and we have to take action and 
that.  So it was not just an arbitrary decision for me to say 
that you also go and contract I was moving towards and 
actioning towards achieving that Board resolution.     
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The Board resolution may have said 
we approve the rationalisation so that the three divisions 
will be merged into one operation the land based entity 
that you were referring to.  It did not say however that in 
20 
that process VR Laser should be given a single supply 
contract, not so?     
MR NTSHEPE:   It also says and show savings in the 
process 
because 
it 
will 
not 
help 
to 
rationalise 
the 
organisation and have a balloon structure.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 79 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, but it did not say that VR Laser 
should as a result of that be given a single supply contract, 
correct?  
MR NTSHEPE:   These are one of – yes it did not say it.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and it did not say that it should 
be given a contract in violation of the Boards own 
procurement policy and delegation of authorities, not so?  
MR NTSHEPE:  I think SC I have explained the role of VR 
Laser Chair and Denel their differences and I have 
conceded in areas whereby I needed to concede or where 
10 
you made me understand and I have also explained the 
reasons why I took those decisions and this is one of those 
decisions whereby I took in order to rationalise the 
organisation other people could have done it differently.        
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now if I can take you back to 518.  
Can I just confirm you gave the instruction to enter into the 
contract with VR Laser for DVS, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And did you actually sign that 
agreement?  
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   No I did not.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Why not? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Because Mr Steyn asked me if he could 
sign it or should I sign it and I said no you can sign it.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Steyn signed it? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 80 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But that was after you had given him 
an instruction to give the contract to VR Laser and to sign 
the agreement.  
MR NTSHEPE:   He could have refused to say I am not 
signing it.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He could have refused.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But he would have been refusing an 
instruction from you as his ultimate boss, not so? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   What would be the consequences of that I 
do not think – he would know exactly what he would be 
doing and I do not think that I was forcing him to sign it I 
mean it was free will it was not forced on him to say you 
sign it or there will be consequences thereafter if you do 
not sign it.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now Mr Ntshepe at page 518 your 
affidavit at paragraph 4.2 at the top, you there, are you 
with me? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, yes.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right this is what you say: 
“With regards to evidence suggesting that the DVS 
concluded the MOA with VR Laser services without 
following Denel procurement policies I do not know 
to what extent such policies were not followed and 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 81 of 404 
 
you – presumably the investigators, have not stated 
the 
extent 
of 
that 
non-compliance. 
 
I 
would 
therefore not know whether or not procurement 
policies were followed as this was the division of 
Denel handling its own procurement processes in 
this regard.” 
And then you say” 
“I must however point out that DVS was a newly 
acquired private company that was still governed by 
their policies.  It was agreed that DVS will migrate 
10 
to government SEM policies over a period of time in 
my understanding the Ministry of Public Enterprises 
was aware of this.” 
Now let us unpack this if we may Mr Ntshepe you referred 
at the top of your paragraph to the fact that you were 
aware 
that 
there 
was 
evidence 
suggesting 
that 
this 
particular contract between DVS and VR Laser did not 
follow Denel procurement policy and you say well you do 
not know to what extent that was not followed so you do 
not whether in fact they were followed.  But you aware that 
20 
there is evidence before the Commission that is why you 
were responding to this that is why you were saying this 
and the evidence is clear that procurement policies were 
not followed for example in that there was no competitive 
procurement 
process 
followed 
and 
secondly 
that 
the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 82 of 404 
 
correct level of authority did not sign or approve the 
transaction.  Now may I suggest that you seem to be 
saying well you do not know about that and you do not 
perhaps care about that.         
MR NTSHEPE:   It is not correct SC.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay just explain do you care about; 
did you care then?  
MR NTSHEPE:   I cared very much I spent 21 years in 
Denel.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   So I cared very much about the success of 
the organisation.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
MR NTSHEPE:   And I contributed very significantly I 
believe.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But you have already conceded some 
of the concerns that the Chair has raised with you as you 
sit now of the benefit of the discussion.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, but it does not mean that I do not 
care about the organisation, Chair.  I conceded it could 
20 
have been mistakes but it does not mean that I do not care 
about the organisation.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay well so you did care alright that 
is good but if you did care was it not important that you 
ensured that before you gave an instruction to Mr Steyn 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 83 of 404 
 
that you were satisfied that there were proper compliance 
with procurement processes.    
MR NTSHEPE:   Mr Steyn and Mr Johan Wessels were both 
involved and I think to a certain extent Mr Burger was also 
involved and I think they were asking for advice of how he 
concluded his VR Laser single source.  If there was a 
problem and they might not have signed it willingly or but 
they had recourse they could have even put me in a 
disciplinary 
process 
through 
channels 
which 
I 
would 
believe they would know.   
10 
So what I am saying is that I cared and the policies 
of this organisation as I further go down is that they were 
in transition they were not totally a State owned policies 
and the Treasury was aware of that because the letter was 
written to Treasury on that matter.     
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Ntshepe what I am asking is 
really about your own state if mind and your own conduct.  
Now I understand you evidence that if Mr Steyn or Ms 
Geldenhuys or anybody else that felt that the instructions 
that you gave to award a single source, a single supplier 
20 
contract from DVS to VR Laser was wrong from a legal or a 
business point of view understand your point that they 
could 
have 
laid 
a 
complaint 
against 
you 
within 
the 
organisation or with the Minister of Public Enterprises or 
whatever.  Before you even get to that point before you 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 84 of 404 
 
decide to give that instruction to them to carry out which 
may result in them being unhappy and potentially raising a 
complaint against you.   
Before you decide to give that instruction was that 
if 
you cared about compliance with procurement policies was 
there not a little question that went off in your mind can we 
actually give VR Laser this contract without following 
procurement policies and can I give an instruction to my 
juniors in the group to give that contract to VR Laser and if 
10 
there may not be compliance that is what I am asking you. 
 So do not trouble us at the moment please with 
whether or not Mr Steyn or Ms Geldenhuys should have 
reported you for taking a decision just focus please if you 
would on whether you could and should have taken a 
decision.         
MR NTSHEPE:   I believe I should have taken that decision 
Chair.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You entitled to take it.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And there was good reason to good 
business reason to.    
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, to me it was a good business 
reasons.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now did you ask yourself the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 85 of 404 
 
question is this permissible to give it to one entity and not 
allow a competitive process to allow others to tender or to 
quote?   
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair I have already indicated the reasons 
why we chose VR Laser and to me it made business sense 
not to piggy bank on the existing agreement that we have 
with VR Laser and I have been instructed by the Board to 
rationalise the organisations the three divisions and it 
make business sense for me to say okay we already have 
this agreement and for the supply of steel in any event 
10 
DDS was buying steel from VR Laser in any event it would 
not have done any harm actually for me it would have made 
savings in terms of the operations of the organisation.  
Therefore, in my mind I think I believe I was correct.          
ADV KENNEDY SC:   How do you know there would have 
been savings if there was no tender or quotation process 
that was competitive you could not know what prices might 
be offered by other potential bidders?   
MR NTSHEPE:   Well there were projections made when 
they were doing this exercise the figure of R80million is 
20 
not an arbitrary figure it was a projected figure.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Projected on the basis that the three 
divisions would be merged or projected on the basis that 
VR Laser would supply it at a certain price? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The three divisions will merge and the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 86 of 404 
 
operations of the three divisions were when they merged 
will be enough to cover the three divisions without getting 
extra or cost any other what I would say cost in terms of 
getting new suppliers, re-qualifying those new suppliers 
etcetera.  But the three divisions will merge and there will 
be cost savings and the cost savings will be internal and 
also external.     
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I understand that cost savings may 
have been achieved if the three divisions were merged but 
I am interested in a different point and that is how could 
10 
there be projections that you would save if you went to VR 
Laser if you as an organisation did not go out to the market 
place and find out how much each person would be 
prepared to offer.    
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair I have already expressed the issue 
of volumes to say that if you have larger volumes you 
would have been able to get a lesser price and that would 
have been a cost saving in my mind and secondly the 
employees of Denel especially the engineers in particular 
that were involved in this types of activities know the 
20 
workings of VR Laser than finding a new company whereby 
it will take a bit of time to understand their systems of 
working and also the matter of Armscor now re-qualifying 
that new supplier.      
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But Mr Ntshepe the procurement 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 87 of 404 
 
policy does not say well when we think as an entity that we 
might get better prices through bigger volumes so let us 
give it to the same party that is already with us in another 
contract so let us give them another contract, it does not 
allow that.  
MR NTSHEPE:   It has happened before.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry it has happened before.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you saying two wrongs make a 
right? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, no I am not saying it you are now 
telling me it is wrong.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am asking you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well he was saying the policy does not 
allow that and your answer was it does happen but your 
answer should address the question whether what the 
policy allows and what it does not allow irrespective of 
whether people comply with the policy or not.    
MR NTSHEPE:   Okay maybe…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to repeat your question Mr 
20 
Kennedy.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, if I may that the mere fact that a 
party such as VR Laser already has a contract with one 
Denel company namely DLS the procurement policy does 
not say well if you have already given a contract to VR 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 88 of 404 
 
Laser from DLS that entitles you to avoid compliance with 
the requirements of a competitive process you give another 
contract for a different division DVS.  Do you disagree 
does it allow that or does it not allow that?   
MR NTSHEPE:   As the policy stands it does not allow that.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It does not allow that.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And yet you were instructing people 
to do exactly that.  
MR NTSHEPE:   I have indicated to you that after the 
10 
discussions that we have been having and after the Chair 
has expressed what should have happened I conceded to 
say that is - I concede to the fact that that is correct.  This 
is history the issues that we are talking about here are 
things that have happened in the past it is not something 
that is going to happen in the future.  If I was, it is like 
asking me if now you know would you do it the same thing 
again of course I would not do the same thing again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I guess your answer is now you 
see that it was not right or it was against public policy but 
20 
you are saying that at that stage you did not see it that 
way.       
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you may I just suggest to you 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 89 of 404 
 
is it not a great pity that you only came to realise now and 
concede 
that 
there 
were 
these 
irregularities 
under 
procurement policies when the matter gets to a Judicial 
Commission of enquiry and when counsel such as myself 
puts these points to you. Were you as the group chief 
executive officer not require to know this sort of thing 
yourself and if you did not know to go to the experts such 
as Mr Mlambo or get outside legal advice to say can you do 
this or can you not do this instead years later you now 
conceding well now in fact I accept that I could not do this 
10 
under the procurement policy.   
It does seem to me that as group chief executive 
officer you should have known this before and if you did 
not know about it you should have at least gone for 
example Mr Mlambo and said Mlambo you are the expert in 
procurement policies can I do this or not and yet he seems 
to have been side lined or overruled.  Any comment on 
that?     
MR NTSHEPE:   With respect SC you have made points as 
if I was deliberately taking decisions to break the policy of 
20 
the company and in my view I was not and as I say that is 
hindsight that is history and that I have to come to the 
Commission and say that yes it is fine where would I have 
said it.  I do not think it is a sin for me to say okay Chair 
what you saying makes sense I think I am not embarrassed 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 90 of 404 
 
to say it I am saying it with good faith. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the proposition that Mr Kennedy 
is putting to you for your comments is that as Group CEO 
you ought to have been familiar with what the policy allows 
and what the policy did not allow but that where you were 
not sure you ought to have approached people such as Mr 
Mlambo or even outside experts or advisors to advise.  He 
is suggesting to you that you did not act in the manner in 
which a Group CEO would have been expected to act.  
What do you say to that that is what he is putting to you?    
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair I do not agree I acted in the 
best manner for the company I believe that.  I do not agree 
to the fact that I was basically being negligent and I ought 
to have known that if I did not know I ought to have known 
that is not correct to do.  We already had an existing 
contract of a similar nature and it was accepted and it was 
operating and as now it has been pointed to me that if it 
has happened before does it mean it must continue like 
that.  I am being told that the contract was wrong.  So I 
say I hear what you’re saying and I am in a position to 
20 
hear what you’re saying basically Chair but in my belief 
that we were doing or I was doing things for the interest of 
the company and nothing more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course when you look at whether 
what you, whether your decisions were or were not in the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 91 of 404 
 
best interest of the company one has got to make a 
distinction between two things there may be a decision that 
on its merits might seem to be in the best interest of the 
company but the process that is supposed to be followed 
before a decision made might be something else and 
following legal processes and following the processes of 
the policy and complying with the policy is also in the best 
interest of the company.        
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes I accept that.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay, Mr Kennedy we at quarter past.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, Chair this would be a 
convenient time I want to try and…[intervene]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think let us take the tea adjournment.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, thank you Chair I just want to just 
wrap up with his evidence as briefly as I can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that is fine.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Perhaps we can take the tea 
adjournment now it will enable my learned friend in the 
20 
team to give the input that she wants me to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine we will take the 20 
minutes instead of the normal 15 minutes for me to attend 
to something.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 92 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we will resume at twenty-five to 
twelve.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   Please rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  May I just deal finally 
with a few, a few further issues?  In relation to the Denel 
10 
Asia, during your time as GCEO of Denel, is it correct that 
Denel then brought legal action against the treasury, 
National Treasury?  Just switch on your mic please.  Thank 
you 
CHAIRPERSON:  Switch on your mic.  Ja.  And face this side 
when you give answers. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Apologies.  Apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Was that decision taken by yourself? 
MR NTSHEPE:  The decision was taken by the Board. 
20 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
By 
the 
Board, 
on 
your 
recommendation? 
MR NTSHEPE:  It was a decision taken by the Board, there 
was no recommendation from me.  It was taken by the Board.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So who came up with the idea? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 93 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would not remember because this, we had 
so many board meetings. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Does it not make sense though that it 
must have been initiated by you as the Group Chief 
Executive Officer? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No.  To me because I did not initiate it, it 
does not make sense because I did not initiate it.  It is the 
Board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But you cannot remember who it was? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And are you aware that there was non-
compliance with Section 54 of the PFMA?   
MR NTSHEPE:  In terms of our understanding when we put 
in the application we complied with Section 54 of PFMA. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Ultimately the Court’s application was 
withdrawn by Denel, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I do not remember. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You do not recall? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja it has been such a long time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now were you part-heard to the 
20 
discussion at the board meeting where it was decided to 
bring a court case against National Treasury? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes, I was.  I was in the board meeting. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And did you agree with it, the decision? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I did not oppose the decision. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 94 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You did not oppose it. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Did you or your board colleagues 
consider the implications for Denel for bringing a legal action 
against National Treasury?   
MR NTSHEPE:  I would believe yes they did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if you were at the meeting, you would 
know who came with the idea at the meeting that this is the 
decision that the Board should take.  You would have been 
aware who raised the issue or who moved for this decision to 
10 
be taken.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair if I may address you, I am being 
honest when I say that I do not remember exactly because I 
do not want to label people and find out that type of 
evidence to support that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, it is fine if you do not remember. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just saying. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you were at the meeting. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would have known at least at that time 
who came with the idea at the meeting, who was, who raised 
it.  But I accept that a number of years after you might not 
remember.  Could it have been a matter that the Chairperson 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 95 of 404 
 
of the Board raised?  Because I think if I am not mistaken. 
MR NTSHEPE:  What I am – I think because it was 
discussed at the Board and he was the Chairperson of the 
Board, in the end I also believe that he did not oppose it, 
because the resolution was taken that we should put a court 
case against the treasury.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I cannot remember now, but you may 
remember who deposed to the bounding affidavits. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair, may I proceed?  
Thank you.  I would like now to deal with evidence that the 
Commission has already heard a week and a half ago from 
Mister – sorry this week from Mr Mhlontlo(?) about the 
circumstances of his being suspended and commissioned a 
long time ago, at the evidence of Mr Saloojee(?).  You were 
at that stage the Head of Business Development in the 
group, is that correct? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  When you are suspended I was asked to act. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Yes.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I mean immediately before they were 
suspended and you then came into act. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 96 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  No, it was after they were suspended.  I was 
called into a meeting and asked to act, it was recorded. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And the evidence that Mr Mhlontlo has 
given is that he was called in.  Each of the three were called 
in one by one.  So he was called in and that you happened to 
be at the office at the time the Board was having its meeting 
when the suspension was decided upon. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that correct.  The meeting started 
round about 6 o’clock in the evening, he gave evidence as 
10 
did others particularly Ms Mandin, Mandindi(?).  It was 
supposed to have started at 17:00 but the Audit and Risk 
Committee had a meeting first and about an hour later the 
board meeting took place.  And that then lasted well into the 
evening.  I think round about 10 o’clock is roughly when the 
decision was taken. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And were you at the office throughout 
this period that the board was meeting? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  Not throughout the period because I 
20 
did not know about the Audit and Risk, the first time I hear it.  
I was in the office when the, I think the main board said I 
was in my office.  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And were you then called in that 
evening to see the board? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 97 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  That was the first time I was called, not 
again.  First time I was called after the suspension. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  After the suspension.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But that same evening. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  You see the perception of some 
the witnesses such as Mr Mhlontlo is that even before they 
were heard, now I appreciate you were not yourself part of 
the board meeting that decided on their suspensions, 
10 
correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct I was not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  But the perception that has been 
created is that this, this was all just engineered that the so-
called hearing before suspension was a, was a farce and 
that you had already been picked to take over in an acting 
capacity once Mr Saloojee was, was suspended.  Do you 
have any comment, any knowledge to that you can add on 
this to the Chairperson? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair in my understanding this was not a 
20 
farce because this meant a serious matter of people’s 
careers, so it was not a farce.  And secondly, I was very, I 
worked with this team that was very, very closely, very close.  
Especially the CEO, was very closely work with him.  I was 
asked by the Chair not to leave the day and then he would 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 98 of 404 
 
let me know.  That is why I was staying the evening. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So he … 
MR NTSHEPE:  I was not … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry, sorry.  Carry on. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I was asked by the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were asked not to leave? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For home that day? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  Yes, because it was serious. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Until, until they had spoken to you. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Until, yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would assume until … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  They have spoke to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay.  So in other words they asked 
you not to go home until they have come back to you. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One way or another. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct, correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But were you told why were you not at that 
stage? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No Chair, because I was asked by the Chair 
not to leave.  I believed that there must have been a good 
reason for him to say that, but I was not told. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 99 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  When did he make that request?  That 
is Mr Mantsha you are talking about, is that right?   
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  When did he tell you not to go home?  
Before the board meeting? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Huh? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did he raise that before the board 
meeting started? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes, before the board meeting. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Otherwise you would have gone home 
that, that evening. 
MR NTSHEPE:  It was – yes, it was around 18:00, 17:00, 
18:00.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Around 17:00 or 18:00. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright and he did not tell you what, 
what they were going to tell you. 
MR NTSHEPE:  What they were going to tell me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  What they were going to talk to you 
20 
about. 
MR NTSHEPE:  No, he did not at all talk to me.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I saw him for a very short time.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And yes, after that, many hours later do 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 100 of 404 
 
you agree it was round about 10 o’clock that you were called 
in? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes it could have been around 10 o’clock. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did Mr Mantsha have a discussion with 
you privately before you were called in or did you just go in?   
MR NTSHEPE:  No, he did not have a private discussion. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you had no idea while you were 
waiting all these hours that it might relate to … 
MR NTSHEPE:  No, I was not … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Your acting.   
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  I did not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And when you went into the board 
meeting as requested, did they indicate the purpose of 
calling you in was to, was to arrange for you to become 
Acting Group CEO in light of Mr Saloojee’s suspension? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes they did.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  In fact it is on record. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, was that all that they raised with 
you?  That was the reason why you had to wait. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Those hours. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes, if I still remember that evening, that 
was the main thing the … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Thank you. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 101 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Must have been frustrating to be told not 
to go home around 17:00 or 18:00 and then 20:00, 21:00 you 
have not been called and you are only called around 22:00 
here.   
MR NTSHEPE:  I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You just waited, when you do not know 
exactly what the issue is. 
MR NTSHEPE:  It could have been me that I was going to be 
fired, I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By this time, that is September 2015. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, I am sorry.  By this time namely 
September 2015, I take it that you and Mr Salem Essa had 
come to know each other quite well, because I think it was in 
2012 or 2013 when Mr Saloojee introduced him to you and 
said you are the, you would be the contact person for him or 
you would work, he would deal with you. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you had come to know each other quite 
well by September 2015? 
MR NTSHEPE:  In short correct Chair, but as I have 
explained before, relationships to me are very important 
especially for the job that I was doing. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 102 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I was doing Business Development and New 
Business Development. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Okay.  No that is fine.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  You then took over 
as Acting Group CEO for some time and later became the 
fully fledged Groups Chief Executive Officer, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now the Commission has heard 
evidence about the departure of Mr Saloojee and the 
10 
departure of Mr Mhlontlo as well as the company secretary, 
Ms Africa.  And is it correct that all three of them were 
initially charged in a disciplinary process? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would believe, I think correct, because why 
would they depart. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  And ...  (indistinct) in charge. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And there must … 
MR NTSHEPE:  I think they were suspended, and I assume 
they were charged.  You must be told a reason why are 
20 
suspended. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Well when you say you think they were 
suspended, they were suspended at the very board meeting 
before you were brought in to be made Acting Group CEO.  
Not so?   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 103 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And the dis – I do not know if you 
have heard the evidence of Mr Mhlontlo the other day, but 
she 
gave 
evidence 
that 
despite 
the 
three 
executives 
concerned being on suspension, they, they were keen to 
have the disciplinary process run its course so that they 
could clear their names, but in fact the disciplinary process 
over about a year did not actually eventually ever take place.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct, I heard him saying that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now the suggestion has been 
10 
made to this Commission that Denel had no basis to charge 
them.  It was actually just to get them out of the way 
because they were, they were being difficult as it were in 
relation to particular transactions.   
MR NTSHEPE:  I cannot attest to that.  If that is their view, I 
accept it.  I cannot change their view. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you – what is your own perspective?  
Can you deny that?  Effectively what they have seemed to be 
saying to the Chairperson is that the disciplinary process 
was in bad faith.  There is a way simply of getting them, 
20 
getting rid of them where you did not have any real 
substance to the charges.  And that explains why it took so 
long.  It took about a year before they resigned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you said Mr Kennedy, you I think – he 
did not make the decision to suspend nor the decision to 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 104 of 404 
 
charge. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No.  No, with respect that is what you 
say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So let me correct it, apologise if I put 
things wrongly.  I accept that you did not suspend, but what I 
am interested in is while you were Acting Group Chief 
Executive Officer, in Mr Saloojee’s place, your organisation 
took a very long time to actually get to the point where it 
would start with disciplining.  And that was despite the fact 
10 
that these employees kept on asking, we want documents to 
be able to prepare, so that our senior counsel can prepare 
and we also want this thing to move quickly.  And yet Denel 
seems to have taken a long time.  And the allegations has 
been made that that was in bad faith, that in fact you knew 
as management at Denel that there was not any serious 
basis for the charges and this was all just a strategy to try 
and get rid of them by basically aiming over their heads the 
threat of disciplinary action which never took place.  How do 
you react to that allegation? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair the firstly, they were not charged by 
management.  They were charged by the Board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry, there were no charges? 
MR NTSHEPE:  They were not charged by management, 
Denel Management, they were charged by the Board of 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 105 of 404 
 
Denel.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  By the board. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Secondly, how long it took.  It was out of my 
control.  The Board was driving the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had no role to play in ...  (indistinct). 
MR NTSHEPE:  The only role I played was to take the 
documents.  I still have the, I still, I even left it there.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  The files.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  That is the only role I played if I remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So the whole process was handled 
by the board itself? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  In particular the Chairperson? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Well I think the Chairperson has, had the 
large input to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  But I think the other board members 
also were involved.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you sit at the board meetings where 
this was discussed as Acting Group CEO? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I think whenever they came to an issue 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 106 of 404 
 
regarding the, the suspended employees, we were asked to 
go outside.  I do not remember sitting in any meeting that 
dealt with the charges.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Are you saying then that you cannot 
help the Commission with your own personal knowledge of 
facts as to why the disciplinary process took so long? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes, correct I am saying that I, I cannot 
because 
I, 
I 
was 
mainly 
involved 
in 
keeping 
the 
documentation.  I was not involved in conducting the 
disciplinary process. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now were you involved in the 
settlement negotiations?   
MR NTSHEPE:  Sorry.  I did not hear you.  I see … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Were you involved in the settlement 
negotiations?  That the negotiations to ...  (indistinct). 
MR NTSHEPE:  No I was not involved ...  (indistinct). 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Not at all? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Including on, including on what amounts of 
money should be offered to them, were you not – did the 
20 
board not involve you on that? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I was not involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now Mr Mhlontlo was one of those 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 107 of 404 
 
suspended as Group CFO, he was – he was replaced in an 
acting capacity by Mr Odwa. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Odwa Mhlwana. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mhlwana. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And are you aware that Mhlwana 
contacted Mr Mhlontlo and arranged a meeting where a 
mandate was conveyed to him as, as the mandate to settle 
and in fact a settlement was ultimately reached with Mr 
Mhlontlo. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  I am not aware of the particular meeting 
whereby he, where they discussed the settlement.  But I was 
aware that because it involved finance or something, if there 
was going to be a settlement that Mr Odwa Mhlwana would 
be involved.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And do you know where he got this 
mandate from? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would have believed from the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did he not discuss it with you? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Not, not in particular. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Not? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Not in particular.  Not in particular. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Not in particular? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Does that mean a yes or a no? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 108 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did he discuss it with you or not? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Does it not seem strange that he would 
not have discussed that with you?  A settlement that would 
secure the resignation or termination of employment on 
agreed terms with three senior executives?   
MR NTSHEPE:  I am not sure if it is strange Chair.  But this 
is what happened and I cannot blame him for not discussing 
with me.  But the point is he did not discuss it with me.  I did 
10 
not even know how much the settlement was, in fact it was 
the first time I heard it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I certainly would have expected that 
the board or its Chairperson would talk to you about what 
was being done to expedite the disciplinary process against 
the three executives.  Because as Group CEO you would be 
concerned about a situation where three senior executives 
are on suspension for a long time, you have got to have 
acting people.  That is not an ideal situation where … 
MR NTSHEPE:  Totally not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is going to take too long.  One would 
have expected the board to talk to you about that, but I 
would also expect, have expected the board to talk to you 
about their idea that the three executives should be given 
settlement offers so that they go because you were the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 109 of 404 
 
Group CEO albeit acting.  You had to have the interest of the 
whole organisation at heart.  If senior executives are sought 
to be allowed to go, one would have thought that the board 
would talk to you about that and, and hear what you may 
have to say.   
MR 
NTSHEPE: 
 
As 
I 
have 
said 
Chair, 
I 
kept 
the 
documentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but they never spoke to you about it. 
MR NTSHEPE:  But in terms of having a meeting and 
discussing all these matters in relation to the suspension. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I did not have any particular meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you only informed by the board after 
the settlement agreements had been reached with the three, 
or with each one as they got to reach settlement agreement. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I think it was mentioned in one of the board 
meetings that we … 
CHAIRPERSON:  After it had happened? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay Mr Kennedy.  Is that – thank 
20 
you Chair.  Is that after the settlement agreements had been 
reached with the three individuals?   
MR NTSHEPE:  For me, the first time … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The first time you were aware? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja, that, ja.  That it was in one of the board 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 110 of 404 
 
meetings that they, there has been a settlement.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And so the agreements were already 
finalised were they? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would, I would believe that they were 
finalised and I – that is why there was a second. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And were the agreements to your 
knowledge signed by Mr Mantsha? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would not know, I am not … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You would not know. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Because I did not see them.   
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Can I take you please to another 
bundle.  It is Bundle 7 and perhaps your Registrar could 
assist us again.  Bundle 7.  You can just find it, it should be 
– yes you are going to be helped there Mr Ntshepe.  So 
Chair it will be Bundle 7, page 741.  In fact perhaps you can 
start at the beginning.  It is page 724.  Do you have 724 Mr 
Ntshepe?   
CHAIRPERSON:  I can look at the black number on the left-
hand corner.  Of left-hand corner, black … 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Page 724 appears to be the first page 
of a Termination of Employment Agreement between Denel 
and Mr Mhlontlo.  Is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I see my signature here. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, can you just answer one question 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 111 of 404 
 
at a time.  That is going to be my next question.  Page 741, 
you find where I was going with this line of questioning?  Yes 
indeed, there is your signature.  You just told the Chair a 
moment ago that you only found out after the agreements 
had been finalised and signed, we believed by Mr Mhlontlo, 
that it had all been finalised and yet we see at page 741 
your signature and your name.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  As Acting General, Group CEO.  So it 
was your evidence a moment ago incorrect?   
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  I will not say it is incorrect, I mean if I would 
not remember in details this document, but I am sure I was 
required to as an Acting CEO. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  To sign this document. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes but I understand.  We can see for 
ourselves you are not suggesting that this is a fabrication is 
it? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No I am not suggesting it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, okay. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  It was not even created by … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  If we accept that it is not a, that it is a 
genuine document that was signed by you, your evidence 
earlier that you, that you were only involved, you were only 
informed after the agreements had been finalised and 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 112 of 404 
 
signed,  you believe by Mr Mantsha that cannot be correct.  
In fact you can see that it was signed by yourself, is that 
correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes, except I do not remember.  I am not 
sure who signed them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But it turns out … 
MR NTSHEPE:  Now it turns out that it is me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  So I am not now – it is my signature, 
so … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I am not saying that it is not my signature.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right and – sorry Mr Ntshepe what? 
MR NTSHEPE:  This is 2016, so I would not remember this 
thing, totally declare it.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I understand that. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Documents and whatever, whatever, which 
documents I have signed. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I understand that Mr Ntshepe.  So I 
am just simply asking you if it is appropriate to correct your 
earlier evidence that you only heard after the event that the 
agreements had been signed by somebody. 
MR NTSHEPE:  By somebody else? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 113 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Oh no.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Somebody else signed it. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I correct it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You correct it? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And do you remember whether you have 
signed 
only 
this 
settlement 
agreement 
relating 
to 
Mr 
Mhlontlo or whether you signed each one of the settlement 
10 
agreements involving the other two executives? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair I have to check.  I recall … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Because it is such a long time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR NTSHEPE:  That is why I gave you the answer I gave 
you because I honestly I did not ...  (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am a little surprised by you saying 
you do not remember.  I would have thought that the 
suspension 
and 
the 
departure 
of 
these 
three 
senior 
20 
executives from Denel was something quite important and I 
think it made … 
MR NTSHEPE:  News. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It made news, it was on the  public 
domain. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 114 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so on.  I would have thought that if 
you were the one who signed the settlement agreements, 
you would not remember that.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Remember the ...  (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would not, you would not forget that 
you are the one who signed the settlement agreements 
relating to these … 
MR NTSHEPE:  (Indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it would have been something 
10 
quite momentous at the time. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I am not lying sir.  I did not remember until I 
saw this.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I signed, I used to sign a lot of documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  So it is my signature, I do not deny. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it possible that when you say, when you 
said earlier on you were not involved at all in the processes 
relating 
to 
the 
disciplinary 
process, 
relating 
to 
these 
20 
executives, 
the 
disciplinary 
process 
relating 
to 
these 
executives when you say you were not involved and when 
you said the board never spoke to you.  And when you said 
the Acting Financial Director did not speak to you about the 
settlement 
negotiations 
or the 
settlement 
offers, is it 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 115 of 404 
 
possible that you might be mistaken about that?  And that 
you might have ...  (indistinct). 
MR NTSHEPE:  With this now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  It could. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It could be. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja, because it just sounds strange to 
10 
me that the board, you were the person that the board 
identified as the right … 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As the right person to act in a Senior 
Executive position. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That must mean they had confidence in 
you. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know.  So it just would seem strange if 
20 
they would not keep you informed as to what was happening 
.. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Can I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  With the disciplinary process that was 
taking so long and even when they were thinking of 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 116 of 404 
 
effectively getting rid of these executives that they would not 
have a discussion with you to say look this is what we are 
thinking and maybe get your views because you might say 
well – well with regard to the CEO you can make your own 
decision but I think these other two are good members of the 
management team I would like them to remain you know.  
They whatever.  Or you could have whatever views including 
about the CEO. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Maybe I just answered that question very 
quickly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Let me just come back to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR 
NTSHEPE: 
 
My 
involvement 
was 
keeping 
the 
documentation 
and 
I 
think 
to 
a 
limited 
extent 
the 
administration 
– 
the 
lawyers 
which 
related 
to 
the 
documentation.  And the rest – and if I remember and then 
the rest of the negotiating and the negotiations with this – 
20 
with the employees – in fact it hit me very hard this 
suspension. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR NTSHEPE:  It hit me very hard this suspension. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The suspensions. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 117 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  In fact – yes.  And – but I was asked to act 
and I believe my responsibility had to do with the company.  
The matters relating to my seniors because we – they were 
my … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Although they – we were colleagues but Riaz 
was my senior. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  And we worked very closely.  Very, very 
close.  In fact the – this even affected the relationship we 
had. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes which is very sad for me.  So when that 
happened you know I make a choice it is a – I focus in the 
work that I have been doing and I am doing this work.  And I 
think to a certain extent if I remember then it is 2016 in 
terms of lawyers that they are doing their work or – or where 
we keep the documents that I was involved in.  But in the 
20 
detail of the actually disciplinary itself where they met or I 
have never been there – I do not even know where that was 
so I was not involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Can you attend to the air 
conditioner it is – maybe if it would make such a loud noise.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 118 of 404 
 
Okay Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  So as I understand 
your evidence you were not involved in the negotiations. 
MR NTSHEPE:  For the settlements? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  For settlement. 
MR NTSHEPE:  No I was not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you were not involved in giving 
instructions to the lawyers or to your – any of your 
colleagues in relation to the settlement negotiations. 
MR NTSHEPE:  The money – no I was not involved. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you were not involved in 
discussing let alone giving your views on the possible offers 
to be made or the acceptance of the offers to be made with 
the board members? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No I was not involved. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now I appreciate your evidence 
that you cannot recall – you could not recall until I showed 
you your signature signed in this agreement. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So I cannot ask specifically whether 
20 
you read this agreement. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Well perhaps I can.  Now that you 
remember because you have been shown the page where 
you signed that.  Can you remember whether you looked 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 119 of 404 
 
through this agreement? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I – in fact the reason why I cannot even 
remember that I signed it because I – as I say I signed many 
documents I do not believe I read this document. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I do not even know what – I mean what 
[00:04:38]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but Mr Ntshepe you would not have 
signed an agreement without reading it would you?  Would 
you have done that? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  I trust the individuals sometimes who bring 
me the document.  To have brought the document in good 
faith and they understand exactly what is in it.  And the 
reason that they are asking me to sign is more procedural 
than for me to understand exactly what is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No hang on Mr Ntshepe.  You cannot be 
serious.  An agreement is something very serious. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A colleague says here is an agreement 
sign.  You will not read it you will just sign because you trust 
20 
your colleague? 
MR NTSHEPE:  This agreement in particular I do not 
remember reading it.  The settlement agreement. I am being 
honest. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 120 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Shoo that is dangerous.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Does that perhaps explain why you 
understood 
that 
the 
contents 
of 
the 
memorandum 
of 
understanding were the same as the contents of the 
memorandum of agreement in the VR Laser. 
MR NTSHEPE:  No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You read those. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I mean what worries me Mr Ntshepe is I 
mean as it happens I think with regard to Mr Mhlontlo he was  
- what you were signing was that the company would pay him 
24 months or an amount equivalent to 24 months’ salary plus 
other amounts.  But if you were not – if you were – you were 
prepared to sign without reading it could have been any 
amount that you could have been signing entering into an 
agreement with – you could have been signing an agreement 
that said he was going to be given R100 million. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair I do not believe the people I was 
20 
working with especially Mr Mhlona that he would have been 
devious to do that to me.  I am being honest Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But they might have thought it was fine but 
you would have thought it was not fine. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I tried… 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 121 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  They might have thought there was nothing 
wrong in offering  Mr Mhlontlo for example R100 million so 
they would have thought – they would thought well it is – it is 
fair.  He has been around in this company for X number of 
years and we are not – we have no proof that he has done 
anything wrong. So R100 million is fine.  But if you had read 
and you came across the clause which says he must be 
given that amount you would have said no, no, no, but I am 
not prepared to sign.  I think this is wrong.  But if you do not 
read you will not know that.  You might discover when it is 
10 
too late that you have signed something that you should not 
have signed and you have committed the company to huge 
financial commitments.   
MR NTSHEPE:  I take your point Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I ask you Mr Ntshepe I know you 
cannot recall and it is not fair to expect you to recall every 
single fact but as the Chair has pointed out this was quote a 
momentous situation it was not just a routine one of many 
hundreds of documents that you would have to sign from 
20 
time to time.  These were colleagues that were now leaving 
the employ you say that even their suspension had caused 
you some anxiety and pain.  You were now going to lose 
from the permanent employ of Denel its Group CEO whom 
you would now replace Mr Saloojee and you would lose the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 122 of 404 
 
Group CFO Mr Mhlontlo who you must have worked with 
closely not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  As well as Ms Africa. Does the same 
apply to – sorry you nodded can you just confirm in the 
record you worked for some time with Mr Mhlontlo? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And his departure or his suspension 
also pained you is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And did the same apply to Ms Africa? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now do you recall who this official was 
who came with the document asking you to sign it? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I think it was Finance. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It was Finance? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Can you remember who in Finance? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would – I would think the CFO but I cannot 
totally confirm that. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  The acting CFO at that time was 
Mr Mhlwana. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes and he of course would now be 
replaced by – sorry he would now replace Mr Mhlontlo not 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 123 of 404 
 
so? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now did he tell you even if you 
did not read the document did he tell you boss I would like 
you to please sign this agreement because the board wants 
you to.  You do not need to read it but I can tell you what it 
is about.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Well… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  He must have told you for you to be 
able to trust him surely? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  I think he did but I – I am assuming 
that he did but I cannot recall in detail that this is what he 
said because I will be able to answer in a precise manner to 
say this is what he said. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Well I would like to ask… 
MR NTSHEPE:  But I am sure he did say something.  I mean 
I would not sign a document without him briefing me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And do you recall if he told you 
what amount would be paid or what the package would be in 
terms of the agreement? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Two – say two years. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes it is actually two years – 24 
months. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  As the Chair has pointed out.  Did he 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 124 of 404 
 
tell that when you were signing this you were committing the 
organisation by your signature on behalf of Denel to settle 
with Mr Mhlontlo was R6.6 odd million equivalent to 24 
months in addition to an incentive bonus and in addition to 
the extra month that would still be worked out until the notice 
period.  Did he tell you that this is what it was going to cost 
your organisation Denel if you signed this? 
MR NTSHEPE:  He might have told me but I do not 
remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He might have told you? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  But I do not remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not remember. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well when you add the other amounts 
I think the amount- I think Mr Mhlontlo’s said the amount 
comes to about R9 million altogether but the ex gratia part 
was – or the equivalent of his two years’ salary which 
translated to about R6 million.  R6 million something.  So 
that is what you were signing, committing the company to.  
And then included in the other amounts in addition to the R6 
20 
million was an incentive bonus and I asked him the question 
whether the policies or rules were to the effect that you get 
an incentive bonus if you are recognised as having done 
your job well.  He said yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 125 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You accept that? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  But in this case Mr 
Ntshepe Mr Mhlontlo had not done either well or badly in his 
job for the past year almost because he had been suspended 
during that period yet he was paid a further I believe it was 
R1.6 million if you look at clause 11 on page 731 is 
amounting to R1  656 411.00 that is in addition to the R6.625 
million that he would be paid as the Chairperson has pointed 
10 
out as an ex gratia payment.  So the – so the bonus seems 
to have been called a bonus even though it would not have 
been an incentive for anything because he was now leaving 
and where he had worked for the past year. 
MR NTSHEPE:  No he did work up until September – he did 
– Chair he did work up until September. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Up to September. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja because the year starts in April up until 
September.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  But this was not… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  This – ja it was not pro rata was it?  Well 
does it get calculated according to the financial year? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or calendar year? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes according to the performance in that 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 126 of 404 
 
financial year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In that financial year. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see now for – he – they were 
suspended in September 2015 that would have been about 
six months before that financial year ended but the payment 
was happening I think in about August of 2016 in regard to 
Mr Mhlontlo.  And from the beginning of that financial year in 
April up to August he had not worked because he was on 
suspension. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in regard to the previous financial year 
it is about six months that he had not worked that is the 
2015/2016 financial year.  In regard to the 2016/2017 
financial year he had not worked for eight months before – 
no, no, no for about six months before he left.  So in each 
financial year he had not worked for six months or so. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  In fact Chair if I may  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Draw the attention of the witness to 
Clause 11 at the end which in fact seems to clarify the point 
at which it was to be paid.  It says he would paid payable at 
the same time as with the rest of the employees no later 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 127 of 404 
 
than 31 October 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Nthsepe what I would like to put to 
you is that it seems highly improbable that you would have 
been unaware of at least the ballpark figure that was to be 
paid to Mr Mhlontlo in terms of the settlement. Firstly 
because it would have been reckless for you as Group CEO 
to sign anything that was committing the organisation to 
substantial amounts without knowing what they are.  The 
Chair has already asked you that question.  Do you want to 
10 
add anything to what you have said? 
MR NTSHEPE:  What I am saying Chair is that I think Mr 
Odwa I cannot – Odwa Mhlwana would have … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry – I am sorry just repeat that. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I think Mr Odwa Mhlwana who was the CF – 
acting CFO might have briefed me about this document and 
in terms of the amounts I do not remember I have to be 
honest.  I do not remember exactly what amounts they – the 
settlement was.  And I believed because of the position 
where I was sitting it was necessary for me to sign this 
20 
document as tabulated here.  Because it would have had to 
be signed at highest level in the organisation.  But they – the 
exact amount of the settlement I cannot – I cannot vouch to 
that.  But I know exactly what the amount is. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes my question was – my question 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 128 of 404 
 
was phrased deliberately on the basis that you would at least 
to have known what the ballpark figure was.  Maybe not the 
exact rands and cents but that you would have known that it 
would have been 24 months equivalent and you would have 
known how much Mr Mhlontlo was earning not so roughly? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes he was – yes I knew – I would not know 
roughly – I would not know yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And you would have known also 
that – that he was getting the other benefits and I put it to 
you that only must you have found that out because it would 
10 
have been reckless for you to sign it otherwise.   But 
secondly is it not a matter of simple human nature that you 
as a colleague of these individuals who are now leaving you 
are – you have been anxious when they were suspended. 
They have now been facing a disciplinary process which 
never gets to the point that it is actually starts let along 
concludes.  You were paying – you as acting GCEO were 
allowing the organisation to pay them during this period of 
extended suspension no so?  Correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Not me as such paying I believe that 
20 
because the ultimate accountability of the organisation is the 
board and the board was paying them this money. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  But you were aware that they 
were being paid during this period by Denel. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I knew there was a settlement but I knew…. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 129 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No, no.  No Mr Ntshepe we are at cross 
purposes I am sorry to interrupt.  I do not mean to be rude.  I 
am talking about the payment while they were being 
suspended – while they were on suspension.  You must have 
known that they were being suspended on full pay. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes, yes I did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  So you knew that this process 
that you were not involved in suspend the decision to 
suspend them – or the decision to pay them during 
suspension or to negotiate a settlement.  You were on the 
10 
side lines because the board was deciding that and you gave 
no input according to your evidence. 
MR NTSHEPE:  The input I never gave an input in terms of 
the firstly the settlement I never gave an input. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  In terms of the disciplinary process itself. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I am summarising what you have 
said about this already. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We do not need to go over that again if 
you do not mind.  So – but what I am saying to you now 
surely it is significant as the Chair was suggesting to you 
earlier.  It must have been significant to you whether as 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 130 of 404 
 
GCEO in your official capacity or even just in your normal 
human capacity as an individual you must have thought wow 
I am glad to hear that the board has resolved this with Mr 
Mhlontlo .  Did you feel that? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I am not sure if I was glad but 
because… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But you were aware that they – they 
were reaching the settlement. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes there was a settlement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Because there was an end of the whole 
process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  This cloud that was hanging over 
Denel. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Executive team. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes it was yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Was now being resolved correct? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes there was a settlement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And money was going to be paid 
to Mr Mhlontlo.  Surely just at the level of human curiosity let 
alone as Group Chief Executive you would have been 
curious to know is Mr Mhlontlo going to leave without any 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 131 of 404 
 
pay or is he going to be paid a package and what is it?  How 
much is he going to get paid?  Maybe not down to the rands 
and cents but roughly how much. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Being honest I did not – I means even as 
Group Executive or as the Chief Executive or as a human 
being I must. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Both. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would – I trusted that the CFO whatever he 
put and agreed on the settlement with the board is genuinely 
enough it is not an issue whereby I should come and 
10 
interfere.  I believe it was genuine enough. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Are you saying you saw the figures or 
you were told by Mr Mhlontlo – sorry Mr Mhlwana the ball 
park figure that was going to be paid and you did not – you 
did not interfere. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I have to be honest.  I do not remember. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You do not remember. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Alright.  Thank you.  May I just 
ADV HYDE:  Well – oh. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry Chair after you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Did you ever form a view as to 
whether 
the 
board’s 
decision 
to 
suspend 
these 
three 
executives was justified or fair?  Did you ever form a view on 
that issue at the – during – before they left – the three 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 132 of 404 
 
executives left? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair with respect and with respect for the 
people who were involved can you allow me not to answer 
that question? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know if I will allow you. But 
let me ask you another question.  Did you -  did you ever 
form a view whether it was justified – the board was justified 
in giving them the amounts of money that it gave them 
effectively to get rid of them because I do not  think it is 
anything else other than that? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  I formed a view in terms of the process 
being completed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please just start – just start again. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair I formed a view for the process being 
completed that now we can – it is either I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You formed a view after? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes when – yes 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  The process had been completed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  I say largely I was not involved directly into 
the process of the suspension because I could have been 
conflicted because they were my colleagues, they were very 
close with me and – and that would be left to the board to 
decide how they going to execute that action.  However I 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 133 of 404 
 
was the in a sense as I say a custodian of the documentation 
of all the documentation that was involved.  Forming a view 
about the fairness or the unfairness of the suspension… 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I will allow you not to express a view 
on the suspension but I think I will – I would want to find out 
whether you formed a view or not on whether the board was 
justified in paying out the amounts that it paid out to them to 
effectively get rid of them? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Now that I know no it was too much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You thought it was too much? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Now that I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now – yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but at that time did you have a view 
whether the board – whether the board was justified in 
paying so much money in order to get rid of them. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Usually if you I think an executive leaves 
who has a five year contract it is either you buy him out.  So 
this could have been a problem – the process of buying the 
executives out.  Yes the amounts – the amounts. But if it was 
20 
just an ex gratia amount to get rid of them I do not think that 
would have been the correct  
CHAIRPERSON:  Justified. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Justification.  But if you buying out the 
contract because you have a contract with the individual I 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 134 of 404 
 
think 
that 
is 
a 
procedure 
which 
happens 
in 
other 
organisations.  So I would – would not have opposed that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course even if you are talking about 
buying out a contract which effectively means if you had a 
five year contract with – with us. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And after you have worked for one year we 
do not want you anymore.  We say we will pay you for the 
balance of the period you know.  But even on – even on that 
you would – it would be necessary would it not be to make 
10 
an assessment whether it is justified because it might be a 
lot of money that you are going to spend.  Not your money 
company’s money. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  Mr Mhlontlo was I do not know – I do 
not want to say it in public how much he was earning. He 
was earning money equivalent into – for two years equivalent 
to the money which was paid out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but what I am saying is the fact that a 
20 
company or a board might resort to what you call buying out 
that on its own should not – does not indicate that it is 
justified or not justified.  It depends on what the reasons are 
and so on is it not? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 135 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So then I go back to this – then I go to this 
question.  You being the person that was asked to sign the 
settlement agreements was it not your duty to satisfy 
yourself 
whether 
it 
was 
justified 
to 
enter 
into 
these 
settlement 
agreements 
with 
these 
terms 
including 
the 
amounts to be paid to them.  Because in the end even 
though the decision may have come from the board I take it 
that as Group CEO as the person who was required to sign 
you would have – you would have been entitled if you 
thought that this was wasteful expenditure or something like 
10 
that to say I am not signing.  It is not in the interest of the 
company that this - such large amounts be paid in the 
circumstances.  I am not prepared to append my signature. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Chair as I said in Mr Mhlontlo case the ball 
park amount to which I have been told is within his salary.  I 
will have to find out the – what the others authorised were 
paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  And the – in terms of his bonus I think I did 
not see anything wrong.  Or do I see anything wrong for him 
20 
to get a bonus all the time that he worked. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but the ex gratia? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ex gratia? 
CHAIRPERSON:  24 months’ salary for him to leave? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Well he – is that ex gratia or is it a buying 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 136 of 404 
 
out? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Called it ex gratia in the settlement 
agreement. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the settlement agreement that you 
signed. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes it is buying out what the – I am sure the 
contract was a… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was not the balance of his contract? 
MR NTSHEPE:  It was not. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja his contract was – he said what was left 
was something like 30 months and what they gave him was 
the 24 months meant that he lost about six months. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MR NTSHEPE:  The question… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So my question is whether you do not 
accept that you had a duty in regard to whatever settlement 
agreements you signed as Group CEO to satisfy yourself that 
this was justified because otherwise you could be committing 
20 
the company to pay an amount to make payments that would 
be fruitless expenditure. 
MR NTSHEPE:  It is correct Chair and as you have explained 
the amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 137 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Though they might call it ex gratia in my 
mind it is buying out of the contract.  You say it is 30 months 
and they paid him for 24 months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you would have had – you had proper 
reasons for wanting to buy an employee, is it not?  You 
cannot just buy out an employee as you please. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, that is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   There must be proper reasons. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I am sure you would, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So my question goes to exactly that, 
10 
whether you did not think it was part of your duty to satisfy 
yourself that you are signing something that you could 
defend ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, there is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...namely, were there proper reasons for 
this to be done by the board. 
MR NTSHEPE:   The issue, Chair.  That matter, as 
Mr Mhlontlo indicated.  It was taking a long time to be 
resolved.  And not only that.  It was 
affecting the 
organisation because it was in the news almost every day 
20 
and that matter needed to be closed.   
 
And to me, those were very strong reasons to say we 
need to resolve this matter.  And if we buy out the contract, 
that of Mr Mhlontlo, in the end, although it is called ex-
gratia.... 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 138 of 404 
 
 
I have no objection because I think it would have been a 
matter of resolving the matter, the issue and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But I ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   I would not even think that it is wasteful 
expenditure because in essence he is contracted for the next 
13-months(?).   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am not sure if that is a proper 
answer because what if the right thing to do, which is in the 
best interest of the company, is to allow them to come back 
if the company cannot put up charges against them?   
10 
 
They were suspended on the basis that they are going to 
face charges.  Why was it taking so long if there were proper 
grounds for them to be charged?   
 
If there were proper grounds for them to suspended, in 
the first place.  So did that not indicate that there were no 
proper grounds for them to have been suspended in the first 
place?   
 
Did that no indicate that there were no proper grounds to 
sustain the charges?  Because, otherwise, you just call them 
to a disciplinary hearing, they face the charges.  If they are 
20 
found guilty and they are dismissed, that is it.  If they are 
found not guilty, they resume their work.  That is it.   
 
Why must there be a payment of millions of money to 
them without determining whether they are guilty or the 
allegations that are made against them? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 139 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, the ultimate decision to pay them out, 
it did not come from me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  I understand that. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  The matter to say that they should 
come back or not come back, it was out of my, can I say, 
jurisdiction.  I am not sure if it is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But would you not be able to say, if you 
took the trouble to look at the matter and say:  Why is the 
company reaching a point where it must pay out such 
amounts?   
10 
 
And you ask yourself where is the justification.  They 
were – we were told that they were being suspended to face 
disciplinary hearing.  Why are they not facing disciplinary 
hearings?   
 
I am not going to sign if this is being used illegitimately 
instead of letting them face a hearing and let them be found 
guilty or innocent.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, I am not sure if that is totally true 
that they did not face any hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, there was no hearing.  That is the 
20 
evidence I have heard.  There were charges that were 
formulated and sent to them. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 And 
Mr Mhlontlo 
has 
testified 
and 
Mr Saloojee testified last year that they were keen to face 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 140 of 404 
 
the charges and there is correspondence from their attorneys 
to the attorneys of the board, where they were saying:  We 
are ready.  We actually want the charges.  We want the 
hearing.  We want to clear our names.   
 
And at some stage, the board instead of agreeing to 
that, said no, let us have a mediation.  They agreed but what 
they wanted, as they have testified, is a disciplinary hearing 
where they would be cleared.   
 
Actually, if I remember correctly, when Mr Mhlontlo was 
testifying he even said, even though he took the settlement, 
10 
the amount, he signed the settlement – he was still 
concerned that in the public domain, his name had not been 
cleared because Denel had publicly said certain things about 
them when they were suspended.  And I think when they 
were – when they departed. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I hear you Chair what you are saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MR NTSHEPE:   But I do not think it is totally ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you do not think that you would have 
refused to sign ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...if you did not agree that they should be 
made 
– 
given 
those 
amounts 
to 
leave? 
 
You 
think 
...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, looking ...[intervenes]  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 141 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...as long as the board made that 
decision, you would have gone along? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I would have gone along. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  Mr Kennedy.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  May I then just in 
conclusion on this point Chair, ask the witness this? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You have given evidence earlier in 
relation to Ms Mahlalela to the effect that if she had a 
different view to her colleagues about non-compliance with 
10 
procurement and whether the job should have been done in-
house.   
 
You felt that it was obligatory that it was required of her 
that she should have recorded this and brought it to the 
attention of her superiors or even the Ministry of Public 
Enterprises.   
 
Why does the same not apply to you if you have now 
expressed the view that you think that the ex-gratia payment 
of R 6,6 million of public funds at a time when Denel was not 
in a healthy financial state?   
20 
 
Was it not incumbent on you to have drawn to, at least, 
the attention of the board, let alone the minister, that you felt 
that this was too much.  This was inappropriate.   
 
And as the Chairperson has pointed out.  If there is 
substance to the charges, let the process run and let it run 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 142 of 404 
 
quickly.  If there is not substance to the charges, drop the 
charges and let them resume their jobs.   
 
Was it not incumbent on you to express any concerns 
you had or you are saying you did not have concerns? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, the amounts that have been – the 
one that I have been quoted in, for me, it looks like it was 
the buying out of the contracts and the board was very much 
aware of the whole process, what is happening  And for me 
to be – to go along with the board as an acting...   
 
In fact, I was not even a board member then.  I was 
10 
acting.  And they have charged with this responsibility.  I 
believe the board took their decision to say let them settle 
and my job was to run the company, not deal with the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But your job... [laughing]  Running the 
company includes running the company properly, and it is 
not running the company properly if you are going to play 
millions of the company’s money to people when there is no 
justification and you do not even want to find out whether 
there is justification.   
20 
 
Running the company properly includes making sure that 
whatever decisions you make including signing a settlement 
agreement with an executive to leave, that you know that 
there are proper grounds.  It does not mean just going along 
with what the board says.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 143 of 404 
 
 
Actually, as Group CEO, as far as I am concerned, you 
are supposed to be able to take a view on certain issues, 
even if it means disagreeing with the board and say I do not 
agree.  That is what you are required when you are CEO.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And therefore, in terms of these, I am 
surprised that you do not seem to – these settlement 
agreements, you do not seem to have taken the trouble, 
even to read the settlement agreements, to see whether the 
terms of the settlement agreements were such that you 
10 
would be comfortable to append your signature to the 
settlement agreements.  It seems that you took the view that 
whatever the board wants, I will facilitate.  I will sign.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Precisely ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not think that is a proper approach or 
attitude of a Group CEO. 
MR NTSHEPE:   As I said Chair.  My job was to act as an 
acting GCEO at that point in time.  The settlements, I was 
not involved in, firstly, in negotiating them.  I think 
Mr Mhlontlo said that.  I mean, we met with Mr Odwa 
20 
Mhlwana.   
 
And secondly, I fully trusted our CFO that he will do the 
correct and he will know exactly what it is that he is settling 
on.   
 
And from what you are telling me, is that, actually it is 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 144 of 404 
 
between the ballpark of what I would have expected him to 
pay.   
 
I mean, in terms of the 13/30-months(?) that he still had 
the contract with notwithstanding his salary, now much he 
was earning per year and the bonus because he did work I 
think six months or so.   
 
And I think if it is one point something, it was prorated.  
I am not sure.  I think it was prorated.  I would not remember 
the details, ja.   
 
But I do not find any anomaly in saying that the 
10 
settlement 
came 
to 
these 
amounts. 
 
I 
mean, 
senior 
executives in organisations, they earn salaries whereby 
when you have to buy out - somebody’s contract, the amount 
is huge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us leave out the issue of buying 
out Mr Ntshepe because the settlement agreement is here. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it does not talk about buying out.  It 
talks about an ex-gratia payment.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The board decided that they should get 
ex-gratia payments.  Actually, on the basis of this settlement, 
on the basis of the fact that you are the one who signed this 
settlement agreement, one would be entitled to say, you are 
the one who decided to give Mr Mhlontlo an ex-gratia 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 145 of 404 
 
payment of so much because that is where your signature is. 
MR NTSHEPE:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So.  But I am focussing on your approach, 
your attitude towards the board and the singing of the 
settlement agreement.  And I am saying, it is a bad thing for 
a CEO of a company to sign a settlement agreement without 
reading it.  Number one. 
 
Number two.  I am saying, it is a bad thing for a CEO of 
a company to sign such an agreement to effectively get rid of 
executives without satisfying himself whether there were 
10 
proper grounds for getting rid of the executives because 
effectively, these amounts were paid so that they could go. 
 
I am saying – I am suggesting to you that a CEO who 
looks after the interest of the company, would want to satisfy 
himself whether there are proper grounds. 
 
Because if there were not proper grounds, and if it is 
seems to him that it was not in the interest of the company 
to enter into this transaction or to this settlement because 
there are no proper grounds. 
 
He would be duty bound to say to the board this is 
20 
wrong, this is not in the interest of the company and I am not 
prepared to sign the settlement agreement.  Do you want to 
comment on that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   My comment Chair would basically say that 
the circumstances at that time were very difficult in Denel 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 146 of 404 
 
whereby you – we needed to move forward than standing still 
and having a lot of noise around Denel at that point in time. 
 
If and when the negotiations came to the issue of 
settlement, I did not oppose it.  And once the settlement 
amount has been calculated, that was to me, that was the 
responsibility of Finance because they – especially the 
financial director. 
 
And from the figures that you are telling me or the SC is 
telling me, it was within the ballpark.  It is not an 
irresponsible 
amount. 
 
I 
mean, 
six 
point 
six 
from 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but that is part of my concern 
Mr Ntshepe.  You seem to keep on wanting to look at how 
much only whereas, although that factor, I am saying the 
first thing is.   
 
You have to satisfy yourself whether getting rid of these 
executives is the right thing.  Are there proper grounds?  
Because if there are no proper grounds, it might not be in 
the interest of the company to get rid of them.   
MR NTSHEPE:   We are coming back to the issue of saying.  
20 
Basically, the opinion to ask me:  Did I think it was a correct 
thing to suspend them or not? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  It is different.  You remember 
I asked you two questions. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, yes.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 147 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Two opinions on two issues.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Firstly it was whether the suspension were 
fair. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then it was, whether it was justified to 
get rid of them and get them paid the amounts that they were 
paid. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I said with regard to whether the 
10 
suspensions were fair, I am quite happy not to insist that you 
give your opinion.  But I said with regard to the other one.  I 
would like your opinion and based on that, because you were 
the person signing.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And therefore, signing the settlement 
agreement and therefore committing the company to pay 
millions of money.  And I was saying to you, before you could 
do that, you would be expected to see whether there are 
proper grounds to do this because otherwise, you would be 
20 
doing something that you should not be doing. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  The...  I think we are going to go 
around the circle Chair because I am going to say again that 
there was a lot of noise in the system. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 148 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I remembered what you said about 
noise. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is your justification? 
MR NTSHEPE:   And the point is.  We needed Denel to move 
forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  No, on that, I think we do not 
10 
have to go back.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what you advanced to justify 
signing the settlement agreement. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And not looking into whether there were 
proper grounds to get rid of the executives or not. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I do not think I had the mandate to look at 
that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not think it was your place? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Within my scope of work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   If there is proper grounds or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even if you would be the one to account 
because I guess you were the accounting officer, were you 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 149 of 404 
 
not? 
MR TSHEPE:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   As Group CEO. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja, the accounting ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Accounting Officer. 
MR NTSHEPE:   ...is the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there is an accounting authority and an 
accounting officer, is it not? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Were you not the accounting officer 
10 
in the board? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Accounting authorities? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, because I represented the board into 
the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I would take myself within the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Kennedy.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  I would just like to touch 
on one last question on this and then I just have one final 
20 
brief topic about the termination of his own employment.  I 
understand you are hesitant to express any opinions as to 
the grounds to justify then being paid out to leave the 
service.   
 
But Mr Mhlontlo in particular, has raised as a concern, 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 150 of 404 
 
why was he being paid such a big amount if he was guilty of 
it, of the misconduct?  Why did they not complete the 
disciplinary process?  And why were they so keen to get rid 
of him?   
 
What he has suggested, and Mr Saloojee also hinted at 
this in his evidence, is that the reason why there was such a 
desire to get rid of them, rather than to actually discipline 
them, if they were genuinely guilty of misconduct, where was 
the case?  Where was the evidence?   
 
So what they have suggested is that they were being 
10 
removed deliberately from Denel because they were seen as 
an obstacle to certain transactions that later proved so 
controversial. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I do not agree with that Chair.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you able then to express an 
opinion on this? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I can express an opinion on this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On what basis? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes?  Yes.   
MR NTSHEPE:   There was a transaction for Dubai BA 
20 
Systems which later became Land Systems South Africa 
which cost the company R 855 million.  And there were two 
banks that were involved  One was Nedbank and the other 
one, I think it was ABSA.   
 
Nedbank was given the impression that we only need a 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 151 of 404 
 
certain bridging fund amount which we will be able to pay in 
six months.  And we do have the other amount.  It is the 
Denel money.   
 
In other words, Nedbank was going to fork out the 450 or 
455 and the 400 is Denel money whereas the truth was 
Denel did not have money.  Actually, we were struggling to 
pay the suppliers at that point in time.   
 
So firstly, I cannot believe that the issue was that they 
were just got rid of because they wanted to get rid of them 
because they are not doing any – something.   
10 
 
But I think, for me, that was the major, major issues 
because they could not – when it went to the board, they 
could not account exactly, firstly why would you not tell the 
truth, the bank, that you are also going to borrow the 400 
from ABSA?  You do not have the money.  So you got it from 
ABSA but you tell Nedbank that no I do have the money.   
 
And then, the time that when this thing was reported, I 
think 250 or 255, within two weeks was due and the board 
heard it for the first time at that board meeting.   
 
I think that – this thing started probably at the Audit and 
20 
Risk and when it came to the board meeting.  That is when 
the first time they heard that in two weeks’ time Denel must 
pay Nedbank the 255 million and we did not have it or Denel 
did not have it.   
 
So I think that, for me...  In fact, I even sat with the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 152 of 404 
 
Group CEO outside the meetings because they wanted an in 
camera meeting.  And then we sat outside for two hours and 
– because we got along very well.   
 
We were not even thinking suspension at that time 
whereas they were talking about this issue that the matter of 
the money being due in two weeks’ time and we do not know 
where we are going to get the money from. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you saying that they have done 
something wrong?  
MR NTSHEPE:   In terms ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Therefore, the suspension ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   For me ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe...  But that they should face 
disciplinary charges and that they...  Ja, that they should 
face disciplinary charges, was justified because you – this is 
what you are aware of what they have done wrong.  Is that 
what you are saying? 
MR NTSHEPE:   For me Chair.  Telling the board in two 
weeks’ time that they have to R 255 million was a serious 
matter and the money is not there.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but what I am saying is ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   And Chair, the decision ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You are suggesting that they have done 
something wrong. 
MR NTSHEPE:   In that particular issue, yes. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 153 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And now if they have done 
something wrong, why were the charges not pressed against 
them and persuade? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I think they were pressed, if I remember 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, but we have just told you there is 
evidence here that there was no hearing that took place.  
Actually, the fact that you signed settlement agreements 
indicates that no hearing was concluded.  Actually, they say - 
Mr Mhlontlo and Mr Saloojee say no disciplinary hearing 
10 
started in substance.   
 
There were dates when it was supposed to start and 
when they arrived, there were – the company had failed to 
give them documents and they had a discussion about 
documents.  But they were ready to face the charges. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, with due respect.  I think there were 
hearings.  It is not true that there were...  There might not 
have been a final decision making but there were hearings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But are you saying that there were 
witnesses who gave evidence in disciplinary hearings? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Because we agreed that they were 
suspended.  We agreed that they were given charges.  The 
charge sheets, they were given that.  And we – I have just 
told 
you 
that 
they 
said, 
dates 
were 
fixed 
when 
the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 154 of 404 
 
disciplinary hearings were supposed to or was supposed to 
proceed but it did not proceed.   
 
And on one occasion when it was supposed to proceed, 
there was an issue about documents which the company had 
failed to provide or they provided documents which could not 
– they could not make sense out of them and then the 
hearing did not proceed.  So are you saying that there were 
witnesses who gave evidence in disciplinary hearings? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I think there were hearings.  Whether there 
witnesses in the final or...  As we know, there was no final 
10 
hearing whereby a decision by the company was made but 
the – because this matter took a year.  So there was not only 
one meeting as far as I remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we are not talking about meetings, 
hearings.  Hearings are where witnesses give evidence. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what I am talking about. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am telling you that both Mr Mhlontlo and 
Mr Saloojee have testified here and said no such thing took 
20 
place.  So you are saying, you think there were hearings.  So 
I want to know whether you mean – you are denying what 
they are saying, namely no witnesses gave evidence. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I beg to differ.  In my understanding, there 
were hearings ...[intervenes]  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 155 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But do you know for sure or did you hear 
from somebody because these were the people who were 
facing allegations.  These are the people who would have 
taken part in the inquiries.  They have come here and said 
under oath:  No witnesses gave evidence.  Are you saying 
that you are disputing what they said?  Were you at those 
hearings? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I was not in those hearings Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So on what basis can you dispute what 
they are saying? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   As I said, I was keeping the documentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  And the documentation show that 
there were hearings whereby Mr Mhlontlo met I think Denel 
lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Do not talk about meeting.  Talk 
about witnesses giving evidence.  Because meetings did 
happen but not hearings.  That is what they say. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Well, witnesses in this case would be the 
banks, I think. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The witnesses in this case, for me, it would 
be the banks because they were the ones who were being 
owed the money.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but do you know whether witnesses 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 156 of 404 
 
gave evidence? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I do not know that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So I am saying to you, therefore, 
they – why if they have done wrong, according to what you 
say, why the company did not call witnesses, have a 
disciplinary hearing and subject them to a hearing and make 
a finding rather than paying them millions without them 
facing those allegations? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The final decision Chair was not mine.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  I accept that it was not yours but 
10 
I come back to this question.  If you signed the settlement 
agreement, certainly you signed Mr Mhlontlo’s one, to say 
the company will pay him R 6 million when you knew that 
according to you he had done something terrible wrong?  
How would you justify paying him?   
 
Signing the settlement, to say he must be paid so much 
and even say he must be paid an incentive bonus when you 
did so, knowing that as far as you are concerned, he was 
guilty of something serious? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I cannot judge Chair that he was guilty or 
20 
not guilty.  I am just stating the facts as they were at that 
point in time.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you say you were aware that as 
far as you were concerned they had done something wrong 
and you think it was serious.  And one would have thought 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 157 of 404 
 
that when an employer is aware of that, they would put – 
they would subject and employee to a proper disciplinary 
hearing rather than ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...pay them large amounts of money when 
they think they have done something wrong.  It does not... 
MR NTSHEPE:   I can speculate if you allow me, maybe why 
in the end it never came into a finality in terms of 
disciplinary? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not know why you want to 
10 
speculate.  [laughing]  I do not think you should speculate.  
If you do not know the reason, you do know the reason. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Okay I can leave it, seeing that I do not 
know the reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I do not know the final reason, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  Mr Kennedy, I know we 
have gone beyond one o’clock but I do not know how far we 
are from finishing with... 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I think five minutes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us try and finish so that he can 
be released and then when we come back, we take another 
witness.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Just a final question 
on this point.  As Group Chief Executive Officer or be it 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 158 of 404 
 
acting at that stage, you were the accounting officer, as you 
confirmed earlier.  In terms of the law, is it not correct that 
the accounting officer, yourself, was responsible to ensure 
proper disciplining of staff? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Of staff, yes but not of board members. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were they board members? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, they were board members. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So you are saying that you had 
no responsibility to ensure that they were disciplined if they 
were ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Board members ...[intervenes]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry.  Please do not interrupt while I 
am putting a question.  I will you give an opportunity to 
answer it once I am done.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Apology. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just please bear in mind that when it is 
recorded, the poor person who has to transcribe this, will not 
be able to work out who is saying what.  Are you saying that 
the fact that these individuals, Mr Saloojee, Mr Mhlontlo and 
20 
Ms Africa were not only employees of Denel but board 
members that disabled you from disciplining them? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well... 
MR NTSHEPE:   I did not – if I can expand? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 159 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, if that was your view I 
understand it.  Whether that is legally correct is perhaps 
something that can be argued at a later stage.  Mr Mhlontlo 
(sic) I would like now to pick up on something you 
mentioned earlier.  You said that you were charged for not 
doing your – for allegations of not doing your duties in 
relation to the board.  Did I hear you right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, no, I did not …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I misheard you.  You resigned from 
your position as Group CEO. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just shortly after the new board had 
come in, it is after the board under Mr Mantsha that ceased 
to hold office. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And a new board under Ms Malahlela 
as its Chairperson came in, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now Ms Malahlela has given 
evidence before the Commission that you and others in 
20 
particular Mr Mhlwana who were implicated in allegations 
of wrongdoing that that was being investigated and in fact 
a disciplinary process was brought against Ms Mhlwana 
who was then dismissed, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 160 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But she testified that although 
the investigation was underway and the likelihood was that 
you would have been disciplined, you abruptly resigned 
and thereby avoided a disciplinary process. 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, it is not because I avoided the 
disciplinary process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So why did you resign? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I resigned for one, personal health 
reasons because by that time my blood pressure, my sugar 
was a mess and I realised that I have to make a decision 
10 
but also it – I mean, I could see that the new board and the 
old board, there are huge differences and maybe another 
person can come and take the leadership especially in the 
CEO position.  I do not have any other income, it was not 
an easy decision but I – sometimes you make difficult 
decisions because of the circumstances.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair, we have no further 
questions of this witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I need to mention something to you, Mr 
Ntshepe as being – as part of being fair to you, over the 
20 
past two and a half or so years I have heard a lot of 
evidence about what has been happening in various SOEs, 
that includes Denel because I heard some evidence last 
year already in regard to Denel.  One of the matters that 
has caught my attention, particularly of late, is the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 161 of 404 
 
question of the type of people that should get appointed to 
boards of SOEs, what should South Africa look for, what 
type of people should be part of boards of SOEs because 
one of the things that – one of the questions that arises 
within the context of allegations of state capture as well as 
high levels of corruption that has happened in various 
SOEs and government departments, particularly SOEs, is 
whether these SOEs had the right kind of people in the 
boards but also the right kinds of people in senior 
management such as Chief Executive Officers and Chief 
10 
Financial Officers and Chief Procurement Officers, those 
type of people because one is forced to ask the question 
how was it possible that some of the things that have 
happened in SOEs, in terms of corruptions and certain 
corruption in certain transactions, how was it possible for 
these things to happen while all of these people were 
there?  Maybe some of them were part – were party to 
some of those transactions and irregularities.  Maybe some 
were not party but they did not do their job the way they 
should have done their job.  You understand? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   I hear what you are saying, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is within that context that in part I 
am concerned about your evidence that you may have 
signed a settlement agreement without reading it and that 
you may have just gone along with what the board said 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 162 of 404 
 
what the board wanted because seems to me that Group 
CEOs for these SOEs must be people of a certain type and 
must be people who will decide this wrong, this is right and 
if it is wrong, I’m not going to allow it and even if comes 
from the board, if I think it is wrong, it is wrong, I will not 
be party to it.   
Now then a CEO who will say well, as long the 
board wants, that is what the board wants, I will go along.  
So I am mentioning that because at least part of it 
emerged from your evidence and it concerns me.  I do not 
10 
know if you want to say anything.  You might not have 
anything to say but if you do want to say something I am 
giving you that chance. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Thank you, Chair.  I would conclude by 
saying that I do admit that mistakes were made.  I cannot 
deny that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is important to make that admission 
because somebody who does not see that a mistake was 
made or mistakes were made makes it difficult to say how 
do we resolve things?  But if somebody at least is big 
20 
enough to say I can see that here we made mistakes or I 
made mistakes and I take responsibility for my mistakes 
and for my decisions, at least that person could contribute 
to saying well, what should be done going forward to make 
sure that these things do not happen again, what type of 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 163 of 404 
 
people should occupy certain positions and so on.    But I 
interrupted while you were just saying – you had just said 
you accept that certain mistakes happened. 
MR NTSHEPE:   The perception might be wrong, okay, but 
the perception is that outside and maybe with the people I 
have engaged with is that – is that though mistakes were 
made, does it warrant a hearing such that an individual will 
– must face the whole of South Africa and express 
themselves 
and 
in 
a 
sense 
being 
exposed 
to 
how 
competent or incompetent that individual is, one. 
10 
 
Or could it have been – could it have been another 
method adopted to come to the same conclusions?  I think 
the State Capture Commission did a fantastic job by 
revealing these mistakes.  I would also say that it is – 
sometimes the people who come here especially if you are 
being cross-examined, you feel like a decision has already 
been made, it is just you fitting – you will be asked the 
same question ten times until you come to a point where 
you are required to come to.   
So that is my honest opinion about this matter but 
20 
the issue of correcting the boards, yes, yes.  And it is not 
only in South Africa that the state owned companies have 
problems with boards.  Many countries, actually other 
countries have even got rid of state owned companies and 
privatised them.  So, as a growing democracy, I think we 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 164 of 404 
 
are learning, it is a learning curve where we are going and 
how we are going to get there. 
So I am not saying that there should not have been 
an inquiry, the inquiry is fine.  However …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
There 
is 
a 
perception 
that 
the 
Commission has long made its decisions. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I am being honest that [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, it is… 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a perception that gets articulated by 
certain people from time to time. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not wrong to mention that you 
are aware of that perception. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not wrong for mentioning that. 
MR NTSHEPE:   But I am a citizen of South Africa and I 
grew up in this country, I will abide by the laws of this 
country.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   If I am needed here, that is why I am here, 
I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, thank you for your input, Mr 
Ntshepe.  I mean, we will always try the best we can to 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 165 of 404 
 
treat everyone fairly. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We try. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are not saying that we are perfect, 
we are not perfect but we will keep on trying. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if may be that in the eyes of certain 
people out there when either the evidence leaders or 
myself we ask questions, certain questions, people feel 
10 
uncomfortable about those questions. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is when they think we have 
made up our minds. 
MR NTSHEPE:   It is true that, you know, I mean… 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, certainly as far as I am 
concerned, some of the questions I ask is to actually – 
actually, not some, all of them, is to either get clarification 
or to get an opportunity – to give you or a witness an 
opportunity to give me their side of the story, their own 
20 
perspective.  I could sit here and listen to whatever you 
are saying and in my own mind and say you are talking 
nonsense. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But say nothing, as you nothing. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 166 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, correct, correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then make findings in the report. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which criticise you but you never got a 
chance to try and influence me. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when I put questions, even what you 
might 
as 
difficult 
questions, 
I 
am 
affording 
you 
an 
opportunity to say to me no, that is not the right way of 
looking at it, here is the right way, at least according to me 
10 
as a witness. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know, here is another way and 
therefore influencing my thinking but it seems that some 
would prefer that we just keep quiet and just write the 
report.  So we will do everything we can to be fair to 
everybody but we will not allow that to detract from our 
function to try and establish the truth. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And ask even uncomfortable questions 
20 
just because people will say – will accuse us of having 
made up our minds.  We will do our job and we will ask 
questions but throughout we will be doing our best to be 
fair and I can assure you that there is no decision that has 
been taken but if you are giving evidence and I am 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 167 of 404 
 
concerned about certain things, I am going to ask you and 
you should see that as a benefit because I am raising with 
you something that might be troubling me about your 
evidence and I am giving you a chance to explain it to me 
and if you explain it to me, you are giving me the benefit of 
your side of the story. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You understand? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I totally, totally agree with you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   And I really appreciate for you giving me 
this opportunity to express myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   And it is a pleasure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:    No, thank you very much, Mr Ntshepe, 
for coming to the Commission to assist the Commission, we 
appreciate it very much.  If we should need to ask you 
again to come back we will ask you but I see that your 
20 
legal representative seems to want to say something.  I do 
not know whether he wants to re-examine.  Let me find out 
from him. 
MR FENI:   Chair, I thought I was going to address, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 168 of 404 
 
MR FENI:   I thought the Commission would allow some 
form of …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of re-examination. 
MR FENI:   Of re-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, we do allow it if you would like to re-
examine, we might probably have to do it after lunch if you 
insist 
on 
it 
but 
I 
have 
seen 
that 
more 
and 
more 
practitioners tend to ask one or two question or say no, I 
am covered, but if you want we will give you because you 
are given that right in terms of the regulations. 
10 
MR FENI:   Yes, I think I have got three questions, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.   Well, if it is three I think we can 
take them now so that when we take the lunch break you 
and your client can be released. 
MR FENI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, you may re-examine.  It 
might be convenient if you re-examine from where you are 
if that is convenient for you but if it is not convenient Mr 
Kennedy will allow you space to do so from where he is.  
Just allow somebody to sanitise first? 
20 
 
MR FENI:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
MR FENI:   Mr Ntshepe, it would appear from the last 
questions of my learned friend that a perception has been 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 169 of 404 
 
created to some of the witnesses who came to testify that 
you were chosen to replace Mr Saloojee and to be a 
[indistinct] 17.39.  Did you get that sense? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I hear you. 
MR FENI:   Were you chosen to act as a CEO and 
subsequently appointed a permanent CEO to favour a 
certain or a particular individual or an entity? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I was asked to act and I applied for the 
Group CEO position I believe in a fair manner whereby 
there were other applicants for the job.  So for me to say 
10 
that I was chosen, I would only – it will only apply when I 
was asked not to leave until the meeting, that is when I 
found surprised that I have to act.  But to be a permanent 
CEO, I was not chosen, I still believe I qualified.  It also 
was taken to cabinet. 
MR FENI:   Subsequent to your appointment as an Acting 
GCEO is there anyone in the board who approached you 
and asked you to favour a certain individual or entity in 
your dealings at Denel? 
MR NTSHEPE:   As Acting GCEO, no. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   As GCEO? 
MR NTSHEPE:   As GCEO it was not a long time, Chair, 
and – yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  And but it did not happen either 
during the short time. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 170 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, it did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR FENI:   In your dealings at Denel did you endeavour to 
favour a particular individual or a particular entity? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Of Denel or outside Denel? 
MR FENI:   Outside Denel. 
MR NTSHEPE:   I did not favour any entity outside Denel.  
I, however, was instrumental in helping outside entities to 
have business with Denel or be partners with Denel but I 
did 
not 
favour 
any. 
 There 
were 
– 
as 
a 
business 
10 
development 
and 
new 
business 
development 
my 
responsibility was to create or helped – I would not create 
but 
helped 
to 
create 
partnerships 
with 
companies, 
especially black owned companies to be involved in the 
defence industry. 
MR FENI:   You indicated in your evidence before the 
Chairperson that you – Denel had been involved business 
transactions with VR Laser for quite a while.  Correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   It is correct. 
MR FENI:   For how long? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   As far as I remember, 2003.  2003, 2004. 
MR FENI:   And then there came Salim Essa? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
MR FENI:   Now the question I want to ask you, is why did 
you support the joint venture between Denel and VR 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 171 of 404 
 
Laser? 
MR NTSHEPE:   To me it made sense to get into the Indian 
market, back.  Denel was bruised before.  We had spent a 
lot of money – in fact I think my estimate last time was an 
underestimation, it could have been far more than that.  
And for us to be able to get into the Indian market it was 
difficult now because we had been out for more than 10 
years in the Indian market and it made sense to me that we 
should have a partner who we will share the risk because 
India is not an easy market.  Many companies actually 
10 
even folded because of the Indian market, it is not an easy 
market.  And mitigate the risks to the holding company 
which is Denel Group and if there is any mishap in the 
future because in India mishaps happened very frequently 
if you have a contract, a huge contract.  It only – and only 
be contained in that division and there was also the issue 
of, as I have indicated, the amount of investment that VR 
Laser Asia was prepared to put in fact. 
MR FENI:   You testified that you came to know that Salim 
Essa is associated with the Guptas. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.   
MR FENI:   Did that knowledge have any influence on you 
to support VR Laser in the joint venture with Denel? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I continued as I started when I was 
introduced to Salim Essa and who he associated with, I 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 172 of 404 
 
separated that from the interaction which I was – as it was 
Instructed to maintain the relationship but I cannot deny 
that he was associated with the Guptas. 
MR FENI:   Was there any financial benefit that flowed 
between Denel and VR Laser? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Funding benefit?  There was delivery of 
products, for instance the Casspirs, about 40, 45 Casspirs 
to – Chair, if you allow me, I cannot mention other 
countries because it is very difficult in this environment 
because it can be  - [indistinct] 25.03 a serious issue for 
10 
the country whereby all those Casspirs were manufactured 
by – especially the hulls but the final assembly in terms of 
the integration, you know, the radios and all that was done 
by Denel or other suppliers.  So there was benefit for 
Denel that we were able to meet our contract, then there 
was benefit for I think VR Laser in terms of – I am talking 
VR Laser South Africa, not Asia.  In Asia there was no 
benefit at all but VR Laser South Africa, there was benefit 
for them because it was revenue for them. 
MR FENI:   Are you …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, if you are not done we will 
have to adjourn.  You said three questions, I think you are 
approaching ten, if I am not mistaken. 
MR FENI:   I am almost there, Chair.  I am almost there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you are going to tell me one and it 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 173 of 404 
 
will end up being three.  If you have one more then I will 
allow you to ask that one then we can adjourn but if you 
have got more I think we should adjourn and then your 
punishment will be to have to wait and come back after 
lunch. 
MR FENI:   Chair, let me – can I ask two, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  
MR FENI:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Strictly two. 
MR FENI:   So you are referring to the time when – starting 
10 
from 2003? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
MR FENI:   Would you say you have during your tender as 
a GCEO and Acting GCEO you have acted in the best 
interests of the organisation? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I with all confidence I believe I have 
acted in the interest of the organisation. 
MR FENI:   My second last question.  Chairperson put it 
succinctly that Mr Mlambo was still seized with a decision 
whether or not to approve a request that was made to him.  
20 
Now it appeared that later on, many years thereafter, when 
Mr Mlambo gave testimony in this Commission, that he 
declined to approve the request that was submitted by Ms 
Malahlela because it did not make business sense.  Did Mr 
Mlambo ever mention to you of that [indistinct] 28.26 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 174 of 404 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   When I was doing my consultations with 
the SC I did mention that we never had a discussion with 
Mr Mlambo.  He never mentioned it. 
MR FENI:   What do you make of the fact that Mr Mlambo 
came to this Commission and gave a reason he never gave 
before? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Mr Mlambo said a lot of things which I 
would take personally but as a matured individual, I should 
not.  I think Mr Mlambo, to me, he – he is not grounded 
especially though he has been – had some time in the SCM 
10 
environment but in terms of posturing or presenting himself 
to the company because I do not think he has managed 
that skill to be able to posture himself because he has a lot 
of experience in that, I cannot deny that, but posturing 
himself into playing that role – I will give you, for instance, 
if you allow me, Chair, I – when ...[indistinct] with a certain 
personality you cannot have a personality which makes 
people want to see the ...[indistinct] you must be a person 
whereby from somebody who from the lower ends up to 
very high places in government they will very much like to 
20 
have a conversation with you, but I think Mr Mlambo has 
not managed that skill as yet.  I might be wrong. 
MR FENI:   My last question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you gave, you said two and you 
have – you did three now you want to do a fourth one. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 175 of 404 
 
MR FENI:   That is the last one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR FENI:   Were you a Gupta accolade? 
MR NTSHEPE:   A Gupta what? 
MR FENI:  A Gupta associate? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, no, no, but the company that I worked 
with the individual, Mr Essa, was very much associated 
with the Guptas. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FENI:   Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  We are going to then 
adjourn, thank you very much Mr Ntshepe, you are now 
released. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Thank you, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  It is nineteen minutes to 
two, we are going to resume at twenty to three.  We 
adjourn. 
ADV KENNEDY:   As it pleases. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we ready? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, thank you Chair.   With your 
leave may we then call as our next witness Dr Stefan Nell. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, please administer the oath or 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 176 of 404 
 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record? 
DR NELL:   Stefan Nell. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
DR NELL:   No, I don’t. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
DR NELL:   Yes, I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence you will 
10 
give will be truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth, 
if so, please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
DR NELL:   [Duly sworn, states]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you may be seated. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy are we running considerably 
behind schedule?  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I’m afraid we are, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, alright.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, there are two Bundles that 
need to be referred to in these proceedings for this 
witness. The one is Denel Bundle 9 and the other is Denel 
Bundle 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 177 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  There is one affidavit in Bundle 9 and 
two affidavits in Bundle 10.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I take the witness through the 
introductory formalities to then seek your leave to admit 
them as…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As Exhibits.  Dr Nell, thank you for 
cooperating with the Commission, may I confirm with you, 
you have, in fact, provided three affidavits? 
10 
DR NELL:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, can I ask you please – you 
should have Bundles 9 and 10 there, do you? 
DR NELL:   That’s correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Please open Bundle 9 and is it 
correct that there’s a marker there, marked A? 
DR NELL:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that the first page of your first 
affidavit? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, you have raised, by way of an 
email, a concern that you have in respect of one of your 
affidavits where you made, what you referred to in your 
email, as a bone fide mistake. You will want to correct that 
in a moment, not so? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 178 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As I understand it, that mistake arose 
in the second affidavit, not the first? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, so – is there anything you 
want to raise in respect of the first affidavit which requires 
correction? 
DR NELL:   No, nothing Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  May I take you 
please to page 33, and if you can look at the black 
10 
lettering not the red but the black lettering on the top left-
hand side of each page, is that your signature? 
DR NELL:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And we see on the foot of the page it 
bears the date 31 s t of January 2020.  Do you confirm – 
sorry have you been through the contents of this affidavit? 
DR NELL:   I have, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And can – do you confirm under oath 
now that the contents are true and correct as far as your 
knowledge goes? 
20 
DR NELL:   I do, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  The next affidavit 
is the one in the other Bundle, Bundle 10 and that should 
appear as – at flag B, is that correct? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 179 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you will see the first page of that 
is at page seven and it runs to page 30 and 31, the foot of 
page 30, is that your signature? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you signed that in front of a 
Commissioner of Oaths. 
DR NELL:   I did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the date of that is the 4 t h of 
February 2020. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright if I can just have a moment 
Chair.  Now, if I can take you please to page 14 of this 
Bundle, paragraph 6621.  6621, I understand, is the 
passage, according to your email that you want to make 
clear to the Chair has to be corrected. 
DR NELL:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what is the point of correction 
there? 
DR NELL:   Those specific tests were under contract from 
Armscor not from LMT. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So, LMT, on the second line where it 
says, 
“These 
tests 
were 
conducted 
by 
CSIR 
under 
contract from LMT” 
 
LMT, should read Armscor? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 180 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, have you in fact, corrected that 
in your later affidavit? 
DR NELL:   Yes, I did Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, we’ll come to that in a 
moment.  Subject to that correction, do you confirm that 
you’ve been through this affidavit? 
DR NELL:   I do Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And do you confirm that the contents 
are true and correct as far as your knowledge goes? 
10 
DR NELL:   I do Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, now the correction that you 
have referred to, is that made in the final affidavit that is 
marked C? 
DR NELL:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that appears at page 470. 
DR NELL:   470? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   470, Bundle 10 yes, do you have 
that? 
DR NELL:   I have 427 and 479, I think. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry just give me the page number 
that you’re referring to? 
DR NELL:   It’s page 477 and 478. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May we just have a moment.  What 
appears on 477? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 181 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   It’s a paragraph 73. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see, no I want to refer you first to 
the first page of the affidavit so that we can identify it, 
please look at page 470. 
DR NELL:   Yes, I am there. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that the first page of your third 
affidavit? 
DR NELL:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And if I can refer you to the last page 
at 482. 
10 
DR NELL:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It appears that the affidavit was 
signed on the 19 t h of October 2020, is that your signature 
at the top? 
DR NELL:   That’s correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Again, you signed it in front of a 
Commissioner of Oaths. 
DR NELL:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you drew our attention, a 
moment ago, to page 477, is it not 475.  Your email 
20 
referred us – and you indicated a request you wanted to 
deal with upfront with the Chair, you referred us in an 
email to paragraph 5723 at page 475. 
DR NELL:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So, does this contain the correction 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 182 of 404 
 
that you have referred to earlier it wasn’t – it was Armscor 
that placed the order? 
DR NELL:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Apart from this – from this aspect – 
sorry does 5723 contain the correct facts? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now have you been through 
this affidavit, and I think you’ve confirmed that, you’ve 
been through the contents of this affidavit and you confirm 
the correctness? 
10 
DR NELL:   I do, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, may we then ask formally for 
leave to introduce these three affidavits into evidence? 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s fine I see that on this last one it 
is not material but it’s page 482. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   482, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, it’s something not material but it 
says, “deponent of signature” instead of “signature of 
deponent”. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, indeed.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright we go back to number 9? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, if we can deal with Bundle 9, 
the affidavit from page eight, if that could be admitted, 
Chair as Exhibit – either W24 or W24.1, whichever you 
prefer. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 183 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, well Dr Nell, you said you went 
through this one, you believe that what you say here is 
true and correct, is that right? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you have decided to give me a name 
that is not mine here in this affidavit.  Look at paragraph 
1.4 in the affidavit. 
DR NELL:   Affidavit number A? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just affidavit in Bundle 9. 
DR NELL:   Paragraph 1.4? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, can you see the name you decided to 
give me, that is not mine? 
DR NELL:   I received this from the Commission Chair, so I 
apologise if there’s a mistake. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I am certainly not Jacob.  So, I think, 
Mr Kennedy, that page will need to be replaced with a 
corrected…[intervenes]. 
DR NELL:   Thank you we will do so, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Dr Nell will you be willing to sign an 
20 
amending affidavit, just to correct this? 
DR NELL:   I will, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, initial the page please, thank 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay the statement/affidavit of Dr Stefan 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 184 of 404 
 
Nell starting at page eight of Denel Bundle 9 is admitted as 
Exhibit W24.1, let’s put it that way. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: Ja, okay.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then we would ask you to admit 
the second affidavit, you’ll find that in Bundle 10 from page 
seven, if that may be admitted as Exhibit W24.2? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit/statement of Dr Stefan Nell 
starting at page seven of Denel Bundle 10 is admitted as 
Exhibit W24.2. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair, and the final 
affidavit we would ask to have admitted is in the same 
Bundle 10, page 470.  We ask that, that be admitted as 
Exhibit W24.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Dr Stefan Nell starting at 
page 470 is admitted as Exhibit W24.3, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair, may we proceed to 
put questions to the witness? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Dr Nell can we start with 
20 
your first affidavit in Bundle 9.  It’s Exhibit 24.1 and you’ll 
find that from page eight, Chair with your leave, may I lead 
the witness on what appears to be uncontroversial issues? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you there Dr Nell? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 185 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   I am. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  You have a 
doctorate in what, Dr Nell? 
DR NELL:   In the Mechanical Engineering Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and your professional 
background is set out at pages 9 and following, is that 
correct? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, you had, at one stage, were 
involved with LMT, is that correct? 
10 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What was your role there? 
DR NELL:   I was the founder and the Chief Executive 
Officer, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And when was it founded? 
DR NELL:   In March 1999, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And were you a shareholder in LMT? 
DR NELL:   Yes, I was Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What was your original shareholding 
before Denel purchased a portion of the shares? 
20 
DR NELL:   It was 40%. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, were you – you’ve since left 
LMT, is that correct? 
DR NELL:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When did  you leave? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 186 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   In September 2016. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and your affidavit indicates 
that Denel purchased a majority shareholding, 51% in LMT 
as a certain stage, is that right? 
DR NELL:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When was that? 
DR NELL:   That was – the process started round about 
May 2011 that time period. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And did you then sell any of your own 
shares to Denel? 
10 
DR NELL:   Yes, our shareholding was reduced. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What was your own shareholding 
reduced to? 
DR NELL:  8%, then.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and did you retain the position 
of CEO of LMT when Denel took over the majority shares? 
DR NELL:   Yes, I did Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Until when? 
DR NELL:   Until March 2016, then. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You resigned in when, September 
20 
2016? 
DR NELL:   September 2016. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, your affidavit refers at page 11, 
to that resignation on the 19 t h of September 2016.  Now, 
you have referred to charges that were initially brought and 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 187 of 404 
 
then later dropped, is that right? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Disciplinary charges? 
DR NELL:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And who brought those charges? 
DR NELL:   It was brought against me by Mr Jan Wessels 
who was then appointed as CEO in my stead, but I state in 
my statement that it was on behalf of Denel that he did 
that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you say, at the foot of page 10, 
10 
paragraph 3.6,  
“I continued as CEO but was suspended, again, due 
to the insistence of Denel Board Members on the 
LMT Board who forced the, then CEO, Mr Jan 
Wessels and the then LMT HR Manager, Mrs 
Melanie van Aarde to bring charges against me”, 
 
Mr Wessels has told the commission’s legal team 
that he – when he was provided with a 33 Notice as is 
called here, to comment on your allegations he says, he 
disputes that he was forced.  Do you maintain that he was, 
20 
in fact, forced? 
DR NELL:   I maintain that Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On what basis? 
DR NELL:   We had a cordial relationship, Chair, and I 
could not understand why he would do such a thing, we 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 188 of 404 
 
were working well together and then one day he walked in 
with these charges and presented it to me.  Also, I heard 
from the HR Manager that these things were done in a way, 
from Denel, on Denel’s side and not from LMT’s side. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, you’ve referred to the broad 
nature of the charges on the top of page 11, that it was for, 
“bringing the company in disrepute after I and my 
fellow founding shareholders applied to the North 
Gauteng High Court to put LMT Holdings into 
business rescue”. 
10 
Is that correct? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, but then they were later 
dropped, those charges? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you were then, again, demoted.  
So, was this a second demotion by Mr Johan Steyn? 
DR NELL:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And – so who demoted you the first 
time? 
20 
DR NELL:   I was requested or informed by Mr Odwa 
Mhlwana who was a Board member at that stage that they 
will – they need a person with a lot of experience, more 
experience than I had to take over the business as the 
business was on upward trajectory and they had to put in 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 189 of 404 
 
Mr Jan Wessels as the CEO, in my place and I had to go to 
– reduced to the position of COO. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that was the first demotion? 
DR NELL:   That was the first one. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the second demotion, after the 
charges were dropped? 
DR NELL:   Mr Jan Wessels then resigned, Chair, and in 
his place was appointed Mr Johan Steyn, he was also the 
current CEO of Denel Legal Systems and when I returned 
after my suspension, they again demoted me to Marketing 
10 
Manager. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   How did you feel about that? 
DR NELL:   I felt very bad about that and decided to 
resign. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you still hold shares in LMT? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair, in the Holdings 
company. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 And 
you 
mentioned 
in 
your 
consultation with us, as the legal team, something about a 
liquidation application, what is the current status in that 
20 
regard? 
DR NELL:   Chair, the shareholder, and the Board of LMT 
Holdings, they decided to put the company in voluntary 
liquidation, this was done in June 2020.  We haven’t had 
any further feedback on that and requested a shareholders’ 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 190 of 404 
 
meeting which will be arranged in the next few weeks to 
get an  update on it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What happened to the earlier 
application that you and your fellow founding shareholders 
brought in the North Gauteng High Court for business 
rescue? 
DR NELL:   Chair, it was the minority shareholders that 
brought the application, it was thrown out, as it was not 
urgent, it was opposed by Denel as not being urgent. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And subsequently there’s been an 
10 
application for the actual liquidation of LMT Holdings? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, that was in June this year 
whilst that court application was in 2016, July. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now Dr Nell I’d like to go 
through the rest of this affidavit fairly quickly because your 
affidavit has been very clear and in the course of all the 
evidence that we’ve been leading in this current session, 
two weeks ago and earlier this week, we’ve been placing 
particular focus on particular transactions and not all of 
those transactions are necessarily the focus of your 
20 
affidavit here, you deal with other things as well.  So, if I 
might ask you, very briefly to turn to page 12 and just in 
very brief terms, just summarise, for the benefit of the 
Chair, what the point – the crucial point is that you want to 
emphasise in relation to LMT’s relationship to Patria 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 191 of 404 
 
Vehicles.  Patria Vehicles is a company based in Finland, 
is that right? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And they were the originators of 
particular type of armoured vehicle, is that correct? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, what was the nature of LMT’s 
relationship with Patria? 
DR NELL:   Chair, we designed a vehicle which was the 
best design for Armscor in a competition that was part of a 
10 
tender process and when the results of the competition 
came about we were contacted by Patria from Finland 
requesting if we would like to be their representative in 
South Africa for this upcoming project Hoefyster and that 
was our role, we represented Patria and we did some work 
for them under contract from Patria. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When was that contract concluded? 
DR NELL:   The first agreement, Chair, was in 2004 and 
the second one was signed in 2006. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, so was that when your history, 
20 
your relationship with Patria began as far back as 2004? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now you refer, at the foot of 
page 13, paragraph 5.11 to the contract that was awarded 
to DLS in May 2007 amounting to R8.8billion, was the cost 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 192 of 404 
 
estimated at May 2007 when the project was awarded? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, and you refer to two phases, 
phase one value of R1.2billion that was signed in May 
2007 – signed between, is that between Armscor and DLS?  
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and then phase two, a further 
R7.6billion for production was signed in September 2013 
and you say at the top of the next page, according to your 
knowledge phase one is still, not yet, fully completed.  
10 
Now, the Chair ’s already heard evidence in that regard 
which bears out what you have said, and the project is 
many years behind schedule, how many years, to your 
knowledge? 
DR 
NELL: 
 
Approximately 
– 
the 
first 
phase 
is 
approximately 12 years behind schedule.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, that phase two, am I right in 
understanding cannot start until phase one is completed? 
DR NELL:   In the normal way of things, that is correct, 
Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now are you able, in a 
sentence or two, to summarise any views you may have as 
to why you believe this phase one of the project has been 
delayed for so many years? 
DR NELL:   Chair, it’s my personal opinion that the vehicle 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 193 of 404 
 
platform is fairly simple and fairly advanced as it came 
directly from Patria and it only had to – it only had to 
undergo a few changes.  The challenge came onto the 
turret and the gun and the missiles and everything that 
goes on top, I think that was a bit more complicated than 
what was anticipated by Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you then proceed, on page 14, 
paragraph 6, to deal with some financial challenges that 
LMT was facing and your background sketches that, as far 
back as 2006 to 2008 you were awarded several contracts 
10 
by Mercedes Benz and then you refer to the recession in 
2009.  Just summarise, for the Chair please, why there 
were financial difficulties in those years, that’s before the 
majority shareholding was acquired by Denel? 
DR NELL:   .Chair, we are a company that used to grow 
organically, so we didn’t have a big shareholder behind us 
that could fund us in difficult times.  So we basically grew 
too quickly and we grew out of our cash but in the award of 
the contract from Mercedes Benz they promised us quite a 
number of projects in the future to manufacture projects for 
20 
them …[break in audio] for them but then in the economic 
recession that hit Europe in 2008/2009 resulted in them 
cancelling these contracts and we lost a big part of our 
potential revenue at that stage. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, at the top of page 15 you refer 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 194 of 404 
 
to a call from Mr Reenen Teubes who has of course given 
evidence in this Commission about two weeks ago and he 
called you in March 2010. 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just explain to the Chair, why he 
called you, what was the purpose of the discussion? 
DR NELL:   He called us – he called me to arrange a 
meeting between myself and him and Mr Burger as he has 
heard that we are experiencing some difficulties and he 
just wanted to find out what was going on. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Had you interacted with Mr Teubes 
prior to this call? 
DR NELL:   Not on this specific subject, Chair, we worked 
together on Hoefyster project us being from Patria and him 
from Armscor, but not on this specific subject. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and so he said that there was 
an interest, because LMT was facing some financial issues, 
Denel was interested in what? 
DR NELL:   Mr Burger requested from us if we are 
interested in selling our shares to Denel. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So, was that Mr Burger after the 
initial discussion with Mr Teubes on the phone? 
DR NELL:   Yes, Mr Teubes gave me a call and then 
requested a meeting.  We then had a meeting, and, in that 
meeting, which was attended by Mr Teubes and Mr Burger, 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 195 of 404 
 
Mr Burger requested or tried to find out if we are willing to 
sell our shares. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you get, from either of them, any 
indication as to the reason why Denel was interested in 
buying shares in LMT, presumably they weren’t just 
interested in helping you out of financial difficulties as an 
act of generosity? 
DR NELL:   It is my understanding, Mr Chair, that Mr 
Burger wanted to consolidate the industry as he had a 
mandate from the Department of Trade and Industry, and 
10 
he wanted to consolidate the military vehicle industry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now some of the evidence already 
led has suggested that Denel was interested, not only in 
consolidating the industry at least between its divisions 
and 
in 
relation 
to 
its 
ability 
to 
meet 
its 
client’s 
requirements but also that there was a concern to have 
LMT’s capacity to strengthen Denel’s in-house capacity for 
purposes of the Hoefyster contract. 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you confirm the evidence of other 
20 
witnesses, in that regard? 
DR NELL:   Yes, I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Now, what came of these 
discussions, your affidavit then goes on for a few pages to 
deal with various events, I’m not going to take you through 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 196 of 404 
 
all of that.  What was the upshot of all these interactions, 
was a deal done in terms of which Denel purchased the 
shares in LMT? 
DR NELL:   Yes, Chair the deal was eventually done after 
an offer of purchase agreement was changed into a full 
share purchase. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and the - which Denel 
purchased a 51% shareholding in LMT. 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did it provide any financial assistance 
10 
to Denel at that stage either before or after the purchase of 
its shares to address financial issues that Mr Teubes had 
started off the conversation referring to? 
DR NELL:  Chair that is correct.  They placed a contract on 
risk on us to manufacture turrets for them and part of that 
agreement was a pre-payment which they provided to us 
against security which we had to offer. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you refer on page 17 in paragraph 
6.17 and paragraph 7 to a trunnion machining contract.  Is 
that the turret contract that you referring to or is it something 
20 
different? 
DR NELL:  It is the same thing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The same. Now tell the Chair please 
about this contract? 
DR NELL:  Chair this contract was negotiated with Denel 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 197 of 404 
 
already or Denel Land Systems already in 2009.  One of the 
Denel Land Systems employees said that they could go with 
LMT if our price was right and the price was agreed upon 
already in 2009. 
 
Then in 2010 based on the fact that we were the front 
runner on this contract DLS awarded the contract on risk to 
us and provided the pre-payment to us. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
Was 
that 
the 
R12.7 
million 
approximately? 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  If we look at page 20 you refer to that 
in bold in paragraph 7.10 and in the table at the foot of the 
page which sets out how it is made up.  Is that correct 
DR NELL:  That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Now there is a reference to IP 
intellectual property of LMT.  How did that arise and what 
was its relevance in relation to these dealings? 
DR NELL:  Chair we had to provide a vast amount of security 
to DLS in order to – to obtain this pre-payment and one of 
the stuffs – things that we could offer as security was our 
20 
intellectual property.  And we had Spoor and Fisher to 
evaluate our property – our intellectual property and this was 
ceded to Denel as well as shares as security. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  As security for the upfront payment of 
R12.7 million? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 198 of 404 
 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now if I can ask you to turn 
please to page 21.  This refers to the option of purchase 
agreement. Is that the option to purchase shares that you 
mentioned earlier in your evidence? 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that was then changed into another 
agreement.  What was that agreement? 
DR NELL:  That was an agreement where the pre-payment 
was changed into equity and they purchased 51% of the 
10 
business approximately a year after this agreement was 
signed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And then you refer on page 23 
to the result of the agreements that have just been outlined 
in your affidavit 8.6 would be that LMT would become part of 
the Denel group and in-house supplier resulting in LMT 
becoming a preferred in-house supplier to Denel fulfilling the 
shareholders vision for LMT that you refer to above.  Just 
explain 
to 
the 
Chairperson 
please 
the 
shareholder 
presumably are the – are the shareholders which included 
20 
yourself who founded LMT many years before, is that right? 
DR NELL:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now what was your vision for 
LMT? 
DR NELL:  Chair we were quite – quite proud to be chosen 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 199 of 404 
 
by Denel to be their partner and it was our vision that we 
would provide them with capabilities and capacity that they 
did not have at that stage.  That was our vision. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now we have seen reference to the 
advantage in paragraph 8.6 of your becoming a preferred in-
house supplier to Denel.  Now how did you understand that 
becoming an in-house entity within the Denel group would 
give you preferred in-house supply?  Was that in terms of the 
agreements or in terms of what you had been told or what? 
DR NELL:  Chair already in the original agreement – option 
10 
to 
purchase 
agreement 
there 
was 
a 
memorandum 
of 
understanding and in that memorandum of understanding it 
is mentioned that DLS would speak to Patria so that we as 
LMT could manufacture the hulls for them at that stage.  So 
the – it is common cause that we were – we are going to 
manufacture these hulls for them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Would that mean that it was not 
necessary for Denel to go out on tender as you understood it 
or do you not know? 
DR NELL:  Chair in a later document in the framework 
20 
agreement they said they will use their best commercial 
efforts to ensure that the work will come to us.  And it was 
my understanding that the whole reason why they purchased 
us was to manufacture these hulls for them and there are 
numerous evidence attached in my affidavit where they 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 200 of 404 
 
explained this to the Denel board and the reason why they 
purchased. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Wait – just – I am sorry will you just pull 
the microphone a little closer to you Dr Nell.  The 
microphone can you pull it a little closer to you?  I do not 
know whether the base moves or not.  Or you might come a 
little closer.  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I think he has to sit forward I am 
afraid. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay no that is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now when you are too far – speaking too 
far from it. 
DR NELL:  Oh sorry. 
DR NELL:  I do not hear you as clearly as I would like to.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  Now there is a reference in 
your affidavit to Pamodzi becoming involved, who were they? 
DR NELL:  Pamodzi was the 29% shareholder in LMT 
Holdings. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And was there a reason why they were 
introduced into the shareholding under the new deal? 
DR NELL:  Chair yes at that stage we required a BEE 
partner and we were quite far advanced in negotiations with 
a partner.  But we were requested by Denel Land Systems to 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 201 of 404 
 
evaluate Pamodzi Investment Holdings as our BE partner 
which eventually they became. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you had been looking to bring in a 
different entity as your BBBEE partner who was that? 
DR NELL:  That was correct Chair they were called Beryl 
Capital. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And DLS then asked that you look at 
Pamodzi instead? 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Who at Denel asked you that? 
10 
DR NELL:  Mr Stephan Burger requested us to meet with 
Pamodzi. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right and was the deal ultimately done 
with Pamodzi? 
DR NELL:  Ultimately yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now there is reference in your 
paragraph 8.7 to Denel DLS rather from the 28 t h June 
becoming involved in day to day management at LMT 
through the Joint Management agreement and – but you 
remained on as CEO of LMT at that stage? 
20 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Before your later demotion? 
DR NELL:  Yes correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And you refer to DLS limiting 
the decision making powers in what sense? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 202 of 404 
 
DR NELL:  DLS supported us on our board and we could not 
really make decisions like we used to make in the past.  We 
had to run everything past them which was part of the Joint 
Management provisions. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That was what was agreed to between 
the parties, is that right? 
DR NELL:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you not criticising this as being an 
improper interference or are you? 
DR NELL:  No I do not. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. And it seems to me that it would 
make sense that now that Denel or DLS now has a majority 
shareholding 
they 
would 
take 
an 
active 
part 
in 
the 
management and that you the founding shareholders would 
no longer be able to operate completely freely and on your 
devices, is that right? 
DR NELL:  But Chair at this stage it was not yet a 51% 
shareholding it was still the option to purchase shareholding 
or contracts.  But as part of the agreement they used to – 
they participated in our decisions which we accepted. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. And then you set out from page 
23 at the foot to the top of page 25 paragraph 9 how the 
advanced payment was used.  Was this the R12.7 million 
advanced payment? 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 203 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And just without going into the detail 
that your affidavit sets out just in a sentence or two just 
summarise for the benefit of the Chair what was it in fact 
used for? 
DR NELL:  Chair we had a – about R190 million worth of 
contracts but unfortunately not sufficient working capital and 
we had some creditors that had to be paid.  So we used the 
advanced payment to settle the creditors and to unlock the 
value of the contracts that we had in hand knowing very well 
that we still need to complete the turrets and there is a 
10 
presentation in my affidavit where we state to Denel in 
November 2010 that we still need to finish the turrets or start 
with the turret project that was scheduled to start in May – in 
March 2011. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right thank you.  Then if you would 
turn to page 25 you refer to the agreement with Pamodzi 
Investment 
Holdings 
and 
your 
affidavit 
deals 
with 
Mr 
Burger’s statement to you paragraph 10.5 about him wanting 
or Denel wanting a different BBBEE partner you were going 
for Beryl Capital that is referred to in 10.4 and then he then 
20 
preferred Pamodzi.  What did you feel about this – this 
preference or requirement that you should change your 
favoured BBBEE partner? 
DR NELL:  Chair it was strange at that stage but we wanted 
the deal to succeed and when we met with Pamodzi the first 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 204 of 404 
 
time they seemed to be very competent and knowledgeable 
partners into our business. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you then deal on page 26 at the 
foot with a Malaysia turrets advanced payment – Malaysia 
LCT30 turrets.  LCT30 is what the technical name for the 
type of turret is that right? 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  I am just simply going to refer to 
it as the Malaysia turrets.  And you got an advanced payment 
for this as well, is that right? 
10 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  In the sum that you indicate there of 
about R5.7 million.  What was the Malaysia business – what 
did that involve?  Was that – was that a business deal that 
you did with DLS or with – sorry that LMT did with DLS or 
who? 
DR NELL:  Yes correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And so was DLS you say in 11.12 
received an order from Malaysia for turrets similar to the 
Hoefyster turrets to the value of R3 billion, is that right? 
20 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then were you then sub-contracted 
as it were at LMT to supply these turrets for purposes of the 
Malaysia deal? 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 205 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And so presumably that would 
have had the price determined in terms of a contract as to 
how much it was per turret or whatever and when it would be 
paid, is that right? 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And – so what was this advanced 
payment for? 
DR NELL:  The advanced payment was to start production of 
these turrets but they were delayed quite significantly and 
they only started in around about 2013 if I remember 
10 
correctly with that specific turret project.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right thank you.  So were you – sorry 
you then say – you refer to email correspondence in 
paragraphs 11.2 and 11.3 and then you refer in 11.4 to a 
disagreement between Pamodzi and DLS that – that had to 
do with the fact that Pamodzi only received 29 % of LMT for 
the – for its investment of R15 million is that how much 
Pamodzi put into the acquisition of their shares? 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And they had only received 29% of LMT 
20 
that was the shareholding correct? 
DR NELL:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Whereas Denel obtained 51% for only 
12.7 % - 12.7 million and that was then resolved.  Is that – 
was there in fact a disagreement that was ultimately 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 206 of 404 
 
resolved? 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you then refer to a letter from DLS 
stated – from DLS to Pamodzi stating future business 
operation – opportunities with LMT and you refer to the 
annexure.  If I can take you please to that annexure it is 
page 593 I believe.  In fact I am sorry Chair I think I have 
got the wrong reference.  May I just correct that?  It is in fact 
SN38 which we find at page 600.  Is that the letter that is 
referred to in your affidavit? 
10 
DR NELL:  In my bundle it is on page 593. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is in 593.  
DR NELL:  The letter. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So in fact the original reference I had 
was correct.  Is that the letter that you referring to where 
Denel wrote to Pamodzi to resolve the issue and refer to 
future business opportunities? 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the one from Koenie Vos – that is 
20 
not the one? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that at… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am at page 593 on Bundle 9 – Denel 
Bundle 9. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes that is correct Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 207 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So these are emails dated the 27t h May 
2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is how it starts. Am I on the right 
page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is how this page starts.  I am 
checking whether I am on the right page as the two of you. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Yes I understand that that is what 
the witness is directing me to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is alright then. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So it is the email of 27t h May 2011 
addressed from Koenie Vos is that right? 
CHAIRPERSON:  To Stephan Nel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair I – the letter that was written to 
Pamodzi is on – in my bundle on page 593. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And is that the email of the 27t h 
May 2011? 
20 
DR NELL:  No it is this letter. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I cannot see from that distance I am 
afraid.  Oh I think I know what is happening.  I think it is that 
you may be referring to – are you looking at the page 
numbers on the right hand side there? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 208 of 404 
 
DR NELL:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes you looking at the page number in 
red on the right hand side you see that? 
DR NELL:  Okay I am sorry then it is page 600 I apologise. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So it is 600 yes. 
DR NELL:  I apologise for that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  So it is the letter from 
Denel Land Systems – DLS from its CEO Mr Burger and it is 
dated the 13t h is it of June 2011? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you have lost me.  At some stage I 
10 
thought you and I were on the same page.  I think… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We were but we have been directed to 
the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that Denel – Denel has confused 
one of us. 
DR NELL:  No I apologise I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us start – let us start – at some 
stage we were on the same page you and I Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We were but we were both… 
CHAIRPERSON:  At page 593. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We were on the wrong page there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay that is what I have not been told.  
What is the right page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes the right page is 600. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  In the same bundle? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 209 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Just so you understand how the 
problem arose and I am not criticising Dr Nell for this it is 
confusing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  He was referring to the page number in 
red on the top right instead of… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Which is why we went to a different – to 
10 
593. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Because we used the one on the left. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay we must just use the black numbers 
Dr Nell.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja for all pages – page numbers we just 
use the black ones.  Yes okay I am there now. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  So this is a letter 
from Mr Burger as CEO of DLS 13t h June 2011.  Is that right? 
20 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And it is addressed to Mr Ndaba Ntsele 
I am afraid my copy is a bit difficult to  - is it Ntsele? 
DR NELL:  Ntsele. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Ntsele CEO of Pamodzi.  And it says: 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 210 of 404 
 
“Future LMT business and order cover.  We as DLS would 
once again like to express our appreciation for your positive 
intent during the transaction process and the last discussion 
held on the 9 t h June.  Following your request on the potential 
business opportunities from DLS to LMT we anticipate that 
on Hoefyster and on other related business opportunities the 
value of this to be in excess of R1 billion over the next ten 
years.  We are also of the opinion that DLS will change the 
face of LMT to be a renowned international business.  Hope 
this will endeavour to further strengthen our current business 
10 
relationship.” 
Now as I understand your evidence Dr Nell this was sent to 
Pamodzi in order to give some reassurance to Pamodzi who 
were uncomfortable about why they only got 29% of LMLT 
compared with Denel which got far more 51% where it had 
put in the R12.7 million whereas Pamodzi had put R15 
million but got less of a shareholding.   
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So this was an assurance given to 
Pamodzi. 
20 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you regard this as having any 
relevance to yourselves as LMT shareholders and directors? 
DR NELL:  Yes Chair it looked extremely promising for us in 
the business with Denel Land Systems. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 211 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you – sorry Mr Burger refers here 
to this being so promising that it would mean that LMT would 
become a renowned international supplier.  Had you been 
supplying at all in international market prior to DLS and 
Pamodzi taking shares in LMT? 
DR NELL:  Yes Chair we have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  At that stage were you big or small in 
the international market? 
DR NELL:  We were quite big.  We were not compared – not 
the same size as Denel but we – we had clients all over the 
10 
world. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you understand this letter from Mr 
Burger effectively to be saying whatever your current – what 
your being LMT whatever the current involvement of LMT in 
the 
international 
market 
might 
be 
it 
would 
grow 
substantially? 
DR NELL:  I did Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now the – the ten – sorry I beg 
your pardon yes the ten years would – the next ten years 
there would be business more than R1 billion to LMT is that 
20 
what you understood him to be saying? 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And right.  Then on page 28 of 
your affidavit – just go back to 28 please.  Then you refer to 
a purchase order July 2011 that followed just a few weeks 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 212 of 404 
 
after the letter we have just looked at from Mr Burger to Mr 
Pamodzi, is that right? 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So a purchase order was then sent by 
DLS and that we see in paragraph 11.8 was for 8 AV8 turrets 
similar to the Hoefyster turrets related services such as 
transfer of technology to Malaysia for the total price of R10 
million and some rands with an advanced payment provision 
of 5000 – sorry R5.7 million approximately.  Was that the 
Malaysia turrets transaction that we have looked at already? 
10 
DR NELL:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And did you understand this to be as it 
were the first of a line of orders that you would have 
expected if Mr Burger’s promise of a lot more business 
coming your way.  Is that how you saw this? 
DR NELL:  It could be Chair yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now in paragraph 11.12 you 
refer to 2014 where you commissioned a report from an 
independent 
project 
management 
expert 
to 
investigate 
projects LMT executed for DLS.  Why did you commission 
20 
that report? 
DR NELL:  Chair at that stage there was a number of 
allegations going around about the quality of our products 
and the work that we do.  And it concerned me a lot because 
at that stage we were delivering parts and components and 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 213 of 404 
 
vehicles to clients like Mercedes Benz whose quality policy 
is extremely high.  And we commenced this contracted this 
company to evaluate all contracts between LMT and DLS to 
determine what is the reason for the unhappiness and the 
constant blaming of – on us about poor quality and late 
delivery etcetera. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now apart from the Malaysian contract 
that we have just had reference to were there other contracts 
and orders placed on LMT by DLS since you became part 
owned by DLS or the share option kicked in? 
10 
DR NELL:  Yes there were Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And so the complaints about 
performance were they related to quality and timing or what 
were they specifically dealing with? 
DR NELL:   Quality and timing Chair both. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Quality and timing.  Was there any 
validity to those complaints? 
DR NELL:  Chair we do not take the blame – we cannot take 
the blame for everything and the study from the independent 
contractor clearly indicated mistakes that were made on both 
20 
sides.  Mr Drevin also the previous - on– of the previous 
Denel witnesses indicated to that some of the drawings were 
not up to date when they provided it to us for delivery.  
Client furnished equipment was not delivered on time.  So 
there was mistakes on both sides. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 214 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you do – so did the report in fact 
bear out that you could not take all of the blame for delays 
and quality issues? 
DR NELL:  Yes Chair it does. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did it blame you at all and do you 
blame yourselves at all for any part of the problems? 
DR NELL:  Yes Chair we made our mistakes.  We had our 
fair share. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now when – now that DLS and 
Pamodzi had shares in LMT and in fact DLS had the majority 
10 
shares – was it DLS or Denel SOC? 
DR NELL:  Denel the head office. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  SOC Limited the head office.  Right.  
Now that they had the 51% they in fact participated as you 
have said in the board and the management of LMT. 
DR NELL:  More in the board level from Denel at head office 
yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So they at that stage did not have their 
own people in the management ranks it was at board level. 
DR NELL:  No Chair they only had their people in the – on 
20 
board level not on management level.  They did provide us 
with a retired person that assisted us but I had to retrench 
him in 2012 on – at the request of Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  He was put into the management was 
he into the staff of LMT as opposed to the board, is that 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 215 of 404 
 
right? 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair as a General Manager. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now this report that came out 
that – that confirmed that many of the problems that had 
been raised were not due to your own fault.  Did you 
commission that for your own knowledge or was that for 
purposes of providing it to Denel? 
DR NELL:  Chair we commissioned it to – for our own 
purposes and we also presented the result of the report to 
our board and to the management of Denel Land Systems. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right and why did you feel it 
appropriate to present it to them – to Denel both in the board 
and within their own company? 
DR NELL:  Chair I just felt that all the allegations – the 
constant allegations of poor quality and late delivery was 
unfounded and I needed some independent contractor to 
check this out for us and make sure whether we are at fault 
or not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now we have already seen reference to 
a trunnion contract.  You refer in paragraph 12 on page 29 to 
20 
a cancellation of the original trunnion contract.  And you 
refer 
to 
that 
being 
terminated 
by 
mutual 
consent 
in 
September 2012 at the request of Mr Burger. 
DR NELL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Which contract was that?  Was that one 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 216 of 404 
 
of the contracts we have looked at earlier? 
DR NELL:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And which one was that?  Was 
that – when was that concluded? 
DR NELL:  That is the 2010 contract with the … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  2010 contract right.  And – right.  Now 
why did Mr Burger request you to agree to cancel that 
contract? 
DR NELL:  Chair it is my opinion that at that stage their 
design was not yet far advanced enough to continue with 
10 
production and they in any case transferred or changed the 
pre-payment 
into 
equity 
shares. 
 
So 
that 
is 
my 
understanding. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And you agreed to that for LMT 
that cancellation? 
DR NELL:  I did Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Why was that? 
DR NELL:  Because we knew at that stage that they are not 
going ahead with this contract and that they changed the 
pre-payment into the equity shares. 
20 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
Now 
you 
mentioned 
to 
us 
in 
consultation that a reference to a suspensive condition not 
being met.  What does that relate to? 
DR NELL:  That is the condition that if the contract is not 
awarded by Armscor to Denel for phase 2 then the contract 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 217 of 404 
 
will be [?]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes now let us be clear. So was the 
cancellation of the trunnion contract from 2010 that was 
because of lack of progress on the Denel side or lack of 
progress on the LMT side? 
DR NELL:  No lack of progress on the DLS side. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The DLS side.  It was not raised for 
example that you were in breach of the contract or anything 
like that? 
DR NELL:  No Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Now you then refer to Denel 
LMT loans in paragraph 13.  Just sum up for us please in a 
couple of sentences if you may what this related to?  When it 
took place, what was involved? 
DR NELL:  Chair around about 2019 we were involved in a 
shareholder meeting and we came to know that Denel laid 
claim to loans that were made to LMT to the value of about 
R370 million.  As shareholders we were not aware of that.  
We were never consulted and Pamodzi made – wrote a legal 
letter in response to Denel’s claim that this claim should be 
20 
paid. So we were not aware of this huge amount of loans 
that were made to LMT at that stage and it was extremely 
strange that such a big amount was provided to such a small 
company compared to the big Denel Group. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you then at page 30, paragraph 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 218 of 404 
 
13.5.  It refers again in the context of what happened in 
2019.  You refer seems by way of background to what you 
mentioned 
earlier 
which 
was 
the 
business 
rescue 
application.  That was brought in 2016.  Is that correct? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   By yourselves as the founding 
shareholders of LMT. 
DR NELL:   Chair, all the minority shareholders including 
Pamodzi. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Pamodzi as well? 
10 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you indicate that: 
“Denel opposed our business rescue application on 
the basis that Denel will fund the business.” 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And were these loans that were 
made, as referred to on pages 29 and 30 and following, were 
they part of what was then promised by Denel in saying they 
were deposed the business rescue?  They were now going to 
be funding the LMT business? 
20 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was this worth funding?  I understand 
that you were one of the founding shareholders in LMT.  It 
was your baby, as it were, and you had a vision for it.  But 
you already mentioned that there were some financial 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 219 of 404 
 
difficulties at an early stage before Denel purchased the 
51%. 
 
And then later, it appears that there were further 
financial difficulties.  Was this company, LMT, in fact in 
serious financial difficulties when you applied for business 
rescue? 
DR NELL:   It was Chair.  It related to the non-payment of 
one of the biggest clients we had at that stage. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Who was that? 
DR NELL:   It is a company called SCC in the Middle East. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I understand that stands for what?  It 
is a Saudi company, is it? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just tell the Chair please what it 
stands for. 
DR NELL:   It is a Security Control Company from Saudi 
Arabia. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And they were not paid? 
DR NELL:   They were not paying us. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   They were not paying you.  Sorry, yes. 
20 
DR NELL:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
DR NELL:   They did not pay our invoices in full. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And were they entitled not to pay you 
in full? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 220 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   Chair, we will – that is something that we still do 
not know at this stage.  There was a change of management 
in that company and they then required a 12 million Dollar 
guarantee from the majority shareholder, Denel, at that stage 
which was not part of the original contract which when we 
signed it with them.  So that was the result.  They wanted 
this 12 million Dollar prepayment guarantee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you refer to in paragraph 
13.6 to two loans while you were still CEO up to March 2016.  
And then you refer in 13.7 after your removal of CEO and 
10 
then on the basis of documents furnished to you.  It appears 
that further loans were made available by Denel to LMT.   
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was that when Mr Johan Wessels from 
Denel was seconded to LMT as CEO in your stead? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And then you refer to another 
agreement between Denel and LMT.  I do not believe we 
need to take you to that Chair.  But what was the essence of 
that agreement?  What was its purpose?  Was it to make 
20 
further loan financing available or what? 
DR NELL:   That was correct.  That was between Denel and 
LMT Product, the operating arm of LMT. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And then there is a reference to 
a need in terms of that agreement for financing to be applied 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 221 of 404 
 
with the consent of the shareholders.  And then you refer to 
a letter of demand having been sent by Denel.  And there is 
a response from both Pamodzi and the other LMT minority 
shareholders.  Would that be yourself, you and your 
colleague? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you respond to that letter of 
demand.  What was the demand for? 
DR NELL:   The demand was from Denel for the loan to be 
repaid Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And were they entitled to demand that? 
DR NELL:   We as the minority shareholders Chair, viewed 
that the correct process was not followed when the loans 
were made to LMT in accordance to the MOI of the company.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then in 13.11 you say it is unclear 
what the amount – what the money was used for.  And then 
you refer to LMT now being placed in business rescue on the 
4t h of September 2019.  So you attempted that in 2016 but 
Denel had opposed this, saying that it would provide loan 
financing.  Is that correct? 
20 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It provided some loans but in 
September 2019, there was then an application to the high 
court for LMT to be placed under business rescue. 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 222 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Who applied for that?  Was that the – 
again the minority shareholders such as yourself or was that 
the LMT company itself? 
DR NELL:   It was the LMT company itself. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Including the directors who came from 
Denel as the majority shareholder? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And you say here that the 
biggest creditor was Denel with around – with the loan of 
approximately R 350 million.  
10 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So does that relate to all the loans that 
were referred to earlier in your affidavit? 
DR NELL:   Only the loans that was paid from roundabout 
2016.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  And then the business rescue 
plan 
was 
approved 
by 
the 
creditors 
of 
LMT 
on 
the 
30t h of October 2019 and that indicates that Denel would 
receive one cent in rand? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Why did it get to this dire 
situation at LMT? 
DR NELL:   Chair, I imagine it was because the funding 
that...  We actually tried to obtain external shareholders to 
fund the business for equity finance but that was always 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 223 of 404 
 
opposed because of PFMA Regulations by Denel.   
 
And we had various shareholders, potential investors to 
the business that could provide sufficient cash with proof of 
funds to save this business.  That was always opposed by 
Denel.  And at the end, I think, Denel also just ran out of 
money and could not run the business.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now in your concluding paragraph on 
page 32, you say you did not personally benefit from the 
acquisition by Denel of LMT shares.  Why was that?  Did you 
not sell the shares in LMT to Denel in order to benefit 
10 
yourselves as shareholders? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair.  But we were only paid a hundred 
rand or something like that for the shares. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   For the shares? 
DR NELL:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And presumable you would have 
anticipated that if the business had grown particularly with 
the large volume of business that Denel was promising that 
your shares would then reflect that success in due course. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And your shares themselves would be 
worth more and you would presumable be paid out in 
dividends substantial amounts. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair.  The company was worth 
R 200 million in about 2016. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 224 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In 2016? 
DR NELL:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   At the time that the shares were 
bought by Denel? 
DR NELL:   Ja, when the shares were bought, we evaluated 
the company for capital at R 65 million.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And at the stage that it was 
closed under business rescue, what was it worth then? 
DR NELL:   I think the liabilities exceeded the assets to such 
an extent that the company was worth nothing. 
10 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
The 
shares 
themselves 
were 
...[intervenes]  
DR NELL:   Ja, the shares also. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  So does that explain why you still 
have the shares? 
DR NELL:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In LMT? 
DR NELL:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now I would like to take you to a 
passage which I would like you to explain please to the Chair 
20 
so that he can understand what you say.  It is the middle 
paragraph, the second paragraph on page 32.   
“A yellow carrot was dangled in front of our noses in 
that LMT would become part of Denel and therefore 
a preferred in-house supplier resulting in our dream 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 225 of 404 
 
being realised.  
The opposite took place.   
The prepayments resulted in 51% shareholding into 
Denel way below the market value of the shares  
Our shareholding was diluted.   
We lost control of our company.   
I was replaced as CEO and later resigned and with 
the new management of LMT, drove the company 
into the ground resulting in LMT products now being 
in business rescue, LMT Holdings to follow soon 
10 
after.” 
 
Now when you resigned from LMT - just remind us when 
that took place? 
DR NELL:   September 2016 Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And were you alone in resigning as a 
member of the Management Team at LMT? 
DR NELL:   Chair, no.  Fellow shareholders resigned as well. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Is there anything that you 
would want to add to what we have just dealt with in this 
affidavit Dr Nell before we move to the next affidavit? 
20 
DR NELL:   No, nothing Chair.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  Chair, if I might 
just have a moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That brings us then, Dr Nell, to Bundle 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 226 of 404 
 
10.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you go to Bundle 10 Mr Kennedy.  
Let us take a short adjournment. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS FOR A SHORT BREAK: 
INQUIRY RESUMES:   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us proceed.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  We are now in 
Bundle 10 and we would like to deal with Exhibit W24.2 from 
10 
page 7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
DR NELL:   Now Dr Nell, you again in the affidavit set out 
the same background you gave previously about your 
professional qualifications, et cetera.  But if I can then get to 
the substance of your affidavit from page 12.   
 
You deal with LMT’s relationship with Patria.  Is there 
anything here that you have added that you need to draw to 
the attention of the...  I am sorry.  I am looking at the wrong 
page.  May I just have a moment, Chair? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If you refer to page 11, you seem again 
to deal with relationship between LMT and Patria.  Why did 
you provide these details will you appear to already have 
dealt with, at least some of the details in the first affidavit? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 227 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   Chair, Just for the sake of complete this added it 
in this affidavit as well. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  then we come to a 
new topic at page 13, paragraph 6 which is CSIR landmine 
tests on the Patria AMV.  Now we have already looked at 
6621 which is then corrected and your correction that you 
put on the record here and reflected in your third affidavit 
says that to the effect that there were tests conducted by 
CSIR under contract from - not from LMT but Armscor. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What were these tests for? 
DR NELL:   Chair, Armscor placed a contract on the CSIR to 
evaluate the land mine protection of all the contenders of 
Project Hoefyster.  And at that stage, they invited us as one 
of the contenders.  I think the only contender at that stage to 
prove or to demonstrate our landmine protection to them.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And was that in terms of specific 
specifications? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair.  it was done in accordance with 
...[indistinct] and all spec RSA Mill Standard 37.  [Speaker is 
20 
not clear]   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now have you heard the evidence of 
Mr Nalepe(?) and Mr Nkosi in relation to landmine...  Sorry, 
sorry.  In relation to specifications and baselines, etcetera? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 228 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And did you hear the evidence that 
was given in relation to criticism of the land mine tests that 
were undertaken by the CSIR on your vehicles? 
DR NELL:   I heard Chair.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What do you say about that?  
DR NELL:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am so sorry.  If I might just put a very 
brief summary to you?  In essence what appears to be at the 
heart of the concerns raised by the witness, seems to be 
this.   
10 
 
That LMT’s vehicle that was sent for tests, had to be 
tested on a broad range of specifications that were laid down 
in terms of the South African National Defence Force’s own 
specifications that required strength of the vehicle in various 
respects to ensure ultimately the safety of the men of women 
who would serve as soldiers on behalf of the nation.   
 
And the concern that was expressed was that the first 
test was failed miserable by LMT.  Is that correct? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And can you tell the Chair please 
20 
why it failed so miserable? 
DR NELL:   Chair, there were two test series and each test 
series consisted of two tests, wheel detonation and the 
belly(?) detonation.  The belly detonation was passed 
successfully.  Oh, the wheel detonation.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 229 of 404 
 
 
The belly detonation failed and the reason why it failed, 
I can attribute it to the use of Armscor because Armscor very 
cleverly placed the mine as required by RSA Mill Standard 
37 in the weakest position on the vehicle.   
 
It was missed by us.  We did all the previous tests where 
it actually passed this on our own.  And then Armscor placed 
the mining at such a place which was the weakest position 
as required by the standard and that is why we failed.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So they test the what?  The mine? 
DR NELL:   The mine, ja.  The test mine. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The test mines.  So the vehicle was 
required to be placed over a landmine or something similar. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was it to drive over it or simply have 
something explode under it while it was immobile? 
DR NELL:   While it was immobile Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Immobile? 
DR NELL:   Immobile. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And are you saying that Armscor 
did something wrong in placing it at a particular position? 
20 
DR NELL:   No, Chair.  I actually say they did the right thing.  
It shows the experience from Armscor to place the mine in 
such a position which was overlooked by us.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Presumable a landmine can be 
triggered in a whole range of different spots. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 230 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair.  The standard requires that you 
place the mine in such a position which is the worst place 
from a survivability point of view. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  So that you can see, not what 
would happen to the occupants of the armoured vehicle if the 
landmine was triggered at a relatively harmless place but at 
the worse place. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now you say that Armscor placed 
the mine at the right place. 
10 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So why was this a failure?  Why did 
your vehicle not comply with it? 
DR NELL:   Chair, the vehicle that we tested was provided to 
us by Butler and Finland and it was an amphibious vehicle, 
which means that it could swim.  And the position where they 
placed the mine was right below the bold(?) pump(?). 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Bold out? 
DR NELL:   Bold pump is the pump that pumps the water out 
of the vehicle whilst it is swimming.  The vehicles of the 
20 
South African Army will not – it is not amphibious and 
therefore will not be using this bold pump position.  We later 
repeated the test at the same position but I am sure you are 
going to ask that question. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ja, I will get to that but let us just deal 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 231 of 404 
 
with the first question now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But is the position that you accept.  You 
do not criticise anybody for that failure of the test? 
DR NELL:   I do not criticise anybody Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But may I ask you?  From LMT’s point 
of view, why was an amphibious vehicle used for purpose of 
the test if in fact that was not the type of vehicle that would 
be supplied to the South African National Defence Force? 
DR NELL:   Chair, that was the vehicle that was supplied to 
10 
us by Patria to be modified to comply with the requirements 
of the South African Army. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So if they had given you some other 
requirement, you would have complied with that other 
requirement which might have avoided the problem? 
DR NELL:   Yes, Chair.  We will. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But can I ask you Dr Nell?  It sounds 
like this was a mission was inevitable going to fail.  Why did 
you not say to Armscor but why must we – or the defence 
force for that matter – why must we put in an amphibian 
20 
vehicle which will not have the same safety standards as the 
vehicle we are going to provide?  It is going to be a waste of 
time. 
DR NELL:   Chair, it was...  I think we thought that the 
vehicle will still go through a number of developments and 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 232 of 404 
 
the test that we had done was based on that specific vehicle 
configuration only.  Both formal and informal documentation 
from Armscor stated clearly that further tests will be done 
later on. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you had criticised...  I think it was 
Mr Nkosi who criticised LMT and how it managed to get the 
second test done.  Let us deal with the second test.  You 
have heard the evidence about that and his criticism.   
DR NELL:   I did Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And his criticism clearly 
10 
seemed to imply that what was being done was that LMT was 
effectively wood-winking the process which should have 
gone for a second test in the first place because if it failed 
the first stage, you should not be allowed to go through to 
the second stage. 
DR NELL:   I totally disagree Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Why is that? 
DR NELL:   After the failure of the first test which was paid 
for by Armscor.  Armscor informed us that they need to gain 
confidence in us and that specific email is in my bundle 
20 
where they say that we need to repeat the test at our own 
cost to show them that we can actually do this.   
 
It was critical to complete the test as soon as possible 
because we were close to the award of the tender and we 
need to show our client, Patria, as well as Armscor that this 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 233 of 404 
 
vehicle can actually comply with what we stated it can do.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you explain to Armscor that the 
reason why you had failed the first test so miserable was 
because you were required to put an amphibian vehicle 
which proved to be vulnerable even though you thought 
originally that it would pass the test okay?   
 
Did you explain to Armscor that actually it is not really 
our fault?   
 
It is because of the fact that we were told put in the 
amphibian vehicle and we did and the amphibian vehicle 
10 
failed, not because we do not know how to make such a 
vehicle but because the design of it is such that there is a 
vulnerable point? 
DR NELL:   Chair, the reason for the failure was very well 
described to Armscor in both a report and in a presentation 
that was given to them before we did the second test.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So then, what I am really leading to is, 
why would it  make sense for Armscor to say we need to gain 
confidence in your product because of the fist failure if you 
present – if you did in a presentation, explained to them 
20 
what had happened?  Why were they lacking confidence? 
DR NELL:   I think they needed to be shown a real test, not 
type of study.  That is why we did the second test.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what was the outcome of the 
second test? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 234 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   We passed the second test.  And I would like, for 
clarity Chair, to state that it was not a cut and paste exercise 
that was in the testimony of Mr Nkosi.  We went through a 
detailed engineering process which involved a lot of tests 
and simulations before we did the change onto the vehicle.  
And all that information was provided to Armscor as part of 
the pre-test evaluation. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So this was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The second test, was it effectively the 
same test that you had failed before as a first test but the 
difference is that since the first test you had fixed the 
problem or did you bring in a different type of vehicle for the 
second test? 
DR NELL:   Chair, it was exactly the same vehicle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NELL:   We just rectified the mistake. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You rectified the mistake? 
DR NELL:   Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well...  So if that – if you – if it was the 
same vehicle but you rectified the mistake, then your earlier 
evidence that the problem was the type of vehicle, the 
problem that led to the dismissal failure of the first test, it 
was the type of vehicle, then it cannot be right.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 235 of 404 
 
 
That evidence cannot be right because it means there 
was simply a problem in that vehicle.  It was not the type of 
vehicle that was a problem.  Once you had fixed the 
problem, you passed the test with the same vehicle. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair.  We removed the bold pump that 
was not to be fitted onto South African vehicles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NELL:   But then it became the vehicle that was 
supposed to go into production. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but am I correct to have understood 
10 
your evidence earlier to have said, the problem was the type 
of vehicle that you had used?  Did I understand your 
evidence correctly earlier? 
DR NELL:   Ja, that specific vehicle was an amphibious 
configuration. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR NELL:   But we removed the propellers and all these 
things that made it amphibious but the bottom part where 
that bolt pump was fitted in, we left out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
DR NELL:   It was taken outside.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you say it was a mistake on your 
side? 
DR NELL:   Correct. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 236 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So there can be no cause for 
complaint and you have not in fact raised a complaint about 
the fact that you – that there was a dismal failure on the first 
– at the first test. 
DR NELL:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And it seems to make sense in 
the light of what you have just said that Armscor still needed 
to be persuaded through a second test that they could have 
confidence in your vehicle. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The vehicle that you submitted for the 
second test, was that a no-amphibious vehicle completely?  
Was it a different design?  Or was it simply what had been 
the amphibian vehicle was just a few things added or a few 
things taken out? 
DR NELL:   Chair, it was exactly the same vehicle that was 
used in the previous test.  We just rectified the mistake by 
changing the floor and going through various engineering 
studies to make sure that it did not expect the same or did 
not – will not get the same as previously. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I take it that you would agree – you 
would then concede that the dismal failure was well 
deserved by LMT because it was your mistake? 
DR NELL:   Ja, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 237 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, I just wanted to make sure that 
whatever criticism may be levelled at LMT or is levelled at 
LMT, we know that you accept that.  You are not saying that 
the criticism was unfair.  That is not what you are saying. 
DR NELL:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that it was a mistake on your 
part and then you rectified it and then you passed the 
second test. 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, may I continue? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Dr Nell, you were further 
criticised by Mr Nkosi in his evidence that you should not 
have actually proceeded to the second test at all.  If you get 
it wrong the first time, then you cannot proceed to a second 
test in his view as to how the system should work.   
DR NELL:   Chair, my response to that is, that anybody can 
ask the CSIR to certify or test their vehicle for landmine 
20 
protection.  This is what they do and this is what we did.  We 
requested them.  We placed an order on them to redo the 
test for us at the request of Armscor to show confidence in 
them again.  And I do not think that – that is unfair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 238 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So the first test ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   On a lighter note, I guess Mr Kennedy you 
fail the exam or you get yourself and then you pass.  Maybe 
that was the problem.  [laughing] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Dr Nell.  So the first test was paid for 
by Armscor. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that was the failure.  And so they 
10 
then said you should proceed if you want to persuade them 
that you have actually got the ability to fix the problem to go 
through a second test after you made the modifications and 
this time the test would have to be paid for, although 
requested by them, at your expense. 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   
DR NELL:   We paid for it and we requested the test to be 
conducted.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  It seems to be Mr Nkosi’s 
20 
allegation or suggestion that something sneaky was done 
here by LMT to do something improper by getting a second 
test even if it was at your own cost. 
DR NELL:   Chair, I deny that.  As I say, anybody can go and 
rewrite the exam if you do it – if you write the correct exam 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 239 of 404 
 
paper.  So CSIR is there for anybody to come and do tests.  
They would require Armscor to verify that the test is done 
correctly and this is what we have done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, it depends whether the rules or 
the regulations of policies permit the rewriting.  Permit doing 
the second test when you failed the first test.  If they do not 
permit it, then it would not be right if somebody has failed to 
let them do it.   
 
It may well be that in a certain situation, it can be said:  
Well, you cannot do the second test.  You will have to wait 
10 
for the next round of test or something.   
 
I mean, I do not know the details but it would depend on 
the rules.  If the rules or policies permit doing a second test 
when you have failed the first one, that is fine but if they do 
not permit then it would not be fine.   
 
But it just depends on whether there are rules dealing 
with that or not.  
DR NELL:   Chair, I am not aware of any such policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  The redoing of tests or doing second 
tests.  In your experience, have that been – had that been 
20 
allowed to other people before or you do not know? 
DR NELL:   Yes, Chair we failed and other companies failed 
tests many times.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and you were allowed to repeat? 
DR NELL:   You have to pass the test. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 240 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Then a further 
criticism was raised by Mr Nkosi and that is that is that the 
test, both the first and the second, only tested your vehicle 
for certain aspects but not others.  
DR NELL:   Chair, we – the test was conducted exactly as 
required by RSA Mill Standard 37.  We provided the 
information that was required.  CSIR came to inspect the 
vehicle.  They gave us an inspection list which we did.   
 
We followed then all the requirements and we provided 
10 
all the information as required by RSA Mill Standard 37.   
 
And if I may?  You have to do things to pass such a test.  
You need to survive the injury criteria which we did.  And you 
need to provide the repairability of the vehicle after the 
detonation.   
 
And in both these cases for the second test, we provided 
this in a form of a report which was distributed to Armscor.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now is there anything you want to add 
on the CSIR test or can we move on? 
DR NELL:   I have nothing to add.  Thank you, Chair.   
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  You deal in 
paragraph 7 on page 15 with delays in finalising the 
platform, the hulls procurement process.  Just sum up for the 
Chair please what your evidence is in relation to the delays. 
DR NELL:   Chair, we were required to provide what we call 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 241 of 404 
 
wrong prices or rough order of magnitude prices by DTLS in 
2012.  And we were again required to provide updated prices 
in 2014.  I think the reason for that was that the development 
of the project or the vehicle at that stage did not proceed as 
it was thought it would and therefore there was a delay in 
the whole process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May we now proceed with your section 
dealing with the acquisition of LMT by Denel on page 16, 
paragraph 8.  That relates to the same issues that we have 
dealt with before but here you flesh out some additional 
10 
details.  Is that right? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I would just like to refer you to one if I 
may.  At 8.4, you refer to a pre-statement by Mr Saloojee the 
CEO of Denel at the AADD 2012 Show.  And if I can just read 
into the record what he said: 
“Our acquisition (meaning Denel’s acquisition) of 
LMT (meaning the majority shareholding) means that 
we will in future be able to manufacture and supply 
through life support for the complete badger locally 
20 
with LMT responsible for the vehicle and tarot hulls 
and DLS providing system integration.” 
 
Now Mr Saloojee has told us and gave evidence to this 
effect that when he made the statement, it was shortly after 
he became Group CEO.  The actual decision to acquire a 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 242 of 404 
 
stake in LMT was taken by his predecessors before he joined 
Denel.  Do you confirm that? 
DR NELL:   I confirm. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But he says that he never had an 
intention to exclude LMT and intended to honour this 
statement.  Was this a further assurance that you received 
this time in public that Denel would channel a lot of business 
to LMT? 
DR NELL:   Especially the Hoefyster Hull Manufacture, 
Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But can I ask you this?  Was that 
– was this – that was surely not a guarantee that Denel 
would always give its business to LMT even though it was 
now going to be in-house, as it were?   
 
Surely, if you were producing an item that was not of 
good quality that, for example, did not have the correct 
safety standards or that you were going to cost Denel a 
great deal more.   
 
Would you accept that Denel would not then have to 
procure such items from you in those circumstances if it 
20 
could get a better, safe and/or cheaper product from other 
sources? 
DR NELL:   Chair, I concede but then we should just now 
about their concerns about safety and quality and the 
problems that they raised.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 243 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now may we then turn on page 
17 to the 2012 quotation process.  This is for the platform, 
Hulls Contract.  That was the 212 originally, was it? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair.  And I would like to again 
state, these were wrong prices that was acquired.  In other 
words, rough order of magnitude.  It was not fixed or firm 
prices.  It was just to give them an idea of how much these 
vehicles will cost to manufacture. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And is that the – so there were 
three firms that were approached for quotations. You being 
10 
the one, VR Laser being the other and I think the third entity 
was DMD. 
DR NELL:   Chair, at that stage, we were not aware of other 
competitors.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  How did you become aware of 
the fact that other competitors had been asked to put in 
quotes, to participate in a competitive process against LMT? 
DR NELL:   Chair, there were a number of rumours going 
around 
but 
I 
think 
it 
was 
an 
honest 
mistake 
by 
Mr Van den Heever who also gave testimony here.   
20 
 
He sent an email and if you read through the email train 
below, he said that VR Laser is also being evaluated or will 
also be visited by Patria.  That was an absolutely honest 
mistake from him and this is how we really confirmed that 
things are going to other suppliers as well. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 244 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Is that the...  Is that the email 
that you refer to in paragraph 10.1 on page 18? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And 10.2. 
DR NELL:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now whether or not Mr Van den Heever 
was making a mistake and whether it was an honest mistake 
or whatever, it is not my particular focus for present 
purposes.  Did it come as a surprise to you that VR Laser 
had been asked to compete with you as well as another 
10 
competitor? 
DR NELL:   Yes, Chair it did come as a surprise to us. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Why was that a surprise to you?  Is it 
not important that a state entity like Denel should be 
following a competitive process? 
DR NELL:   It is important for them to follow.  Just inform us 
about this change in the process.  After everybody make 
promises to us that this will be work that will be coming to 
your side.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you referred also to the Patria 
20 
site inspection visit, the heading at paragraph 10.  Just tell 
us in a sentence or two what that relates to and why it is 
significant in respect of the quotations submitted by VR 
Laser? 
DR NELL:   Chair, as have been mentioned previously.  We 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 245 of 404 
 
have been working with Patria since 2004.  So Patria knew 
our capabilities.  They knew what we were busy doing.  They 
knew how we do things in the business because we have 
been working for ten years already.   
 
And then we got a letter to say that they are coming to 
inspect our premises and the way we work.  And they have 
been on site permanently for almost ten years.  So they 
know exactly how we work.  So they came to visit us.   
 
We did not really know exactly why.  The purpose was 
stated in the email to check out capabilities and things that 
10 
we can do.  So.   
 
But later on we learnt that there was an extremely 
negative report that was published by Patria.  That report 
was never given to us.  We never had access to that  If we 
had access to that report we would have made the necessary 
changes immediately to rectify the mistakes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You would not have asked Patria to 
rewrite its report?  You would rather to try do changes to the 
vehicle so that they could then re-inspect it and then be 
satisfied that it was now up to scratch.  Is that right? 
20 
DR NELL:   Chair, yes.  We would rather rectify mistakes in 
our processes and our quality if that has been identified by 
them.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now the Patria report that you have 
just referred to.  Is that the one dealt with in your affidavit, 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 246 of 404 
 
page 19, paragraph 11? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the Patria report came out saying 
that you – that VR Laser was superior to yours.  Is that 
right? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In fact, considerable superior to yours. 
DR NELL:   They said that some changes to our processes 
and capabilities, we can only be evaluated or considered for 
the hulls.   
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Dr Nell, I understand your 
evidence that you were expecting a lot of business from 
Denel, 
better 
business 
once 
they 
acquire 
the 
51% 
shareholding.  There was reference to something in that 
regard in the agreement that you referred to earlier.   
 
There was reference also to that in a letter to Pamodzi 
that you referred us to.  And it was also apparent from 
Mr Saloojee’s press statement that we have referred to 
already.   
 
But would you not agree with me that if Patria, the 
20 
original designers and manufacturers of the basic vehicle 
that was at stake here.   
 
If Patria – was it not desirable that Patria should in fact 
undertake an inspection of the vehicles of the three bidders 
who were then making quotations to see who was the best 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 247 of 404 
 
from a safety and technical point of view? 
DR NELL:   Yes, I would agree to that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You would agree with that? 
DR NELL:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you are not saying, are you, that 
Patria or Denel were wrong.  That Patria was wrong in 
coming to do an inspection or Denel was wrong in asking 
Patria to do an inspection.  They were entitled to do that.  Is 
that right? 
DR NELL:   They were entitled. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Surely, it is of the benefit of the 
nation and also its soldiers who have to get into these 
vehicles and go into combat where they may go over 
landmines, that the very best quality is identified and cost-
effective and competitive that that would then be secured 
for that benefit. 
DR NELL:   I agree, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now what I am interested in 
is your suggestion to the Chair that what should have 
happened is this.  If Patria does an inspection, which you 
20 
have confirmed they were entitled to do and it was in the 
national interest for them to do it, where they came out 
with a report saying VR Laser is far better than LMT and 
LMT, they could be considered but they are certainly not as 
good as VR Laser and they have got a number of 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 248 of 404 
 
negatives, drawbacks about them.  You seem to be 
suggesting that you were entitled then to have a second 
chance, is that appropriate? 
DR NELL:   Chair, if we knew that there was a report that 
could damage our future chances of getting work, I would 
expect or think that it would be appropriate for us to be 
given the report to see where we did wrong.  The reason 
why I saw that is we have been working for Patria for ten 
years, they know our processes, we have supplied them 
with many components in the past.  Why suddenly the 
10 
negative approach?  This was my concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if they are entitled to come to your 
site and you conduct inspections and the inspections 
reveal something that you might regard as negative, why 
are they not entitled to reflect that in the report because 
you see,  you have to make it clear whether your complaint 
is that they did not give you the report or the complaint is 
that they included negative findings or whatever in their 
report or both.  Which one?  Is it your complaint or is it 
both? 
20 
DR NELL:   Chair, they are entitled to inspect the facility 
at any time.  I think we were unhappy with the fact that we 
did not know the exact purpose and what they are really 
going to look at when they came to inspect us and if we 
knew what was the output of their report, we would have 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 249 of 404 
 
rectified it immediately. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well I do not know the details but 
we all know that where somebody is entitled to come to 
your site or premises and conduct an inspection sometimes 
there are good reasons for them not to notify you in 
advance before they come because they want to see how 
you operate as you do because if they notify you in 
advance you might – they might not be able to find the real 
situation because then you will change certain things.   
DR NELL:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you accept that there may be those 
situations? 
DR NELL:   I accept that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Generally speaking.  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   This was a different situation though 
to the CSIR test, I understand that, as you put it earlier, it 
is like writing an exam or the Chair suggested it might be 
similar to writing a test and you might be able to have a 
rewrite provided you, in this case, pay CSIR for the cost.  
But how many visits did you feel would have to be 
20 
undertaken by Patria to eventually be satisfied?  I mean, if 
they were to give you a second change the first time 
around and you did not match that the second time around 
would you then be saying well, they should have given you 
yet a further chance.  What I am suggesting to you, Dr 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 250 of 404 
 
Nell, is that perhaps those witnesses from Denel, who have 
expressed concern about quality issues on LMT’s part may 
have some sort of point that you would be – if you are 
going to be considered for the award of a contract you 
should be not just good on price and certainly your tender 
reflect – your quotes reflected that you were substantially 
lower than VR Laser and some questions have been raised 
about why VR Laser was so high but what I am suggesting 
is, as some witnesses have suggested, I am not saying this 
is necessarily my own opinion, but I am putting to you the 
10 
version of some of the other witnesses that there were 
already 
concerns 
about 
quality, 
there 
were 
already 
concerns about performance and so forth, they were 
entitled to go out to the marketplace, as you have 
conceded, they were entitled to have you satisfy Patria, 
which was the originator of this vehicle, to come and look 
at it objectively from a technical point of view and then not 
only had you failed the first CSIR test but the Patria test 
you do okay with but not nearly as good as – as well as VR 
Laser.  Is that not a fair comment on their part? 
20 
DR NELL:   It could be a fair comment.  When they came to 
visit us, they did not investigate how we welded Patria 
floors or Patria hulls, they investigated or they walked 
through our workshop and just had a look at the general 
process in general.  At that stage we were – we had 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 251 of 404 
 
manufactured more than 50 of these Patria floors for 
customers all over the world.  So if they wanted to 
investigate that, they could have had a look at that, but I 
concede they could come and have a look at any time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes is that not the point and it is 
perhaps to your credit that you do make that concession.  
The first part though suggests the criticism that they 
should have done the test in a different way but that is 
surely up to the examiner, it is not the student, but the 
examiner who has to determine what the test will not 
10 
include. 
DR NELL:   I agree, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You concede that, yes.  And you 
concede that Denel was entitled to take the Patria report 
seriously. 
DR NELL:   Yes, if that meant something to them and it 
added to supply their valuation, yes, I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now some of the witnesses 
have expressed real concern about LMT’s safety, the 
technical side going as far as safety was concerned, 
20 
particularly Mr Burger and he will give evidence on that 
later.  Is you answer to those concerns if only you had 
given us a chance we would have fixed that? 
DR NELL:   Chair, before answering on that I can say that 
there are more than 100 Patria vehicles driving around all 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 252 of 404 
 
over the world saving many lives in Afghanistan with 
clients using floors welded by us.   
So I disagree with the fact that there is a safety 
concern on our products.  Even the Mercedes Benz cabs 
fitted with floors that we supplied and they saved many, 
many lives in Afghanistan.  So our floors were definitely 
not of poor quality, they were actually of extremely good 
quality.  But it is really up to Denel or Denel Land Systems, 
they can use all this information to make a supplier choice. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now the vehicles that were supplied 
10 
to the United Nations where they used in Afghanistan or 
elsewhere?  Were they not used in Africa? 
DR NELL:   That were different vehicles, Chair, those were 
Casspir vehicles. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Casspir vehicles, different from this 
but also armoured vehicles, not so? 
DR NELL:   Correct, if I may clarify on that, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
DR NELL:   Those vehicles were manufactured from a very 
specific type of steel of which DLS know of.  We received 
20 
the steel from the steel supplier and the steel required a 
very specified – specific way how you prepare the steel to 
weld it.  When we received the steel from the supplier we 
noticed that the steel was severely corroded.  We informed 
the supplier thereof, they said that we can use the steel.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 253 of 404 
 
 
The allegations that safety was an issue due to our 
poor welding is not – is unfounded.  We contracted a 
world-renowned metallurgist to evaluate the cracking in 
those specific vehicles and they found that it was due to 
corrosion in the plates while they were stored at the steel 
supplier and that specific report is also in my bundle. 
 
So we did not – we built many Casspirs for Denel 
and not only those ones to the United Nations and not one 
of them failed except these five which were built from steel 
that was corroded severely. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But do you concede that Denel was 
entitled to take it seriously the fact that at least five, even 
though it might have been hundreds elsewhere and other 
parts of the world like Afghanistan, as you mentioned, they 
were entitled to at least raise the questions and have a 
concern that they would need to have resolved before they 
could comfortably give business to you in future? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, I concede that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And let us accept for a moment 
also your evidence that a Casspir is not the same as this 
20 
particular type of vehicle for purposes of the Hoefyster.  I 
do not have any difficulty with that but it is something that 
Denel in awarding a contract for hundreds of – the different 
type of vehicle in Hoefyster project, different to the 
Casspirs should again have needed satisfaction on for the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 254 of 404 
 
new vehicles, correct? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And so you send your vehicle 
through to the CSIR.  It fails the first one dismally, it 
manages to get through the second one but then when 
Patria comes for their visit, their one and only visit, they 
find you are really not as good as VR Laser and in fact 
there are some problems.   
Now I understand your approach is but they were 
not that serious that we could not resolve.  Am I doing 
10 
justice to your overall point? 
DR NELL:   You are right, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But was it illegitimate or 
irrational for Denel to say well, we are really concerned 
about it.  Denel may be giving us assurances that those 
five vehicles that were in Africa, the United Nations, that 
they had a corrosion and that was only because your steel 
manufacturer had let you down and it was a different type 
of vehicle and you sorted everything out and yet the CSIR 
said no, you failed first time and Patria said, although they 
20 
did not fail you, you were not as good as VR Laser.  It 
seems, 
I 
am 
putting 
to 
you, 
to 
be 
legitimate 
and 
responsible 
approach 
by 
Denel 
to 
say 
we 
are 
still 
concerned about LMT’s ability to provide a safe vehicle. 
DR NELL:   Chair, yes, I agree but to fail your first landline 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 255 of 404 
 
test of your first design is not uncommon.  I do not think 
that is the big issue but yes, I agree, that Denel, if they 
had concerns, those are valid concerns. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think maybe the challenge was that you 
were being compared with somebody else.  If you were not 
being compared it might have been easy for Denel to say 
okay, fix this and then give us comfort that we can give you 
the job going forward but when you are being compared 
with somebody else it depends what they find with the 
10 
other person. 
DR NELL:   I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, if they find absolutely no problem or 
whatever problems they find with the other person, if those 
problems on the other person are much less serious then 
yours then you are likely to lose out.  You understand? 
DR NELL:   I agree, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I put a different perspective 
from other witnesses?  So the witnesses I have referred to 
20 
who took a dim view of the technical safety aspects, some 
of them in fact contended particularly Mr Burger, if one 
looks at the documents, that VR Laser must get the award 
of the Hoefyster platform hulls contract because LMT just 
was not able to achieve safety.  That was the extreme, if I 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 256 of 404 
 
can put it.   
 
The other extreme approach of other witness is that 
Denel was – or those people in Denel were really trying to 
favour VR Laser using as a pretext the safety that LMT 
might have had a few problems but they could easily be 
fixed up but you have conceded that they had to be 
assured that the technical safety was satisfactory and 
good, not so? 
DR NELL:   I agree, Chair, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy, I am mentioning this so that 
you can if necessary help me if my recollection of the 
issues and the evidence is not right.  Is the position that 
even though DLS, Mr Burger and whoever, who were 
critical of LMT’s abilities, capabilities, capabilities and so 
on, even though they may have had a point or some points, 
those are points that ought to have been dealt with in the 
course of following a competitive – an open competitive 
tender process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   As opposed to them raising those points 
outside of that process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is my thinking in terms of the issues 
right? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 257 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   With respect, it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   With respect, it is, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Yes, we confirm …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I just wanted that as we proceed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will make sure that we – I am not 
missing anything, ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And is it not correct that in one of the 
contracts you raised a concern that LMT was not being 
given a proper chance as an in-house entity? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And there was then a resolution 
achieved where VR Laser got the initial business but LMT 
was promised further business thereafter. 
DR NELL:   Chair, yes, that specific situation arose when 
Mr Teubes gave me some options to work with.  My 
20 
problem with that – and that happened in October 2014, 
was that the process of requesting LMT with an RFP, us 
compiling a tender, getting it approved by the board and 
then submitting it back to DLS, that process was never 
allowed to be followed.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 258 of 404 
 
I had to – I was put under pressure to sign an 
agreement which was not to the benefit of the shareholders 
or of the business and what I did not understand at that 
stage is why did the board not allow me to put this under 
the board.  So the whole thing never – nothing came from 
it at the end. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was that the contract that we have 
just been dealing with, the 217 platform hulls or is that a 
later contract? 
DR NELL:   That was the same contract. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The same contract.  Yes.  And did 
you in fact get business in addition to what was allocated 
to VR Laser were some of the platform hulls or at least 
some components awarded to you? 
DR NELL:   My recollection, Chair, I left the business in 
September 2016 and I think in that time period of 
September 2016 the award of the internal fit of the vehicle 
was awarded to LMT.  I think it was R20 million or 
something which is a drop in the ocean compared to the 
bigger contract. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And in fact there was reference to 
the interior fit and including or in addition to that would be 
the rear doors, were you aware of that? 
DR NELL:   I am aware of that, Chair, but I am not aware 
that it has been awarded, the rear doors. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 259 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  But to go back to the issue of 
whether you should have been given a second chance and 
a chance to fix it up and so forth, do you believe that that 
issue was influenced at all by the fact that LMT was now a 
largely – it was owned largely by Denel and in fact 
controlled by Denel and that various assurances had been 
given to you as the founding shareholders as well as 
Pamodzi, that you would be given substantial business now 
that you were part of a Denel group? 
DR NELL:   It was our approach that if it complies with the 
10 
requirements of the agreements that we would give a – we 
would be given a chance if it is commercially viable and 
within the rules of PFMA and that was the case. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, may we turn on page 21 to 
paragraph 13, the BBBEE certification requirement during 
the evaluation process.  Just tell us what this is about, Dr 
Nell, please? 
DR NELL:   Chair, the original request for a proposal did 
not require us to provide a BBBEE certificate and during 
the clarification meetings we had with DLS we were 
20 
required to provide our BBBEE certificates.  I informed the 
meeting at that stage that we are busy with a re-
evaluation, our current BEE certificate expired and we 
were then given two weeks to provide a new updated BEE 
certificate. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 260 of 404 
 
 
We then consulted with the auditors who did our 
BEE adjudication, they did supply us with a valid BEE 
certificate before the 14 days were over which were then 
submitted to DLS in response to their requirement the 
clarification meeting. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Now we get to page 22, paragraph 
14.  It is headed: 
“Allegations 
of 
poor 
performance, 
delays 
and 
quality concerns made by DLS against LMT.” 
We have dealt with that it seems in some detail, is that 
10 
correct?  
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I just want to pick up a couple of 
points, if I may, page 23 paragraph 14.4 you refer to the 
cracking of Casspir hulls delivered to DLS and eventually 
to the United Nations.  On the 11 November 2014 Dr J J – I 
seem to remember that you confirmed in consultation there 
was mistyping – there is a typing error, it should be Dr 
Marais and Associates. 
DR NELL:   Correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  M-a-r-a-i-s.  Presented a report to 
LMT which vindicated LMT and then you have a copy of 
that report to your affidavit.  Did that vindicate you on the 
basis that – of the explanation you have already given or 
summarised earlier, the corrosion of the metal, etcetera?    
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 261 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Right.  Now you the – and I would 
like you to comment on this please or explain why you have 
used these words.  14.5: 
“I 
submit 
that 
considering 
the 
timing 
of 
the 
compilation of all these trumped allegations of 
underperformance 
was 
a 
ploy 
to 
slander 
and 
castigate LMT as an incapable entity that Denel 
could not trust to execute a Hoefyster Burger.” 
Oh so sorry, “order”.  Now you then continue the next 
10 
paragraph 14.6: 
“Interestingly 
Stephan 
Burger 
raised 
these 
allegations.  He as the very same person who a few 
years back had approached LMT and branded LMT 
as the strategic and critical partner in the Hoefyster 
programme whilst at the same time he was singing 
praises of VR Laser Services.” 
Just let us unpack that please, Dr Nell.  Do you stand by 
the terminology that you have used in your affidavit that 
the allegations of underperformance were trumped up? 
20 
DR NELL:   I agree, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You stand by that? 
DR NELL:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You are not agreeing with me, that is 
not my terminology, that is your own that you put in the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 262 of 404 
 
affidavit. 
DR NELL:   I agree with what I say here. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Is that despite the fact that 
earlier you accepted that there were some failings on the 
part 
of 
LMT 
which 
you 
have 
indicated 
were 
not 
insuperable? 
DR NELL:   Chair, yes, I agree.  At that stage we delivered 
many, many vehicles to many, many international clients 
and to all these negative or allegations of poor quality, late 
delivery, pointing fingers only to us was not acceptable.  
10 
There are always two sides to a story and this is why we 
contracted this guy to do the evaluation for us of all the 
contracts between them because not one of our other 
clients we had so many complaints as we had with DLS. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But you say further that: 
“These trumped allegations of underperformance 
was a ploy to slander and castigate LMT as an 
incapable entity.” 
DR NELL:   Chair, that was my interpretation of the 
situation at that stage. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you stand by that still today?  Is 
that still your opinion? 
DR NELL:   I still do, Chair, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now LMT by this stage of 
course was in-house, it was within the Denel Group. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 263 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And DLS was a sister entity within 
Denel, not so? 
DR NELL:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It was a division of the Denel 
company whereas you were – your company was a 
separate company but controlled by Denel. 
DR NELL:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now why do you make these very 
serious allegations that their allegations were not just 
10 
serious against you but in fact wrong and not just wrong 
but actually slanderous, in other words, defamatory.  They 
were out to harm your reputation as a capable supplier, 
that this was a ploy and that this was trumped up.  In other 
words, they care concocting a case, it is not just that they 
had an honest opinion that you were poor performers but 
that they were making out a lie.  Is that not essentially 
what you are saying? 
DR NELL:   Chair, we had many clients that were satisfied 
with our products, we saved many, many lives.  So say that 
20 
our vehicles are unsafe is incorrect.  Our welders and the 
welding processes that we use in the company are all – 
they are all certified in accordance with South African 
Institute of Welding, it was just beyond me that people 
could say these things about our products which saves so 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 264 of 404 
 
many lives and which we have delivered so many to 
different clients all over the world. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now just to pick up, I am going to 
skip 14.6 at the moment because I will come back to that.  
I just want to pick up what you just said about LMT now 
being under the control of Denel.  You pick – you take up 
that threat in 14.7, you say: 
“It should be further be noted that Denel controlled 
the LMT board with 51% shareholding and could 
have easily intervened is these allegations are true.  
10 
On LMT board level we refuted all these claims 
indicating that it was in fact DLS who, due to poor 
contracting, is responsible for most of the issues 
relating to the perceived poor performance.” 
So effectively you are saying when DLS blame us for poor 
performance it is not a genuine truthful criticism, it is 
trumped up, they are trying to slander us, defame us.   
 
And 
secondly, 
where 
there 
were 
problems 
of 
performance it was not our fault, it was due to DLS’ fault.  
Is that what you were saying? 
20 
DR NELL:   Chair, the contents of the report clearly state 
what were the reasons for the problems on these projects. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
DR NELL:   We provided this report to our board, we also 
provided a report to DLS and there were some increase in 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 265 of 404 
 
performance from both sides and we started to work well 
together but at that stage there were no more further 
contracts placed by DLS on us. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I would like to go back to 14.6.  
You seem to be saying that there was a measure of 
hypocrisy on the part of Mr Burger.  Is that correct to infer? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And is your point that that Mr Burger 
had supported the purchase by Denel some years before of 
a majority shareholding in LMT because it would enhance 
10 
the capacity in-house and that you would – your production 
capacity would be good particularly for the Hoefyster 
project? 
DR NELL:   That is correct, Chair.  I indicated in a board 
meeting already in 2013 that we have sufficient capacity 
and capability to weld I think four of these Patrias per 
month in our existing facility. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But Mr Burger ’s evidence, according 
to his affidavit, and he will be called as a witness, as I 
understand his evidence, part of it is this.  That however 
20 
attractive you may have looked some years back when 
Denel purchased the majority shareholding LMT there was 
a disappointment that crept in because in fact there were 
serious production and safety issues that concerned him.  
So does that not explain why there is an apparent 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 266 of 404 
 
inconsistency?  It is all very well to say Mr Burger 
originally promoted the idea of purchasing a majority 
shareholding in your company at that time but the fact that 
later he was saying no,. no, no, we must give it to VR 
Laser, not LMT, is that not explained by his belief that in 
fact in the interim the intervening period quality had arisen 
as a serious problem? 
MR NEL:   Mr Burger is entitled to his opinion, Chair, that 
is what he saw.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But you seem to be saying that he is 
10 
not entitled to his opinion if it is not a genuine opinion.  
You seem to be saying it is not a genuine opinion, it was a 
ploy, is the word that you used, it was trumped up.  In 
other words, it is basically a misrepresentation of the truth 
which he undertook deliberately.  Those are very serious 
allegations against Mr Burger and those of his colleagues 
at Denel that either agreed with him or followed his lead. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, the impression that 
emerges from what you say here is that you do not believe 
that he held that opinion honestly about LMT, you do not 
20 
believe it was a bona fide opinion even it was wrong 
because they could have – he could have a wrong opinion 
but still held in good faith.  What emerges is that you seem 
to be saying he knew that what he was saying was not 
true, he had some agenda to say these things about – 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 267 of 404 
 
these untrue things about LMT.  I think that is what Mr 
Kennedy is trying to check with you, whether that is what 
you intend saying. 
DR NELL:   Chair, I agree with that.  Responses we 
received from other clients at that same time, not the same 
as what we received from him at that time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I can just pick up that line, that 
concept at the foot of page 24 in paragraph 15.5 you say: 
“I submit further that the performance and quality 
concerns raised by Mr Burger were a deliberate 
10 
attempt to discredit, taint and diminish ...[indistinct] 
of LMT in order to render it incompetent for the 
Hoefyster programme and to promote the business 
of VR Laser Services.” 
So here it seems very clear Dr Nell you are excluding the 
possibility that Mr Burger may have just mistakenly but 
genuinely 
believed 
that 
there 
were 
serious 
safety 
problems.   Presumably you would accept that in some 
situations people are entitled to their different opinions, 
that is what you in fact made the point of earlier. 
20 
DR NELL:   I agree Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And people can be genuine and bona 
fide and truthful in formulating their opinions. 
DR NELL:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But you are saying no it wasn’t that, 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 268 of 404 
 
Mr Burger was not entitled to voice an opinion that said 
that LMT was incapable of producing a safe vehicle 
because nobody could possibly have genuinely believed 
that instead he was trying to promote V R Laser. 
DR NELL:   Chair Mr Burger is entitled to his opinion, I 
know what we were capable of and what our quality was at 
that stage. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But on what basis do you say that Mr 
Burger, who was entitled to his opinion, was actually trying 
deliberately to discredit your reputation in order to promote 
10 
the business of V R Laser.  What do you base that on? 
DR NELL:   Chair I based it on the fact that the constant 
negative information that came from that side towards our 
capabilities was just – why didn’t the Board address that – 
or my Board address, take it up with me.  If these 
allegations 
were 
true 
we 
should 
have 
intervened 
excessively 
into 
the 
business, 
and 
the 
way 
we 
did 
business, but our Board, I presented it and the Board 
accepted our response. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your last answer just before Mr Kennedy 
20 
asked his previous question I thought it represented a 
position you were taking maybe as a result of this 
discussion, which was different from what you are saying 
here, so it is important to know what your last position is.  
I thought that is what you – the position you were taking 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 269 of 404 
 
was I hear what you are saying but what I am saying is Mr 
Burger was entitled to his opinion, I think he was wrong 
and that is where it ends, as opposed to saying he is 
entitled to his opinion but he is only entitled to his opinion 
if it is in good faith, even if it is wrong, but in this case he 
was 
not 
expressing 
an 
honest 
opinion 
about 
the 
capabilities of LMT, he was – he knew that these – this 
criticism of LMT was unjustified, it was not based on any 
facts and he was doing this for his own agenda to discredit 
LMT, so there is a difference between the two.  The one is 
10 
you are not attributing any malice on his part, but you are 
saying he is wrong. 
 
The other one is you are not just saying his opinion 
is wrong, you are saying it goes beyond that, he knows 
that 
it 
is 
wrong, 
but 
he 
nevertheless 
goes 
around 
expressing this view because of some other motive or 
agenda, which one is your last position on the issue? 
DR NELL:   Chair I maintain that he is entitled to his 
opinion, he never spoke to me about the quality, I never 
had personal interaction or correspondence going into this.   
20 
It was in our view at that stage what was going on.  It was 
just – it isn’t based on any evidence or emails or anything, 
it is based on our perception, whether that was right or 
wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 270 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair.   Now I would like 
to skip over a few of the next paragraphs because I think 
we have dealt with them as much as we need to from the 
point of view of – in the previous evidence that you have 
given. 
 
May I take you to page 26, paragraph 18, and you 
refer to DLS having negotiations with LMT starting in 
September, 25 t h of September 2014, and you refer to the 
minutes of a meeting, if I can ask you please to turn now in 
the same bundle to page 406. 
10 
DR NELL:   Yes I am there Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you familiar with these minutes? 
DR NELL:   I am Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that your signature  and name at – 
on the bottom left? 
DR NELL:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So do these reflect what in fact 
happened at the meeting? 
DR NELL:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you prepare the minutes yourself 
20 
DR NELL:   No I did not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay but you are happy with the 
contents as ...[intervenes]  
DR NELL:   I am happy Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now just tell the Chair please what 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 271 of 404 
 
was the purpose of this meeting? 
DR NELL:   Mr Wessels as a member of the LMT board 
wanted to get some middle-way and to solve the current 
issue of Denel or DLS wanting to award the contract to VR 
Laser, and on our side we said that we also need to be 
involved in some way or another. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Again sorry to interrupt, we are still 
talking about the Hoefyster Hulls, the turret hulls? 
DR NELL:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, right.  So you had complained 
10 
that you were not being properly treated particularly as an 
in-house entity and there was an attempt to resolve your – 
the – what some documents have referred to as an 
impasse?  
DR NELL:   Correct Chair.   We received a number of 
proposals from DLS and I wanted to present these 
proposals to the LMT Board to get their approval to 
continue with the proposals made by DLS.  I was requested 
not to present it at the Board, and Mr Wessels was 
requested by the LMT board to go and solve this in some 
20 
amicable way, and this is what I referred to previously 
where I wanted DLS to provide me with an RFQ, we would 
follow the process of quoting and then get Board approval.   
I cannot sign anything on my own, it is beyond my 
delegations of authority to this value of contract. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 272 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now your affidavit then continues to 
set out in some detail with reference to various annexures 
various attempts that were made to put forward proposals 
to seek your agreement on behalf of LMT, is that right? 
DR NELL:   That is right Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you say in paragraph 18.8: 
“I again refused to sign these documents after 
obtaining legal advice.” 
Now why were you taking legal advice, was there a legal 
issue that you were concerned about? 
10 
DR NELL:   Chair the issue was that the proposals made 
was not in the best interests of LMT or the business.  The 
money that was to be made and the responsibility we had 
to take was not in sync, and I wanted to know and I wanted 
to know if that is in my fiduciary duty to sign such a 
document without getting board approval. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What essentially was being proposed 
by Mr Wessels? 
DR NELL:   Mr Wessels tried to get a view that could 
support both DLS and LMD to make sure that everybody 
20 
gets a fair share of the deal.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And ultimately you refused the 
proposal from Mr Wessels.  Was any resolution, any other 
resolution achieved? 
DR NELL:   Chair as I said before I wanted the process to 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 273 of 404 
 
be followed, the correct process to be followed.   I as a 
director or CEO cannot just sign anything to that value.  It 
is totally beyond my delegation of authority and I needed 
Board approval to sign such a document. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then may I take you in the same 
bundle 
to 
page 
460. 
 
You 
have 
referred 
to 
this 
communication in the text of our affidavit, page 460 
appears to be an email from Mr Dennis Mlambo, he was 
Group Supply Chain Executive or head at head office level, 
is that correct?  Sorry, you are not there yet, 460, look on 
10 
the left hand side remember.  I am not sure you are looking 
at the right one, 460, the number on the left hand side, top 
left?  Do you have 460 now? 
DR NELL:   I have yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And is it correct that this is an email 
that the 14 t h of November 2014 from Mr Dennis Mlambo to 
yourself? 
DR NELL:   That is correct Chair.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And he of course at the time was the 
Head Office Group Head of Supply Chain Management, is 
20 
that right? 
DR NELL:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Had you had dealings with him 
previously? 
DR NELL:   Yes I have Chair.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 274 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And if I may just read into the record 
Chair the brief content of the email; 
“I learnt with a great deal of surprise this afternoon 
that LMT has taken a decision not to supply the 
...[indistinct] DLS for the Hoefyster contract.  I 
thought I should confirm that with you if that is 
indeed true before further engagements.   I find that 
surprising 
given 
the 
time 
we 
have 
spent 
at 
Corporate Office debating the issue with DLS.” 
Now you seem to be under the impression at that stage 
10 
that LMT had taken a decision not to supply the hulls to 
DLS rather than DLS had taken a decision to award the 
contract to an entity other than LMT.   How did it come 
about that – clearly he was wrong on this, not so? 
DR NELL:   That is correct Chair yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You had not taken a decision to 
supply these items to DLS, on the contrary you wanted to? 
DR NELL:   Yes we wanted to Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, how did it come about that this 
email was sent to you. 
20 
DR NELL:   Chair it all comes back to the various 
approaches made from DLS to us, one of the proposals 
was that they placed the contract for the hulls on us but we 
need them to place the contract on VR Laser, take full 
responsibility for quality, delivery and everything and for 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 275 of 404 
 
that we can take a 5% mark-up.  Now if you do the 
calculations it is not in the best interests of the company, if 
you follow that approach, at the risk of managing another 
business in doing something which you have no real 
control over, it is not worth the money, and I again iterate 
that 
I 
wanted 
Board 
approval 
to 
continue 
with 
this 
approach, which we did not get at that stage, and we just 
did not agree to the proposal, I did not agree with the 
proposal, again reiterating my fiduciary duty as a director 
and I wanted LMT Board to approve this proposal before I 
10 
even signed but I was never given the opportunity. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now just to look again at the last 
sentence of that paragraph Mr Mlambo expressed surprise 
at his – at what he understood the position to be that LMS 
had taken a decision not to supply the hulls, given the time 
he says we have spent at Corporate Office debating the 
issue DLS what did you understand that to refer to, was 
that the very process in which there had been interactions 
between LMT and DLS as to whether some solution could 
be achieved. 
20 
DR NELL:   No Chair I think this refers to the discussions 
they had between DLS and head office. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And head office that you were not 
party to? 
DR NELL:   Yes we were not party to it.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 276 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  Then in your 
affidavit page 28 you deal with the Gupta Family and its 
linked company, Regiments Capital, and you refer to a 
conversation 
with 
Mr 
Ntshepe 
who 
was 
then 
Group 
Executive Manager for Business Development, sometime 
before what we have just been dealing with and that is on 
the 22 n d of March 2013 about linking a Ghanaian client with 
a potential funder, what was that all about? 
DR NELL:   We were quoting for a project in Ghana and 
required some capital or guarantees and I approached Mr 
10 
Ntshepe and he referred me to Regiments Capital as a 
potential solution to our problems. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what happened from that 
contact? 
DR NELL:   There were numerous correspondence between 
myself and Regiments Capital but in the end nothing much 
happened, the project was delayed.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you aware at that stage of any 
connection between Regiments Capital and the Gupta 
Family or their business associates? 
20 
DR NELL:   No I was not Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you find anything out of the 
ordinary in Mr Ntshepe’s approach to you? 
DR NELL:   No I only later on realised Chair that 
Regiments Capital was one of the companies linked to the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 277 of 404 
 
Gupta Family and this is why I included it in my affidavit. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  May I just have a moment?  
Thank you Chair.  In paragraph 20 in your conclusion 
paragraph you refer in the second part of that starting “I 
wish to state” that you have never personally benefitted 
etcetera from the sale, that is repeat it seems from what 
we saw in the first affidavit, correct? 
DR NELL:   It is exactly the same yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and you say that the other 
shareholders and you lost out in the whole process.  I just 
10 
want you to tell the Chair to what extent have you lost out 
and how has that affected your life if at all? 
DR NELL:   Chair we invested a lot of our own money into 
the business and – in the form of loan accounts, a 
significant amount, and if company would be put into 
business rescue or be voluntarily liquidated then we would 
lose everything, all the money that we have put in which 
was significant.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now let us turn finally, if we may, to 
your third affidavit, Chair that is to be found in the same 
20 
bundle 10 from page 470. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number again? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   470. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you have it Dr Nel? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 278 of 404 
 
DR NELL:   I have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you have explained earlier that 
this was a third affidavit to fill in some details that you felt 
needed to be added to your previous affidavits, correct?   
DR NELL:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it seems to cover much of what 
we have already dealt with. 
DR NELL:   Correct chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that correct?   Now I don’t want to 
lose anything that may be important to the Chair, as far as 
10 
I can see we have covered them as best we could, if we of 
course had three days to deal with your evidence we would 
go into much more detail, but we are just focusing on a 
particular 
issue 
that 
you 
have 
already 
heard 
we’ve 
identified.   Is there any aspect of your third affidavit that 
you feel you need to bring to the attention of the Chair that 
has not already been canvassed in your evidence? 
DR NELL:   Chair I would like to note that the issuing of 
certificates is applicable only to that specific vehicle that 
was tested on that specific day. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You’re referring to the CSIR 
certificate? 
DR NELL:  The CSIR certificate.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
DR NELL:   So you cannot use that certificate infinite for 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 279 of 404 
 
other vehicles, if there is any material change to the 
vehicle design or to the type of skill or whatever you need 
to reset it and that’s the first point.  The second point is Mr 
Beetge on his own did not decide to issue the certificates 
to us after the second date, it was a collective effort by 
Armscor Quality, the CSIR that the process was in fact 
correctly followed and that’s why the certificates were 
issued.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I may just interpose for a second, 
Mr Beetge you refer to has not been, has not come out in 
10 
your oral evidence today, it came out initially in Nkosi’s 
evidence and you have responded in the second part of 
this latest affidavit to particular allegations made in Mr 
Nkosi’s evidence, is that right?   
DR NELL:   Correct yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And Mr Nkosi gave evidence that 
prior to his own, Mr Nkosi’s appointment he – to replace Mr 
Beetge, there was a period of overlap where he was 
understudying Mr Beetge in the transition period and Mr 
Beetge gave certain information to Mr Nkosi in relation to 
20 
possible criticism of the initial and the second test at the 
CSIR.   Is that the Mr Beetge you are referring to? 
DR NELL:   That is correct yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right thank you.  Chair we have no 
further questions for this witness, thank you very much. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 280 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you very much Dr Nell for 
availing yourself to come and assist the Commission.  
Should we need you to come back we will ask you to come 
back but thank you very much, you are now excused. 
DR NELL:   Thank you sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair I see it is getting close to five 
thirty which was as I understood it earlier the outer limit 
that we were being allowed, we seem to have just sneaked 
in the completion of this evidence.   We had planned 
another witness, the attorney who is currently in George, 
10 
but I am afraid we haven’t got through to him.  We are in 
your hands, if you wish to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I am prepared to sit till quite late to 
complete all the witnesses that we can complete today.  I 
don’t know whether Mr Seleka is already around.   I think 
he is around, how long do you think your next witness will 
take, what is your estimate of how long he will take your 
next witness? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I just confirm with my 
colleague?   An hour, possibly an hour and a half Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay Mr Seleka maybe you can 
come closer.   Yes you are excused Dr Nell.  What is your 
estimate of how long your witness that we are going to 
deal with will take, 30 minutes, one hour, what was your 
estimation? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 281 of 404 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We should be an hour Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Should be about an hour? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  About an hour yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright, may I – I know that both 
you and your witness and her legal representative, if there 
is a legal representative, would have come here on the 
understanding that we would be able to start at five or as 
soon thereafter as possible.  If I hear the evidence of the 
next witness which I am told might take about an hour and 
a half that would entail considerable waiting on your part 
10 
and on witness’s part and the legal representative.  Would 
you and the witness and all concerned be able to be 
patient and wait and once I am done with the other witness 
I would the hear your witness, or if another option 
depending what Mr Kennedy says might be if they are 
happy to take a break, and do whatever they want to do, 
after all he has been on his feet for the whole day, and 
then I hear your witness and then when I am done then 
they come back.  I am flexible.   I don’t know what is your 
situation? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I will take the second option. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy what do you think? 
MR KENNEDY SC:  We are quite happy to accommodate 
our learn friend on that score Chair, we are mindful of the 
fact that the other day my learned friend also had to wait 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 282 of 404 
 
for us to complete our evidence that overran and that 
inconvenienced him and we are indebted to him for that, 
maybe also indicate it is going to take a little time to set 
up the video conference link so that perhaps can be dealt 
with while my learned friend takes over the podium and we 
give him his chance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and after all your witness also will 
be testifying via video link from home or from wherever. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am not sure exactly where. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but at least it doesn’t involve 
10 
travelling to the venue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, okay no I think that is fine, what I 
will do then I think I am going to adjourn to allow Mr 
Seleka to set up and you can have a break, stretch your 
legs and then I can when I come back I can then hear Mr 
Seleka’s witness. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I think let’s take a 15 minute 
break, so we will resume at quarter to six.  We adjourn. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Good afternoon 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Good 
afternoon 
Mr 
Seleka, 
good 
afternoon everybody. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 283 of 404 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are now starting our evening session.  
We are done with our day session but we will continue later 
with the evidence relating to Denel but we will continue 
during the evening session.  So this will evidence relating to 
Eskom and in particular to the suspension of relating to the 
suspension of executives.  And Ms Klein is continuing her 
evidence.  Ms Daniels. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Daniels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Daniels is continuing her evidence. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Are you ready to have her 
sworn in?  Okay please administer the oath or affirmation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS DANIELS:  Suzanne Margaret Daniels 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS DANIELS:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
20 
your conscience? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 284 of 404 
 
God. 
MS DANIELS:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Welcome back Ms Suzanne – 
Ms Daniels. 
MS DANIELS:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now Ms Daniels Chair 
is going to complete her evidence on the suspensions.  We 
will continue to use Eskom Bundle 08[a] and [b]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And Chairperson just for to recap 
on why she is in fact here it is also because of new issues 
that arose during her testimony in her last appearance and 
she was requested then to file a supplementary affidavit.  
She has done so Chairperson that supplementary affidavit is 
in Eskom Bundle 08[b].  That is right at the end of that file 
Chairperson and I think that is where the Chairperson should 
be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got Eskom Bundle 08[b]. 
ADV SELEKA SC: Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And page 1050 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 1050. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  1050 which is the last item in that file.  
We using the black number Chairperson. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 285 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  And – so the -  Ms Daniels testimony will 
turn mainly on this and we will put the version of the other 
witnesses to her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  May I proceed Chair?  
Ms Daniels thank you for making yourself available on short 
notice.  You will have also the reference bundle – not the 
reference the bundle I have just referred to Bundle – Eskom 
Bundle 8 where your supplementary affidavit is contained. 
10 
MS DANIELS:  Yes I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You do have that.  Ms Daniels I have 
gone through the affidavit and there were a couple of things 
you mentioned during your testimony in your last – in your 
previous appearance which the Chairperson has asked that 
they be contained in this affidavit.  My recollection is that 
you had completed the evidence on the suspensions to the 
point of the exit negotiations.  You testified about the 
meetings that took place.  Is that on the 11 May 2015?  Exit 
negotiation meetings. 
20 
MS DANIELS:  Yes and the 4t h May Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The 4t h May yes.   
MS DANIELS:  Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And you related how those meetings took 
place. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 286 of 404 
 
MS DANIELS:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The recent affidavit now that I have 
mentioned that there is an affidavit by Mr Matshela Koko 
which he has subsequently submitted to the commission.  I 
have provided you with a copy of that affidavit.  That – in 
that affidavit and I simply want to read a paragraph – the 
affidavit will be part of the bundle of Mr Koko in due course.  
There is a paragraph in which he says speaking of the 
settlement or exit negotiations meeting of himself.  He says: 
“What Ms Daniels states in paragraphs 68 to 
10 
71 of her affidavit is broadly correct save 
that I did not refer to her stories relating to 
Zola Tsotsi that I could tell.  I was specific.  I 
informed Ms Klein – Mr Khoza and Ms 
Daniels of the Sumi Tomo affair as the 
reason 
for 
Mr 
Tsotsi 
engineering 
my 
suspension.” 
If you break this paragraph down into its various components 
the first one is that your paragraphs the contents of your 
paragraph 68 and 71 are broadly correctly.  Now you will 
20 
want to know what are those paragraphs.  Those paragraph 
are in your first bundle Eskom Bundle 8[a].  And on page – it 
starts on page 19 - 19 Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh this is in another bundle? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is in the [a] Eskom Bundle 8[a].  Page 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 287 of 404 
 
19 paragraph 68.  Are you there Ms Daniels? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes I am Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So there you wrote: 
“The board met Mr Matshela Koko on 11 May 
2015 and the turn of this meeting was to 
dramatically different from the previous two I 
had sat in.  The board was represented by 
Ms Veneta Klein and Mr Zethemba Khoza.” 
Paragraph 69. 
“Unlike the previous two meetings Mr Koko 
10 
was given time to express his sentiments on 
the issue of his suspension quite in length. 
He 
was 
lyrical 
do 
not 
understand 
and 
shocked and surprised permeated his speech 
and the now legendary Eskom is in my veins 
was part of his rendition of his position at 
that moment.” 
Paragraph 70 
“He also portrayed his relationship with the 
previous 
chairperson 
Mr 
Zola 
Tsotsi 
as 
20 
acrimonious and attributed his acrimonious 
relationship as the reason for him finding 
himself on suspension.  He went at great 
lengths to impart to the board members that 
they had been misled and that he would not 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 288 of 404 
 
make it difficult for the board if the board 
says you do not fit.  He would accede and 
leave Eskom.” 
Paragraph 71. 
“Mr Khoza thanked him for his submission 
and Ms Klein started her conversation with 
an opening question of could you truly trust 
this 
board 
again? 
 
One 
again 
Koko 
emphasised that he believed that the reason 
for his present situation was the acrimonious 
10 
relationship he had with Mr Tsotsi which led 
to a [00:09:37] between him and the previous 
board.  At this point Ms Klein then asked 
could you come back and work with this 
board?  Mr Koko retorted that he heard 
horror stories relating to” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second.  Please switch off 
cell phones and whatever may disturb us.  Yes continue Mr 
Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
“Once 
again 
Koko 
emphasised 
that 
he 
believed that the reason for his present 
situation was the acrimonious relationship he 
had with Mr Tsotsi which led to acrimony 
between him and the previous board.  At this 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 289 of 404 
 
point Ms Klein then asked could you come 
back and work with this board?” 
Now may I pause there because so far he has not said 
anything that you have said is incorrect but he is about to 
say what he said he did not say. 
MS DANIELS:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You follow. 
MS DANIELS:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
MS DANIELS:  Okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So broadly what you said Mr Koko says 
is correct now the statement he singled this one out.  He 
says: 
“Mr Koko retorted.” 
This is in response to the question by Ms Klein, could you 
come back and work with this board? 
“Mr Koko retorted that he had horror stories 
relating to Zola Tsotsi and not the current 
board.  Ms Klein thanked him for his honesty 
and took note that he had said I will come 
20 
back to Eskom. She exercised that this 
confirmed that the trust element was intact 
and that Koko was prepared to sit out and 
wait.  She confirmed that she respected what 
he had told them and thanked him for being 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 290 of 404 
 
open and frank.” 
The only – the only query he raised with your 
statement is the one regarding horror stories you say he 
mentioned in regard to Mr Tsotsi.  Now what do you – what is 
your response to that?  Well I could ask you directly in the 
interest of time Ms Daniels whether your statement is it a 
correct 
reflection 
of 
what 
transpired 
in 
that 
meeting 
particularly in regard to Mr Tsotsi or do you think that is what 
was articulated by Mr Koko?  What can you say to the 
Chairperson? 
10 
MS DANIELS:  Mr Chairperson in my supplementary affidavit 
I attach my notes from the meeting.  It is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that in your supplementary affidavit? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes Mr Chair.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  It will be in the other file Chairperson. 
MS DANIELS:  This is. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Bracket a – bracket b I beg your pardon. 
MS DANIELS:  Black number I just think 1076. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page number for the notes? 
MS DANIELS:  Is that correct? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  What is the page number? 
MS DANIELS:  It is the black number Eskom 08 1076. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1070? 
MS DANIELS:  1076. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 291 of 404 
 
MS DANIELS:  And you will see that I can confirm that this is 
my handwritten notes from the meeting at that time.  And I 
took them down without any editing.  So what I say – what I 
write here are the words that was said at that meeting.  And 
you will see at the top of page 1078 I have the words horror 
stories relating to ZT.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry at? 
MS DANIELS:  1078 
CHAIRPERSON:  1078. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What are you drawing my attention to on 
that page? 
MS DANIELS:  The first line says horror stories relating to 
ZT. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS DANIELS:  So then when I say there VK it says: Hi thank 
you having said this and then in quotation marks I put “I will 
come back to Eskom and in brackets I put MK”  So this is the 
conversation as I recorded it at the meeting of the 11 May 
2015. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when you wrote VK. 
MS DANIELS:  I was referring to Ms Veneta Klein. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr? 
MS DANIELS:  Veneta Klein. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 292 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh Ms Veneta Klein yes. 
MS DANIELS:   And when I have MK it is Matshela Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS DANIELS:  And when you see ZK it is Zethemba Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MS DANIELS:  And ZT is Zola Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Have you always had these notes 
with you? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Did you show them to the 
10 
investigators or the legal team earlier? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. Alright Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  So if you turn the page 
back Ms Daniels to page 1076 at the top of the page that is 
meeting with M Koko is that Mr Matshela Koko? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The date is 11 May 2015 that is the date 
you reference in your affidavit? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is the meeting that I attended where 
20 
he was present. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did you base the contents of your 
affidavit on what is contained in this – your notes? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So the affidavit is reflective of what is 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 293 of 404 
 
contained here? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did you share your minutes at a time with 
Dr Ngubane or any of the members of this delegation 
mandated to negotiate with the suspended executives? 
MS DANIELS:  They did not really ask for it so I did not 
share it with them Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did you give any report back to the team 
delegated to negotiate or to Dr Ngubane?  I believe you were 
in Dr Ngubane’s office at this time? 
10 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct.  I gave him feedback on 
some of the – what happened at the meetings but because 
he was in contact with Ms Klein and Mr Khoza and Mr 
Khumalo I did not need to share my notes with him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I see.  Anyway that is the only aspect the 
horror story – the horror stories which seems to be in 
contention or contended by Mr Koko. 
MS DANIELS:    Oh I wrote it down as he said it at the time 
Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Now let us go back then to your 
20 
supplementary affidavit in sequence which is in that – that 
very same bundle where we are Chair page 1050.  In your 
affidavit starting on page 1051 to page 1056 you relate or 
you reference five meetings which you had with Mr Essa or 
shall I say five different occasions on which you met with Mr 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 294 of 404 
 
Essa.  Are you on that? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Those pages? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes I am. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The first meeting you reference is the 
one of the 10 March 2015 where you were called by Mr 
Matshela Koko to meet with him at Melrose Arch.  That is the 
meeting where you meet with Mr Essa for the first time 
according to your affidavit and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you gone there to her supplementary 
10 
affidavit or are you back on the other bundle? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Back to the same supplementary Chair.  
The same bundle where her handwritten… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 1051. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  So page 1051 Ms 
Daniels from that page on talks about the five different 
occasions when she met with Mr Essa.  Paragraph 4 is the 
first occasion which is on the 10 March 2015 and that 
20 
meeting was at Melrose Arch where you were called by Mr 
Koko.  The details of that meeting are in your main affidavit.  
So you have testified here and at the Parliamentary Portfolio 
Committee about that meeting. You recall Ms Daniels? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that I confirm Mr Chairman. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 295 of 404 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is the meeting where the suspension 
of the executives was mentioned and that an inquiry will also 
be started. 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And  other details are mentioned which 
have been traversed in this evidence – in the evidence 
before this commission Mr Essa introducing himself to you 
as the Minister’s advisor. 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The second meeting you reference is 
10 
paragraph 5 of your affidavit which is a meeting you say it is 
in October 2015 where you meet with Mr Essa at Eskom’s 
premises in Megawatt Park and that he was coming to meet 
with Mr Koko. 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is what he told me Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And that seems to be a brief meeting 
nothing significant about it.  You see him waiting for Mr – 
waiting to meet with Mr Koko and you say that he 
congratulates you on your appointment as the Company 
Secretary. 
20 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct Mr Chairman.  He actually 
drew my attention. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  He actually? 
MS DANIELS:  He actually – he was seated there on the 
couch. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 296 of 404 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS DANIELS:  And he actually you know greeted me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did he in fact tell you that he was coming 
to meet with Mr Koko? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes he did say that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did he tell you the reason for coming to 
meet with Mr Koko? 
MS DANIELS:  No he did not mention why he was meeting 
Mr Koko Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did you and him – you and him speak 
10 
about anything in relation to Eskom? 
MS DANIELS:  No not at that meeting Mr – not at that 
encounter Mr Chairman it was not actually a meeting.  I was 
walking past delivering documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  Can you attend to the noise 
of the  air conditioner.  Somebody will – must just attend to 
that.  Okay alright.  Please – just repeat your answer?  Oh 
you want him to repeat the question? 
MS DANIELS:  My apologies Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  He – Mr Seleka will repeat the 
20 
question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You were saying it was actually an 
encounter not a meeting? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes he was – he was in the waiting area and 
I was walking past delivering documents to the various 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 297 of 404 
 
executives and that is how the encounter happened.  So it 
was not a very long conversation.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Then you reference three other meetings 
or encounters which take place now in 2017 and the first of 
those is on page 1052.  Again it is a meeting at Melrose Arch 
but here I am going through this because you have already 
testified about it.  Here it is not a meeting with him as such 
is you being taken to Melrose Rose by Mr Koko on the 
explanation that you were in fact going to meet with the 
Minister. 
10 
MS DANIELS:  Yes that is correct Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is in paragraph 6 of your affidavit.  
You said  
“Mr Koko had asked me to accompany him to 
a meeting with Minister Brown to discuss the 
independent power producers.  Instead we 
ended up at the offices of Mr Essa in Melrose 
Arch.  At this stage the offices had moved.  I 
did not [00:24:14] it was in the same building 
as Glencore.  I would later come to establish 
20 
that those offices were the actual home of 
the Trillian Group Companies.” 
You see that? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes I see that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Koko has dealt with the allegation 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 298 of 404 
 
pertaining to your or rather let me say your version 
pertaining to the meeting of 10 March 2015 and we have 
traversed that as well in your last appearance and according 
to him he had called you to come to Melrose Arch in order 
for him to obtain advice from you as a legal advisor he refers 
to you on what he says was his – a threat as communicated 
to him Mr Matona.  A threat made by Mr Tsotsi that unless he 
reverses the suspension of Mr Sikasimbi Mr Tsotsi was going 
to suspend him and Mr Matona.  Could you give the 
Chairperson your response to that? 
10 
MS DANIELS:  Mr Chair at no stage on the 10 March 2015 
did Mr Koko ever mention the matter of Mr Matona in the 
context of a threat from Mr Tsotsi.  The only conversation 
that I had was in his presence when Mr Essa told me that Mr 
Matona would be one of the four executives suspended. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Koko agrees that he met with you on 
the 10 March.  He agrees that he met with you at Melrose 
Arch but he disagrees with you on the purpose of the 
meeting.  And he disagrees with you on meeting with Mr 
Salim Essa.  So are you hundred percent sure that the 
20 
purpose of the meeting and the people present at the 
meeting according to your version are correct? 
MS DANIELS:  I am hundred percent sure Mr Chairman that 
the purpose of the meeting was as I had testified earlier. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Were you aware that in – back during the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 299 of 404 
 
inquiry by the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee of the 
testimony of Mr Abraham Masongo? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes I listened to Mr Masongo’s testimony 
when he testified in Parliament Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Are you aware that he also testified in 
regard to him attending at Melrose Arch? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes he had a similar experience if I recall Mr 
Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So Mr Koko will have to deal with that as 
well. 
10 
MS DANIELS:  Yes he would. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Are you aware here before this 
commission of the testimony of Ms Nonkululeko Velete or 
Dlamini? 
MS DANIELS:  Yes I listened to her testimony as well Mr 
Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And what is your comment in regard to 
her testimony relevant to what we are talking about here? 
MS DANIELS:  I was quite I think pleased would be an 
appropriate description to say that she could at least 
20 
validate what I had said all those years ago and that you 
know it is true.  I do not know about the second part of her 
testimony in terms of the – the way she talked about the 
successors but it certainly sounded as when Mr Koko phoned 
her to invite her to Melrose Arch the same as what had 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 300 of 404 
 
happened to me. Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay we do not have Mr Koko’s version 
in regard to your meeting in general – on the third occasion 
shall I refer to it because you do not actually have a date.  It 
says during 2017 where he takes you to Melrose Arch and 
you are outside the boardroom, he is inside the boardroom 
according to you with Mr Essa.  They talk and talk for some 
time and thereafter they come out.  Mr Essa then speaks to 
you about telling Mr Koko to stay off Twitter and you say that 
will be an exercise in futility.  That is in paragraph 7 of your 
10 
affidavit. 
MS DANIELS:  That is correct Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You also relayed that while you were 
waiting a gentleman walked by and introduced himself to you 
as Eric Wood.  That is in paragraph 7. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, that is correct Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now who is Mr Eric Wood? 
MS DANIELS:   He was Mr Essa’s partner in Trunnion.  I am 
just not sure of the whole structure but he was one of the 
partners in Trunnion. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was that your first, what shall I call it, 
encounter, meeting with him? 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, this was my first encounter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Would you meet with him later on? 
MS DANIELS:   No, this was the only time that I actually 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 301 of 404 
 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   This was the only time? 
MS DANIELS:   ...I actually met him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because when we come to dealing with 
the transactions, we understand that Mr Eric Wood was in 
the mix. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, your investigation team has shown me 
some of that information but this was the only time that I 
physically encountered Mr Wood, Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you did not deal with him at the time 
10 
when Eskom concluded...  Well, I do not know what.  Invoked 
the services of Trunnion. 
MS DANIELS:   No, I did not Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then the third encounter, you referred to 
it, is on page 1053 and you say it is in June 2017.  It has to 
do with ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Why do you say third? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The fourth.  I beg your pardon Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The fourth.  You say 
20 
it is in June 2017 and it has to do with you meeting with 
Mr Essa against the backdrop of a meeting where board 
members were discussing whether or not to bring back 
Mr Koko from his suspension.   
MS DANIELS:   Yes, that is correct Mr Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 302 of 404 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, the focus at this stage is really 
your encounters with Mr Essa.  And you did testify that he 
could repeat to you what you have said in the meeting.  Was 
it the meeting of the board or the meeting of Audit and Risk? 
MS DANIELS:   This was a special meeting of the Audit and 
Risk Committee, Mr Chairman. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And as I recall, the debate was about the 
report that had been produced by Nkonki and Cliff Dekker.  
Is that correct? 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, that is correct Mr Chairman. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Whether that report in making findings of 
no wrongdoing against Mr Koko, you could on the strength of 
it return Mr Koko from his suspension. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, that is correct.  That was the 
discussion. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And why were you opposed to do that? 
MS DANIELS:   Mr Chairman, I felt that the report did not 
sufficiently interrogate the evidence that was collected.  On 
both parties, both the legal firm and the auditing firm.  They 
took statements from the various witnesses.    
20 
 
They did not really interrogate them to a degree that one 
would have expected.  And my recommendation was that the 
board, not just accept it at face value but actually get a 
counsel’s view on where the gabs were in the report. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And did you obtain counsel’s view? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 303 of 404 
 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, I did.  The board had a discussion and 
then I was instructed to obtain counsel’s view and which I 
did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, Ms Daniels has provided 
us with copies of that opinion yesterday which we will 
incorporate into the bundle in...  I think it is a significant...  I 
have perused the documentation Chairperson.   
 
It is a significant opinion in that it gives a critique on the 
report 
that 
was 
given 
and 
the 
shortcomings 
in 
the 
investigations in that report and what needed to be done in 
10 
order to further those investigations.  It is written by...  
Sorry, it was a legal opinion by one of my colleagues.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes-no, that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, we will incorporate it in the bundle 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Of course, you will apply your mind, 
if you have done so, to the question whether we need it for 
the purposes of the evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of the issues. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or whether it is enough that certain 
developments happened after. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 304 of 404 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now Ms Daniels, then 
the focus, going back to the focus of this exercise, is that 
subsequent to that meeting, you meet with Mr Essa at the 
filling station across Megawatt Park.  And he is talking to you 
about why you are opposed to Mr Koko coming back.  And at 
some point he says:  Name your price.  You remember that? 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, I do recall that Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that is where on your previous 
occasion he said he could – offered and amount of 
R 800 million. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That part was covered last time.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is there anything new that needs to be... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us not go over ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am moving on Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us not go over evidence that was 
covered. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us only look at new things. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right Chair.  Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So that we do not waste our time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then the last occasion Ms Daniels is on 
page 1056 and that too you had related it where you are 
called to Melrose Arch and you meet with other persons 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 305 of 404 
 
there including AJ Gupta and it is a talk about the case, the 
court case involving the pension pay-out of Mr Molefe. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, that is correct Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that too was covered. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That too was covered, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 That 
was 
the 
last 
encounter 
with 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...if I am not mistaken that she had with 
10 
Mr Essa and then she met them with other people, the Gupta 
people in some apartments.  Is that right? 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, that is correct Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so not let us go over that unless there 
is something new that is important that was not mentioned 
before.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chair, that takes care of the 
meetings.  Now Ms Daniels, in this affidavit of Mr Koko which 
is yet to form part of the bundle.  There are a couple of 
things he mentions there about you.  One of them is 
20 
emphasising that...   
 
He draws something we have not seen before which is 
that, there was a - the minister when dealing with the issue 
of Mr Molefe’s pension pay-out, the minister issues a media 
statement and you were recording him, he is on suspension, 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 306 of 404 
 
to tell him that the minister is throwing is the board under 
the bus.   
 
The minister is going, essentially, at loggerheads with 
the board and you wanted advice from him.  And he mentions 
a couple of times you called.  How many times you spent on 
the call which is remarkable.   
 
And one thing leads to the other and he comes to this 
point where he says your relationship with the board had 
broken down.  He says you tell him that.  It is unclear 
whether it is your relationship, in fact, with the minister or 
10 
with the board.   
 
But then he says, you come to his house, you had a 
meeting with him and you asked him to intervene.  And he 
says to you:  But I cannot because you say you had a good 
relationship with the minister, to him.  Please intervene.  He 
says he does not and he cannot intervene.  You became 
upset.  And you walked out of his house.   
 
And he thinks that is the reason why you have joined a 
team of people that are on a hunt for Mr Koko.  Your 
response.   
20 
MS DANIELS:   Mr Chairman, I really think that is a bit 
ludicrous and it is also, I mean to bring a personal 
relationship here before the Commission, which is not the 
mandate of the Commission to investigate.  It is actually 
quite spurious.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 307 of 404 
 
 
There are a couple of issues in there.  There was a 
breakdown between myself and the board which had really 
started late 2016.  So you know, I have not given evidence of 
that just yet.   
 
As Mr Seleka said, he only gave me the affidavit last 
night because he got it late.  But there was a breakdown in 
the relationship within the board and there were incidences 
of 
what, 
you 
know, 
victimisations 
in 
relation 
to 
my 
relationship with the board   
 
When Mr Koko became Chief Executive Officer, the 
10 
relationship also between ourselves, myself and him started 
deteriorating because he would say more on the basis of:  I 
cannot have a Chief Legal Officer who is constantly at odds 
with me.  And that was the beginning.  Not in 2017.   
 
You know, in June 2017, it was already beyond repair 
because I had already...  You know, I had formed a view of 
what he was.  So those paragraphs in there I would, you 
know, deny.   
 
There were issues in terms of the pension matter and 
how the minister dealt with it but he is conflating some many 
20 
issues that it is really, you know, it – I would take guidance 
from the Commission as to what I would need to answer in 
terms of that.   
 
But from a high-level issue, it was about the breakdown 
in the relationship with the board, from my perspective, 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 308 of 404 
 
started there.   
 
It actually – at that point in June 2017, it had nothing to 
do with Mr Koko.  It was actually the board and myself at 
loggerheads.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  But can I make this point which is 
what I think Mr Koko is trying to make, that you approached 
him to ask him to intervene in mending the relationship.  
When he said to you he could not do it, you became upset 
and as a result of that, you have gone on a bandwagon to 
say things that are not true about him.   
10 
MS DANIELS:   Well, that is a complete fabrication.  There 
was only one occasion that I have been at his premises and 
it would certainly not have been in the evening.   
 
He had called myself and Mr Kolane(?) Koma(?) who 
was the board’s spokesperson at the time to his house to 
deal with negative press reports on the Impulse(?) matter.   
 
And that is the only time I had been at his house.  And I 
did not ask him to intervene in any relationship with the 
minister or the board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now Mr Koko goes on to say that in 
20 
regards to you saying you think your telephone had been 
bugged after the meeting at Melrose Arch.  That firstly, he 
does not have the capabilities to bug phones and secondly, 
why did you not report the matter so that it can be dealt with 
to the authorities? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 309 of 404 
 
MS DANIELS:   Well, Mr Chairman the first instance was that 
he was very specific about who I had spoken to.  He 
mentioned people by name and it was for that reason that I 
suspected that he had, you know, either bugged my phone or 
listened in.   
 
How he had those capabilities, I am not sure of.  What I 
did do is that all the criminal acts that occurred, I had 
reported to the relevant law enforcement authorities and 
because it was not only the bugging.   
 
I started having harassment on the road.  I was later 
10 
threatened.  I received death threats.  My daughter was 
threatened.  I had attempted break-ins at home during this 
period 2015 to 2017.   
 
In the run-up to my testimony in parliament, subsequent 
to that and even after my last testimony here at the 
Commission, I have also had anonymous threats.   
 
Now these were all phone calls and you know those kind 
of things and I have been followed.  So when I reported to 
the police, they consolidated all of these incidences.   
 
So contrary to Mr Koko’s assertion that I have done 
20 
nothing about it.  I have reported them to the relevant law 
enforcement authorities at the relevant times. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, page 1059 of your supplementary 
affidavit in paragraph 31 you refer to acts of harassment, 
intimidation and threats.  Various incidences which you 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 310 of 404 
 
consolidated to the police and you give the case number.   
MS DANIELS:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Would that be the acts you are referring 
to? 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or incidences you are referring to. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, that is correct Mr Chairman.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   What has become of that case, do you 
know? 
MS DANIELS:   At the moment, I think it is still open 
10 
Mr Chairman because of the anonymous threats and...  So I 
am not sure as to how far the law enforcement authorities 
can take that.  The police do check up regularly.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then Mr Koko has raised to another 
issue which relates to the Dentons report.  Remember the 
Dentons report which is said to have been destroyed.  On 
your version, you were saying that it implicated Mr Koko.  
And he is asking but why do you not produce that report.  
What is your response to him. 
MS DANIELS:   As I said to you, those reports, I do not have 
20 
it anymore.  It was taken.  I had – I think I had a copy on my 
Eskom computer but that also was removed.  And then as I 
testified the last Mr Chairman, the board had instructed that 
the copies be destroyed.  So I really do not have any record 
of that at this point in time.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 311 of 404 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now we did receive copies of various 
versions of this report from Dentons which we have provided 
you with to compare and determine the position in regard to 
the allegations that are in one or the other affidavit.  Can 
you tell the Chairperson what is your assessment of this 
report, these various versions after you have looked at 
them? 
MS DANIELS:   Mr Chair, I had the opportunity to look at 
them but they do not go into the detail that I remember from 
seeing in that first report.  So I, you know, even though in 
10 
the version 1 there are more references to Mr Koko than in 
the later versions, it is still not the report that I testified to in 
my previous occasion here.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then there were two...  I am moving on 
Chairperson.  There were two aspects which arose in your 
testimony last time.  One of them was when you told the 
Chairperson that according to you the board did not 
contemplate that the suspended executives would come 
back.  They did not want the executives to come back.   
 
And the Chairperson asked you what was your basis for 
20 
saying that.  You deal with that on page 1060 from 
paragraphs 36 to 42.  Briefly, could you explain to the 
Chairperson your basis for that conclusion? 
MS DANIELS:   Mr Chair, my rational for that was that in the 
meeting of the 23r d of April 2015, while I referenced I did – I 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 312 of 404 
 
looked at my original affidavit.  I did reference it there in 
paragraph 53 but I did not go into the, you know, as you 
asked the question on what basis did you do that.   
 
So the basis for me saying that was that firstly, when the 
board was discussing Mr Matona and his CCMA matter, they 
were already looking at his reassignment, a possible 
reassignment for him in government 
and that it was 
something that the minister needed to consider.   
 
So this was in April 2015 and Mr Matona had already 
gone to the CCMA and yet they were discussing his 
10 
reassignment.   
 
And it was also here that the board emphasised that 
while they were conducting this inquiry, it was actually 
independent of the outcomes for these executives.  And 
these are in – I have also attached my notes.  I did hand it 
in.  I do apologise that I – I think I had... Oh, no it is here.  
Sorry, Mr Chair. It is on 1065.  And on 1066 I have set it out.   
 
They said while the inquiry does not come to an end, the 
outcomes relating to the executives are independent of what 
happened in that inquiry.  So for me, they were already 
20 
talking about – they were contemplating and they actually 
mention the resignation of these executives, you know, to 
avoid charges.   
 
So it was a very conversation but the contemplation was 
there, in my mind, at this early stage.  My understanding, 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 313 of 404 
 
because I was sitting in the meeting that this in the 
contemplation of the board.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what would have been important is 
to see whether there is any basis for thinking that at the time 
of the suspension of the executives or before the suspension 
or soon thereafter, immediately after that – there is any 
basis for saying the board did not at that stage contemplate 
the return of the executives. 
 
From what you – is written here in your affidavit, it looks 
like the earliest point, the earliest date in respect of which 
10 
you have something to put up in support of saying the board 
did 
not 
contemplate 
the 
return 
of 
the 
executives, 
is 
something that happened on the 23 rd of April.  That is more 
than a month after the suspensions, is it not? 
MS DANIELS:   Yes, but also, this was the first board 
meeting with the new chairman, the new interim chairman 
and the – this was the first formal meeting that they had, that 
I was privy to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS DANIELS:   So that is why in – when you asked me in – 
20 
you asked me about my opinion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS DANIELS:   So this was the first time that I was exposed 
to that collective board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, I am not saying that something 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 314 of 404 
 
that they may have said on the 23r d of April or subsequently, 
might not necessarily reflect that maybe even before the 
suspension they did not contemplate the return of the 
executives. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am also not saying that prior to the 
conclusion 
of 
settlement 
agreements 
with 
the 
three 
executives, I am not saying that any – there is nothing that 
they may have said at meetings between the date of 
suspension and the date of the settlement agreements, 
10 
which may indicate that, at least as at those dates, they did 
not contemplate that the executives would come back.   
 
I am just saying that is something that would have 
happened either before the suspensions or on the day of 
suspensions or soon thereafter, may have been also maybe 
more helpful.   
MS DANIELS:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS DANIELS:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed so because...  Ms Daniels talking 
of 
Mr 
Abram 
Masango’s 
testimony, 
especially 
at 
the 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee, and he will come before 
this Commission.  He says that Mr Koko told him already on 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 315 of 404 
 
the 10t h of March that four executives will be suspended but 
he, Mr Koko, will return but the others will not return.  So 
you understand what the Chairperson is saying. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS DANIELS:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But you are saying, you only picked it up 
at this stage. 
MS DANIELS:   Well, as I testified earlier, it was suggested 
by Mr Essa but in terms of the board...  You know, you asked 
10 
me why I was so emphatic in terms of the board saying that, 
because this was my experience that they – this was already 
in discussion at the 23 r d of April.   
 
And as you say, they may have been talking about it 
beforehand but this was the first time that I was exposed to 
this is what they are going to do.  And it really did not look 
like they wanted the executives back. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, the minutes of that meeting 
are in the Reference Bundle, page 250.  I think... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do we need to go there? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We could go and look at them in due 
course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And I see that Ms Daniels in your 
affidavit, page 1061, paragraph 40 you refer to the meeting 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 316 of 404 
 
of the 19 t h of May 2015 which you relate in your main 
affidavit and you say it reinforces what you are saying.   
 
Now that meeting, quickly, is a meeting where you say 
the delegation these three or are mandated to enter into exit 
negotiations.  They met...  Chairperson, it is important, to 
what comes to my mind now.  The meeting of April 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   23 April? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   23 April. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It comes after the executives have 
written letters to the board, at least three executives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Towards... I think the 18t h – the 
17t h/18t h of March.  And they say we want to come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or they are enquiring about the terms of 
reference and so on and so forth. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   On the 19t h of March, the board meets 
20 
and there is a note.  They are looking at – they look at the 
letters of the executives and they say to the company 
secretary, please respond to these letters.   
 
And you would see that some of the board member have 
said to you:  Well, we did not – we were not even aware of 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 317 of 404 
 
those letters.  But we have drawn their attention to those 
minutes of the 19 t h of March.   
 
The exit negotiations take place only in May as 
testified by Ms Daniels, the 4 t h of May, the 11t h of May.  This 
is after April.  So before the exit negotiations, there is the 
23rd April where the board appoints a delegation to 
conclude exit negotiations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When does that happen? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In the meeting of the 23 April. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Before some of the executives who are 
exasperated by the board tell the board there is no point in 
me coming back, I want to go.  But remember, is during 
those – in May – only in May that takes place.  So I 
thought I should mention that, that aspect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is significant.  Because in the 
meeting then of the 19 t h comes what you were saying, Ms 
Daniels, in your affidavit, the delegation meets and you say 
Ms Klein said let us clear the decks.  You say it in 
20 
paragraph 73 of your main affidavit. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Clear the decks, get rid of the 
executives.  But Ms Klein was here and she denies that 
meeting, that the meeting took place. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 318 of 404 
 
MS DANIELS:   Mr Chairman, I have also provided my 
handwritten notes of that meeting to the Commission where 
I took down.  That meeting did take place, the people were 
present and this is the conversation as I recorded it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   However, I should add that she did 
admit to the Chairperson that they mandated you to write a 
brief, a briefing note to the minister. 
MS DANIELS:   Yes but that happened on the 19 May at 
that meeting and you will see it in my notes as well 
because I think I wrote as SD to write a brief DPE Min in 
10 
my notes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, I cannot hear? 
MS DANIELS:   My apologies.  I think I recorded that 
action but on the 19 May that I needed to prepare the brief 
for the minister. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Lastly, Ms Daniels, another point arose 
in your previous testimony about a board member who 
stated that this was a Gupta board, I will not go down 
alone. 
 
You 
deal 
with 
that 
in 
page 
1061 
of 
your 
supplementary affidavit from paragraph 43.  If you could 
20 
please briefly explain to the Chairperson the context in 
which 
this 
statement 
was 
made 
and 
who 
made 
the 
statement. 
MS DANIELS:   Mr Chairman, this was an in-committee 
meeting of the board and either or during about May 2016 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 319 of 404 
 
it is confirmed by minutes that it actually happened on the 
31 May 2016.  In this meeting Dr Ngubane brought to the 
attention of the other board members that he had been 
approached by Ms Carrim, one of the non-executive 
directors, who had been apparently victimised by the banks 
due to her relationship with the Gupta associate, Mr Essa.  
At that time it was known that her husband was the cousin 
of Mr Essa, I think.   
 
In the meeting Ms Carrim then explained to the 
other board members how she had been in no uncertain 
10 
terms told by Nedbank that she – that they would not take 
her accounts because of this association.  They had been 
in the process of transferring accounts and it had affected 
her business and personal affairs quite detrimentally 
because they were financing – I had the opportunity to 
listen to the recording provided by the Commission and it 
also talked about he was in the process of purchasing 
house, which I had forgotten.  So it had affected her 
financial affairs quite dramatically.  In this conversation 
the other board members then also explained how they had 
20 
been exposed to delays, banks doing audits, etcetera.   
In that meeting then Dr Ngubane called Minister 
Brown and she came onto the line, she listened to the 
complaints, for want of a better word, of the board 
members and she said she was not actually sure, you 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 320 of 404 
 
know, how she would be able to deal with it but that she 
would take advice, she would actually speak to the 
President about the matter and that she would come back 
to the board.   
At the same time I was instructed to get a legal 
opinion on the effects - you know, you know, how – being 
an Eskom board – the board felt that being an Eskom board 
member was what was actually causing the problem with 
the banks, as a board member of the SOC. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   May I intervene there, Ms Daniels?  
10 
Chairperson, the minutes of this meeting which we have 
obtained, 31 May 2016, and we will incorporate them in the 
reference bundle, paragraph 5 of the minutes, it is headed: 
“Discussion on challenges in respect of media 
perceptions relating to board meetings.” 
And it is three paragraphs talking about: 
“Members 
raising 
several 
concerns 
relating 
to 
unreasonable…” 
What they say it is unreasonable and unfair behaviour 
towards them as a result of recent media reports.  The 
20 
minutes do not reflect the details of what you hear in the 
recording.  I think the recording is important and that is 
what Ms Daniels is talking about and that is where you 
hear them talk about the challenges the banks are giving 
them.  They do not – they say they are connected with the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 321 of 404 
 
Guptas and Mr Essa and there is suspicion of money 
laundering on their part.   But then, Ms Daniels, who makes 
the statement that you have said was made, a board 
member? 
MS DANIELS:   Okay.  This was – like I say in my affidavit, 
this was from Ms Carrim. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that Ms Nazia Carrim? 
MS DANIELS:   Nazia Carrim, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And what does she say? 
MS DANIELS:   She called me and she said if these people 
10 
thought I was going down alone, they had another thing 
coming, we all know that this is a Gupta board.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you – ja, the last issue you dealt 
with on your last appearance, I will not go into it.  I think 
that is the last issue I have dealt with.  There is another 
issue arising from Mr Zethembe Khoza’s affidavit that you 
authored the pre-suspension letters of the executives but 
those letters were not used.  He does not know how he 
received them, he thinks he received from Mr Tsotsi.  How 
and when he does not know but he says that when you look 
20 
at the metadata the letters were authored by you and last 
modified by Mr Essa.  Your response quickly? 
MS DANIELS:   Mr Chairman, I did not participate drafting 
of the pre-suspension letters at all.  As I have said in my 
original affidavit, I had prepared a template and it would 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 322 of 404 
 
have in all probability had my name as the author on there, 
that could have been used.  Insofar as I compared what Mr 
Khoza was attached to his affidavit and what was attached 
to Mrs Klein’s affidavit because they both make similar 
allegations, the metadata has been  - is quite different. 
 
Thirdly, I did not have any proximity to Mr Khoza or 
Mr Tsotsi at the time so I would not know how they would 
get my documentation and also from the evidence that was 
led here, Mr Linnell testified that he had drafted the 
suspension letters.  So it was really my contention that, 
10 
you know, I do not think these letters are authentic, I think 
that, as I have learnt, that you can manipulate the 
metadata and you can change the authors, etcetera.  I 
really do not think that they are authentic. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  When you say you would have 
prepared the template, is it – what are you saying to the 
Chairperson?  Is this a template that Eskom would have 
created in order to draw on as and when they want to issue 
a pre-suspension letter or is it a template that you 
prepared or had prepared specifically for this occasion, the 
20 
suspension of the four executives? 
MS DANIELS:   No, there was a general template that you 
could create for an Eskom letterhead and as I was 
essentially an administrative officer in the office of the 
Group Executive at the time, I would have created certain 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 323 of 404 
 
templates and that is the only way that I could that my 
name would be the author because when you save it as a 
template, you will remain the author of that template. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Would Mr Koko or Mr Salim Essa have 
asked you to help them draft the pre-suspension letters? 
MS DANIELS:   Of the executives? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Of the four executives, yes. 
MS DANIELS:   Okay.  No, Mr Essa did not ask me that 
because I had only met him on that day.  If you look at the 
metadata of the documentation it is dated the 10 March, Mr 
10 
Chairman.  So, you know, I find that improbable.  What is 
probable is that he probably could have gotten that 
template from Mr Koko because I was in his office and he 
would have had access to those documents but it would 
have been a template, not – you know, not related to those 
four executives. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, that concludes my questions for 
Ms Daniels. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Ms Daniels, for 
coming to complete your evidence.  Should anything arise 
20 
we will ask you to come back again but thank you very 
much. 
MS DANIELS:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are now excused. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   May I point out, Chair, that Ms Daniels 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 324 of 404 
 
has to come back in regard to the transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that is fine.  That is fine.  Okay, 
then I will adjourn and then the Denel-related evidence will 
resume, so we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, please administer the oath 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
PIETER JOHANNES VAN DER MERWE:   Pieter Johannes 
10 
van der Merwe. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No objections. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give  
will be the truth the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth.  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
20 
me God. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr van der Merwe, good evening to you, 
welcome.  Thank you for availing yourself to give evidence 
before the Commission. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 325 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Thank you, Mr Chair, no problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I am saying it is problem that we 
have not experienced before. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They say it is fine now.  Okay. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, on my side it is loud and 
clear now, Mr Chair, with absolutely no echo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The technicians seem to say it is okay 
now, we can continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, good evening, Mr van der 
Merwe, as I indicated to you informally earlier we are 
grateful that you have made yourself available late this 
evening, we had hoped to get to you earlier but we have 
obviously been busy with other witnesses, so thank you for 
assisting the Commission. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No problem, Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is it correct that you have signed an 
initial affidavit at the request of the Commission which you 
20 
have since updated and recently provided the Commission? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Mr Chair.  I initially 
provided the Commission’s investigators with a statement 
which was not Commissioned.  I think that was the first 
statement that I provided was in November 2019.  I was 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 326 of 404 
 
subsequently requested to depose to an affidavit which I 
did incorporating two Rule 3.3 notices which I received.  
So yes, correct, Mr Kenney, but the first one was a 
statement, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you for the correction.  
Do you have a copy of your affidavit, the one that was 
done recently, in front of you? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I do, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And may I ask, are the pages 
numbered similar to us?   If we can look at the top of the 
10 
page, there are numbers on the left hand side and the right 
hand side.  Do you have that?   
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct.  Correct, on the left hand 
side it is Denel 10.548 it starts and on the right hand side 
W7 with PJVDM01. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That corresponds with ours.  We are 
not going to refer to the right hand side numbers, we are 
only going to refer to the left hand side and we are only 
going to refer to the last three digits in the case of the 
page you have referred us to, to page 548.  Okay? 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Noted. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And just for the record, Chair, this 
appears as part of Denel bundle 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr van der Merwe, may I ask you to 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 327 of 404 
 
please look at page 574 to 5?  In fact it is page 575. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, sorry, if I may and I am 
extremely sorry to interrupt.  There are three issues that I 
picked up that I just maybe want to correct.  It is not – it 
does 
not 
revolve 
around 
the 
merits 
but 
are 
merely 
typographical errors.  May I correct them? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, please do. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   The 1.1 where I make reference in 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second, Mr van der Merwe, 
10 
Mr Kennedy, are we on his affidavit that is at 548 or is it 
another affidavit? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, page 548, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   sorry, Mr van der Merwe, the 
question was directed to me by name.  If you would not 
mind just considering very carefully how questions are put 
and to ensure that you are being asked a question before 
you answer particularly when it is done electronically via 
virtual hearing, it is going to get a bit chaotic if we both 
20 
speak at the same time.  Thank you. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Noted, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, the answer to the question is 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 328 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It is at page 548. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I can take you, Mr van der Merwe, 
please to page 575? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, Mr Chair, I am there. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that your signature at the top of 
the page? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it appears from the next printed 
section that the affidavit was signed on the 19 October 
10 
2020 and it is attested before a Commissioner of Oaths, is 
that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So the affidavit from page 548 to 
575, do you confirm that you have gone through its 
contents? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indeed, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And do you confirm that the contents 
are as far as your knowledge goes true and correct in 
every respect? 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indeed, Chair, there are just – Mr 
Chair, just two more points that I wanted to correct, if I 
may. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 329 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   On page 578. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   578? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes?  That is in one of the 
annexures, is it? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Apologies, paragraph – ag, page 
572, apologies, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, there is a lot, 14.23.  
14.23, it is 571 where I refer to annexures F in paragraph 
10 
14.23. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   The second attachment has 
annexure F, indeed is indicated in the affidavit as annexure 
G.  It is not a big issue but I just felt that it had to be 
correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, the letter in the affidavit as G, 
G does not appear in paragraph 14.23. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   In …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you saying that the second 
20 
reference to annexure F should read annexure G? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  So you mentioned this was 
the second change.  We interrupted you earlier when you 
were making the first change.  Just go back, I think you 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 330 of 404 
 
were saying – you were starting to say it was at page 548. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, where I make reference 
to paragraph D …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Take us to the page number and then 
give us the paragraph number before you go into an 
explanation please? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, it is indeed on page 
578, Mr Chair.  This is an attachment. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   That was attached as P1 and in 
10 
paragraph 28 of that attachment… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   It makes reference the annexure 
D but if Chair has regard to the pagination of the papers it 
should in fact refer to annexure E.  There is no annexure 
D.  Do the reference to annexure D in paragraph 28 refers 
to annexure E. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   E, right.   
MR VAN DER MERWE:   That is all, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that all?  So there were only two 
20 
changes? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes and in the first paragraph my 
reference to Cullinan(?) on in George. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In George, thank you. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Thank you, Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 331 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, a supplementary affidavit should 
be done if it has not been done already which should 
explain all the things that you have explained, Mr van der 
Merwe, and it can be slotted in after this affidavit so that 
anyone 
reading 
can 
come 
across 
the 
supplementary 
affidavit that will explain these things otherwise when one 
reads and starts looking for annexure F when they are 
supposed to look for annexure G it will be confusing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr van der Merwe, were you able to 
hear that request from the Chair. 
10 
MR 
VAN 
DER 
MERWE: 
 
 
Oh, 
ja, 
to 
just 
file 
a 
supplementary affidavit properly setting out these changes, 
if the Chair please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Will you attend to that please and 
then send it to the legal team?  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I will do so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Now, Chair, we ask 
formal leave from you to admit this affidavit in bundle 10 
from page 548 including its annexures to be admitted as an 
20 
exhibit of the Commission to be marked Denel EXHIBIT 
W7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I guess the Denel part should not 
be – we just stick to EXHIBIT W whatever. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   W7 is the number, Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 332 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So did you say 7? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  7, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, we did not have 7 before?  Or was it 
…[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, the – I am told no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, was it a different work stream?  We 
do not have...? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We do not.  I am sure that we do not, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  The affidavit of Mr Pieter 
10 
Johannes van der Merwe starting at page 548 is admitted 
as EXHIBIT W7.  Okay. 
AFFIDAVIT OF PIETER JOHANNES VAN DER MERWE 
STARTING AT PAGE 548 HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT W7 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr van der 
Merwe, I am going to go through some of the areas of 
particular interest to the Commission.  The Chairperson 
obviously has the full affidavit and we will have an 
opportunity   - he has had an opportunity  already to read it 
and he will have further opportunities later so you can be 
20 
assured that all of your evidence is before the Commission 
now that it has been formally admitted as an exhibit.  I am 
going to, with the Chairperson’s leave, lead you on issues 
that should not be controversial and then I am going to 
deal by way of focus on just some of the aspects contained 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 333 of 404 
 
in your affidavit, okay? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Thank you.   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, thank you.  You are an 
attorney by profession, is that correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You are now operating in George, 
correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you previously were the Chief 
Executive Officer of VR Laser during a period that you 
10 
referred to in your affidavit.  We will come to the detail of 
that in a moment.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indeed, correct so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  You then deal on page 549 in 
paragraph 3 with the background to Van der Merwe and 
Associates and its operations.  Now that I understand from 
your affidavit was a firm of attorneys that you and your 
brother Gert van der Merwe were involved in as partners, 
is that correct?  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Not as partners, I was working for 
20 
Van der Merwe and Associates,  Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You were working for your brother, I 
see. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   For the firm.  And you refer in your 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 334 of 404 
 
affidavit to suggestion by your brother around 2012 
whether you would interested in working on a sole retainer 
basis for a group of companies called Oakbay Group, is 
that correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you have referred earlier in your 
affidavit to the fact that the firm was involved – in fact in 
paragraph 3.4 prior to 2012, Gert had done a lot of work 
for a company West Dawn Investments and you explained 
how that related to Oakbay and how in 2011, 3.5, around 
10 
about 2011, Gert was asked by the CEO of JIC to assist 
because a shareholder in JIC was Oakbay Investments and 
they were looking for a litigation firm who could assist 
them, is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, someone who could vet 
contracts on a legal adviser basis, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and two junior attorneys were 
allocated to the Oakbay Group but then it appears that 
they required additional services in the form of a more 
experienced more senior attorney on a permanent basis. 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that is when Gert approached 
you to ask if you would be interested to fulfil that role. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and you took up the offer. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 335 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You took up that offer, is that 
correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indeed, correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And so were you working fulltime 
then for the Oakbay Group? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Chair, still with Van der Merwe 
and Associates but I conducted work for the Oakbay Group 
solely, so I was not working for them, I was still and 
attorney under Van der Merwe and Associates, Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So when you refer at the foot of page 
550: 
“I decided to take up his offer and start assisting 
the Oakbay Group of companies on a permanent 
basis” 
In other words you were assisting them as an attorney. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In your brother ’s firm. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Still in the firm and that was on a 
20 
permanent basis.  Do you mean permanent or indefinite 
basis? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indefinite rather, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now you referred to a good 
relationship 
that 
you 
had, 
paragraph 
3.10, 
with 
the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 336 of 404 
 
Oakbay’s employees, management and the Gupta family.  
You deal elsewhere with your contact with the Gupta family 
but can you just explain to the Chair to what extent you 
had dealings with the Gupta family? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, I was sitting in Sandton 
and I visited meetings, I was in the office on a permanent 
basis as issues would arise at that stage.  The group had 
about – well, at one stage it had about 4 000 employees, 
there were different companies.  I interacted with the 
shareholders, 
I 
interacted 
with 
the 
CEOs 
of 
these 
10 
companies, so I did it quite frequently.  I sat in in Exco 
meetings that was held with – or between the different 
CEOs.  So on that basis I got the know the group and the 
family.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now – so at that stage you were an 
attorney assigned to Oakbay as the client of the firm, 
correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was your brother Gert also still doing 
work for the Gupta family and their businesses? 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, he was, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is he still acting as one of their 
attorneys? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I can comment, Chair, I do not 
know. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 337 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You do not know, okay. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I will be lying if I say, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, I am not asking you to say 
anything that you do not have knowledge of, Mr van der 
Merwe, you can make that point immediately if you are 
asked, you do not something you must just say so, please. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then you deal in your affidavit from 
page 551 with your involvement around the end of 2013 in 
advising on a sale of share agreement relating to VR 
10 
Laser, correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And at that stage you were still 
employed by the firm of attorney and you were advising on 
the sale of shares in VR Laser.  How did that come about? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, I would get agreements 
– at that stage there were still other attorneys working with 
me so we would get contracts, all types of contracts, sale 
of shares agreements, creditor supplier agreements, debt 
collection matters and this was one of the instructions to 
20 
go through a sale of share agreement in VR Laser.  At that 
stage I did not know and I was not involved in the 
negotiations.  If I can remember correctly, I was provided 
with a draft sale of share agreement and I was requested 
to vet the agreement on the normal principles, go through 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 338 of 404 
 
the agreement and advise that this clause might not be in 
your interest, that one might be.  Like any normal other 
contract.  So that is how it ended up on my table, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So this was a sale of shares in VR 
Laser.  Had you been involved with or interacted with VR 
Laser prior to this? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No. No, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And who was going to buy the shares 
in VR Laser? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, if I can remember 
10 
correctly it was a company called Elgasolve.  I do not have 
the agreement and I – it is quite a while back but I think 
the first sales of shares was with Elgasolve and the seller 
was – I cannot remember the entity but it was bought from 
a Mr John van Reenen and Gary Bloxham. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now if I could ask you to turn for a 
moment to page 555. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I am there, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you set out the shareholding at 
the stage when you left VR Laser.  The shareholding in VR 
20 
Laser was 10% held by Aerohaven Trading, 25% in 
Craysure Investments and Elgasolve was holding at that 
stage 65%.  Was that the shareholding at the time that they 
acquired it or did it change after they acquired it? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No, Chair, it changed afterwards.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 339 of 404 
 
I unfortunately cannot say exactly when.  What I can stat is 
I think with almost certainty that Elgasolve was the first 
buyer, this was Mr Salim Essa and then I remembered that 
another 
shareholder, 
a 
Mr 
Benny 
Jiyane, 
also 
had 
shareholding.  He did not sell his shares with Mr Gary 
Bloxham and Mr John van Reenen.  Those shares from Mr 
Jiyane I know was later acquired and if I can remember 
correctly, Craysure and/or Aerohaven might have bought 
those shares at a later stage, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So the shareholding in fact in 
10 
paragraph 5.2 you say: 
“I cannot remember exactly what the shareholding 
of the purchase company was when the acquisition 
was done initially.” 
But you can state that when you left VR Laser the 
shareholding was as follows and that is the shareholding I 
read out, is that correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair, that was when I 
left. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you refer in 5.3 to the 
20 
shareholders in Elgasolve and the majority shareholding, 
80% was held by Mr Salim Essa.  Correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indeed correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you know Mr Salim Essa at this 
time that you were advising on a purchase of the shares in 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 340 of 404 
 
VR Laser? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, I knew him, not well, but 
I knew him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And how did you know him?  Was 
that because he was a business associate of the Guptas? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And so he held 80% in Elgasolve and 
Elgasolve in turn, at least by the time you left VR Laser, 
held  65% in VR Laser, correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And then you set out some 
details of other shareholding in Craysure, etcetera.  The 
Chairperson will be able to read that in due course.  Now 
was the agreement for the sale of the shares from the 
previous shareholders to the new shareholders that you 
were advising, did that in fact – was that agreement 
concluded? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, it was concluded.  The 
agreement was drafted by a firm I think in Sandton.  I think 
it was a company called DNO attorneys and if I can 
20 
remember correctly it was a Mr Smuts, he was the attorney 
of record for the sellers, Mr John van Reenen, Mr Gary 
Bloxham. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   So the sale was concluded. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 341 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, now if you go back to page 
551, you refer to that in 3.11, particularly the involvement 
of the previous owners, the sellers, Gary Bloxham and 
John van Reenen and you refer there, third line of 
paragraph 3.11, to this.  You say: 
“I know Messrs Salim Essa and Igbal Sharma were 
involved as the purchasers.” 
Now presumably you mean the ultimate beneficiaries 
through their companies such as Elgasolve, is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Iqbal Sharma, who was he? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, I did not know Mr Iqbal 
Sharma, I had not met him before.  At the first meeting in – 
and why I say that he was involved, at the first meeting 
where I met the lawyer who drafted the agreement and the 
sellers, Mr Iqbal Sharma was also present.  So – and, like I 
say, I was not involved in the negotiations so I cannot give 
details on the negotiations but that is why I say Mr Iqbal 
Sharma was involved. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now on page 552 you refer in 
20 
paragraph 3.16 to a situation in 2014 when you got more 
involved in the daily operations of the companies within the 
Oakbay Group.  You came to know the operations of the 
different companies, specifically VR Laser during the latter 
part of 2014.  Did you understand that the VR Laser Group 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 342 of 404 
 
now had been purchased by Mr Essa and Mr Sharma, 
admittedly through intervening companies, really formed 
part of the Oakbay Group? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Sorry, how did I understand that, 
Chair, Mr Commissioner? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, no, I – did you understand, was 
the VR Laser Group now part of the Oakbay – sorry, was 
VR Laser company now part of the Oakbay Group? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   That is how I understood it, Chair, 
yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Right.  And you indicated that there 
were problems with staff motivation at VR Laser and that it 
was not profitable at the time and then you say you cannot 
remember how it came about, whether I had a discussion 
with Mr Kamal Singhala, an erstwhile director of VR Laser 
or whether I had a discussion with the then management of 
the Oakbay Group about VR Laser.  How did Mr Kamal 
Singhala fit in?  He is a member of the Gupta family, is that 
right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is he in fact a son of one of the three 
Gupta brothers? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And so were you dealing with 
him in relation to VR Laser at all? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 343 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Chair, at the latter part of 2000 
and – if I can just maybe explain how I came to know about 
VR Laser and the business dealings in VR Laser. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Like I explained previously, I sat 
in in Exco meetings.  So normally where these meetings 
would consist of these different CEOs and management 
staff of the different companies and then in these meetings 
every single company should do his projections, should 
give a report to the Chairman, how is the company doing, 
10 
what are the challenges, new business and VR Laser was 
also discussed in some of these meetings.  I cannot 
remember exactly when in 2014 but most definitely in the 
latter part of 2014.  So that is how I became to know or 
know about VR Laser and the business dealings. 
 
Now Mr Kamal Singhala, when I was given the 
opportunity to move to VR Laser, Mr Kamal Singhala was 
also present at VR Laser at that stage. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So was he on the board of VR 
Laser when you then became involved in VR Laser ’s 
20 
management? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Chair, yes, I cannot specifically 
remember when he became a director but he became 
involved with me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, thank you. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 344 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   But he was most definitely for the 
most of my tenure there, he was a director until he 
resigned somewhere – I do not know the date, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And who were the other directors of 
VR Laser during your time working at VR Laser itself? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, it was Mr Salim Essa. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   And a lady by the name of 
Yugeshni Govender. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right?    
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  At one stage there was also a 
person by the name of Mr Ian McNeal, but he was only a 
short stint there as director, I don’t know when he 
resigned, but mostly those Mr Geoff. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   There has been a suggestion in some 
documents that Mr Duduzane Zuma may have also been a 
director of VR Laser, is that correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No, not according to my 
knowledge, never Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.   Now tell us how you became 
20 
involved in VR Laser?   As I understand your evidence a 
moment ago, and also your affidavit having been an 
attorney assigned to advising the Oak Bay Group, which 
included the VR Laser you then became involved in the 
actual day to day management of VR Laser, is that correct? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 345 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair, in short. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Not as its attorney, you were now an 
operational person. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No, no Chair what happened was I 
was like I said I can’t remember exactly how it came about, 
whether it was during an Exco meeting but it was apparent 
even from Exco meetings that VR Laser had difficulty and I 
say with respect, under Mr JP Aurora.  I do not know 
details but VR Laser was not performing, they were running 
at a loss and when the opportunity came to me I said well I 
10 
do not know what I would do different, I do not know the 
company by a bar of soap, so my suggestion at that stage 
was that before I take up the opportunity I would first need 
to ensure that I would be able to turn VR Laser around, 
first of all and whether that was a challenge for me, 
whether I wanted to do that because that would mean that I 
would move from being a practicing attorney, remove 
myself from the roll as practicing attorneys and become a 
businessman for what it is worth, so in the later part of 
2014, I can’t remember when exactly Chair, I visited VR 
20 
Laser and Mr J P Aurora was still there.  I don’t know 
whether he knew about the offer that I had, I guess it was 
uncomfortable for them to divulge to him that I might take 
his place, so I was only there as an observer, and I could 
see if I may continue, how it came about that I took up the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 346 of 404 
 
offer.  It was a tremendous company, it was – the company 
was it was situated in Boksburg, it was about – the 
company had about 25 000 square metres under crane, 
which means inside, indoors under cranes and the things 
that they did there was just absolutely amazing.   It 
attracted me from the day I stepped into the factory with 
what they manufactured, armoured vehicles, different steel 
products, and I could also gather that their biggest issue 
according to me was staff morale.   
 
At that stage, and again I say it with the utmost of 
10 
respect, Mr J P Aurora has passed away, but the staff 
morale was extremely low, and I saw a great opportunity 
and so I decided to take up, I obviously discussed it first 
with my wife, I said it is a big decision for me whether to 
leave the law and go into this business, managing a 
business which I do not know.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr van der Merwe ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   ...[Indistinct]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can you hear me Mr van der Merwe? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I can hear you Chair.  I can hear 
20 
you sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    May I just ask respectfully that you 
try and not go into too much details about things like 
consulting your wife and so forth, I think can you just 
confirm you went initially as an observer to see whether – 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 347 of 404 
 
what was involved and whether you felt you were suited to 
the job and whether it would be an interesting challenge, 
but the end point for that process is that you actually were 
persuaded to take up an appointment, is that correct?   
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That was a full time appointment as 
Chief Executive Officer of VR Laser? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you say in paragraph 3.19 that 
that took effect in January 2015, is that right? 
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, now you then moved to deal 
here and in greater detail later with a contract which was 
between either already in existence or to come into 
existence between VR Laser and Denel, is that right, to do 
with steel platform hulls? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that related to the Hoefyster 
Project. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And was the contract already 
concluded by the time you started as the full time CEO? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, can I take you now to page 
558, because that’s where you deal with this contract in 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 348 of 404 
 
some detail. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair if I may just elaborate on 
that and I won’t take up time unnecessarily. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:    I was involved and I sat in, in the 
later part of 2014 I – when the Hoefyster agreement was 
negotiated in the final stages I sat in with Mr Aurora and 
Bennie Diyane and Mr Pieter Gredelinghuys with Denel, in 
negotiating the agreement, so I just want to make it clear 
that it is not when I started in 2015 that I had – that I 
10 
didn’t know anything about the Hoefyster agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right thank you.  Can I take you then 
to page 558. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I am there Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you say in paragraph 7.1: 
“I got involved in VR Laser informally during the 
latter part of 2014.  If I remember correctly the 
tender was already awarded to VR Laser.” 
If I may just stop, the evidence has indicated that it was 
20 
not a full public open tender.   What had actually happened 
was that Denel had decided to invite bids from three 
suppliers that it identified as being potentially suitable.  
Are you aware of that? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:    No Chair I had no details when it 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 349 of 404 
 
was submitted, what the details I obviously became aware 
of the details afterwards but at that stage not at all Chair.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, but are you aware of that now? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   Now you then say in paragraph 
72 you did not have any meetings with Denel or any official 
before the contract was awarded and so your involvement 
in relation to this contract was very limited, is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and you say at the foot of the 
10 
page you didn’t know any person at Denel before you 
started as CEO at VR Laser? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now Mr van der Merwe you refer at 
the top of page 559 to your inability to remember the exact 
figures and we fully understand that, given the passage of 
time, and also the fact that you are not currently working 
for VR Laser and you don’t have access to all the 
documents as you have explained elsewhere, in your 
affidavit.   
20 
 
Are you aware that the total value of the bid that VR 
Laser submitted was of the order of R260million? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I was not – from the top of my 
head I cannot recall the exact amount Chair I cannot recall 
it.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 350 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   And I don’t know. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I deliberately asked you in fairly 
rough terms, I said around R260million,I am not going to 
ask you for any exact figures, so you don’t have to worry 
about that, do you at least know what the ballpark is and 
do you know whether it was roughly in the order of 
260million or can’t you remember? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair sorry, the first tender 
that was submitted, the agreement that was signed or the 
10 
order that was placed? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The bid that was submitted was 
initially R260million approximately are you aware of that? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No, I was not – I am not aware of 
that initial figure Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And are you aware that what was 
eventually agreed after negotiation, which you may not 
have been involved in, but have you had knowledge that 
that was then reduced to about R195million?  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Chair I know it was reduced, the 
20 
exactly figure I don’t know, but I know it was reduced. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you involved at all in that, in 
the negotiation process that resulted in the reduction? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes chair at the meeting where 
the agreement was negotiated there was a quibble about 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 351 of 404 
 
the price. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   There was a quibble did you say? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, on the one hand Denel said 
but can’t you give us a better price, on the other hand Mr 
Aurora said no they cannot, the price is what is what it is, 
so – for me it looked as if it was normal commercial 
negotiations, so there was for instance I can remember 
discussions around prepayments if I am not mistaken, but 
why I am mentioning this is I know that the price was 
reduced. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Are you able to recall any 
further detail to assist the Chair to understand why there 
was such a reduction?    You can’t remember exactly what 
it was reduced to? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No Chair unfortunately I cannot. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It was a major reduction, are you at 
least aware of that? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Chair I was not aware of any 
tenders, I cannot say. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, now you refer later on page 
20 
559 
to 
problems 
having 
arisen 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
contract 
that 
was 
eventually 
concluded for the platform hulls for the Hoefyster project, 
you referred to letters of demand etcetera for payment from 
Denel, just very briefly explain that to the Chair please.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 352 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Which paragraph are you referring 
sir, sorry? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well I was referring to paragraph 7.8 
but I was  hoping you could just right now just give a brief 
summary of what you recall? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, Mr Chair the letters of 
demand that was written by myself and various emails it 
wasn’t formal letters of demand, but it was open and 
honest emails and I have sent numerous emails on a 
monthly basis, because I don’t think that VR Laser was 
10 
ever paid on time.  The fact is that the background to these 
emails were that not only was VR Laser doing Hoefyster 
work, VR Laser was also doing other work for Denel and 
even other Denel related entities as well, DVS and LMT 
and their account was never paid and it was impossible for 
VR Laser to sustain the growth that we wanted to have in 
VR Laser if these accounts were not paid to date.    
 
We would for instance buy the steel, which is a 
large component of the entire contract, of one hull, and 
then we would not be paid in time.  We would negotiate for 
20 
instance with steel suppliers and various other suppliers 
that if we pay them on time or if we pay them early that t 
here might be a reduction in the outstanding amount, so 
that, it had an enormous implication for VR Laser if Denel 
did not pay, and from the emails, and I do not want to go 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 353 of 404 
 
through it email by email by Mr Chair you would note that 
my emotions in those emails saying that sub-contractors 
are cancelling their agreements because you are not 
paying. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you refer at the foot of this page 
559 to your becoming, you came to understand that Denel 
when VR Laser was in business rescue attempted to cancel 
the Hoefyster contract, but you did not know what the 
reasons were, what the progress of the litigations were, did 
that happen after you left VR Laser?  
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Look, correct Chair but even at 
the stage when I left, if I may just for chronological 
purposes VR Laser ’s trouble started in 2017 when the 
banks started closing bank accounts.  Suppliers were 
starting to cancel agreements, they were reluctant to assist 
and then on top of that Denel didn’t pay on time, so it was 
extremely difficult for VR Laser to manage these contracts 
and we tried our level best to manage it but we just 
couldn’t, so ja when I left there if I can remember correctly 
and my Chief Operating Officer might be better to testify 
20 
about that, but the Hoefyster project came to a halt 
because we actually manufactured hulls and there were no 
more space for Denel to store these hulls, so we executed 
the project and the hulls were supposed I think to be 
delivered to Denel Vehicle Systems, they were the next 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 354 of 404 
 
company in line to execute, to put the wheels on and to put 
the engine in and the harness etcetera, and they hadn’t 
even started, I didn’t even – I was under the impression 
that there wasn’t even an order at that stage placed on 
DVS, that’s why there was no space for us to deliver the 
hulls, so when I left the project was in jeopardy, but it was 
not yet cancelled Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, were you made aware of 
complaints by officials within the Denel Group that the 
Hoefyster Platform hulls contract awarded to VR Laser did 
10 
not comply with their own rules and regulations for 
procurement? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right my – right thank you, do you 
want to add something Mr van der Merwe? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Chair yes, if I may obviously in 
the media it became reported on about Denel and the 
Guptas and the risks so there was a negative perception 
around VR Laser, and so I knew that when I was the CEO 
that there was that negative perception. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes I am not asking ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   And ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry Mr van der Merwe I am not 
asking you about the negative perception, and I promise 
you that I will get back to a later section, in fact there’s 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 355 of 404 
 
also an earlier section in your affidavit that deals with all 
of that, and the effect on the VR Laser business, but I am 
asking specifically you to focus in your answer on whether 
you were aware that there were concerns raised within 
Denel that Denel’s own procurement processes were not 
followed when it awarded this contract, the platforms hulls 
contract to VR Laser.  Were you aware of that, I am not 
asking if you were responsible for any irregularities, I am 
simply asking are you aware that the – were you aware 
then that there were concerns raised in that regard? 
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Chair when I started no, I need to 
state, and I need to qualify that, at one stage a company 
called DCD, and I cannot remember the year, whether it 
was 2016 or 2017, there was a company called DCD.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   And I think Mr Kennedy you said 
they were one of the other tenderers. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   They requested information in 
terms of PAGA from Denel pertaining to the Hoefyster 
20 
contract, so during my tenure I became aware of those 
allegations but at the time I did not know, but I also cannot 
say that when I left I was not aware of those allegations. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you for that clarity.  Now 
let’s move to another agreement which you deal with in 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 356 of 404 
 
your affidavit from page 560, and that’s the so-called 
memorandum of agreement or MOA between VR Laser and 
Denel Land Systems that has been referred to as DLS.  
Now you are aware of that agreement is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Very well yes sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And were you involved in the 
negotiation of that agreement? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I was Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In fact you say at page 560, 
paragraph 8.1: 
10 
“Although I cannot remember the specific dates I 
had meetings with Mr Stefan Burger, Mr Reenen 
Thebus and possibly Denise Govender in regard to 
the supplier agreement with VLS.” 
Now before we proceed this was an MOA, a memorandum 
of agreement in terms of which DLS appointed VR Laser 
Services to provide certain things, is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And this would be on a single 
supplier basis is that right? 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what were those items, were 
they different from the items covered by the platform hulls 
contract? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes indeed Chair.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 357 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   It was two separate, it was two 
completely separate agreements. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Two completely separate agreements 
in fact Mr Ntshepe, the ex Group CEO stated in his 
testimony yesterday that he understood that they – that the 
one, that the second one, the MOA that we are now looking 
at in fact replaced the first and included what was covered 
by the first, but you confirm that is not correct, in fact 
other ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:    No the Hoef – no Chair the 
Hoefyster contract was signed and on very specific terms, 
and the memorandum of understanding made – or of the 
MOA made provision for work going forward, it was never 
intended to work retrospectively, so that is just wrong. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and in fact other witnesses have 
confirmed exactly what you have said in this regard Mr van 
der Merwe.   Now did you negotiate with DLS the terms of 
this MOA? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I did Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now you didn’t at DLS – I am 
sorry, at VR Laser you and your colleagues didn’t submit a 
tender to DLS, is that correct, for this contract? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In fact DLS decided to appoint your 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 358 of 404 
 
company, the company you were heading then, VR Laser, 
to take up the single supplier contract, not so?  They 
decided ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   The agreement was signed correct 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr van der Merwe, are you okay?  Are 
you okay? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have seen about three times, I’ve seen 
you making a facial expression that suggests you might not 
10 
be comfortable, you might be feeling pain or something? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are fine? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No I will try and limit my facial 
expressions Chair, it is just sometimes that I bring my ear 
closer to hear properly, sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, no, no that is fine. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   But I am 100% fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought you might be having some pain 
or something.   Okay fine. 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No, no, not at all Chair, not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Mr van der Merwe, and I 
think the Commission, speaking for the legal team, are 
happy if you just feel as comfortable as you are, so if you 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 359 of 404 
 
make facial expressions you have explained it now, don’t 
focus too much on the facial expressions, rather just on 
the content of what we ask you to testify.  Thank you. 
 
Now you were aware, although you hadn’t been 
involved in it, that the earlier contract, the Platform Hulls 
Contract, had followed a form of competitive procurement 
in a sense that DLS had asked for three tenders or three 
bids to be submitted by VR Laser, LMT, and DRD, is that 
correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I was not aware of the tender 
10 
process but yes Chair, I know there was a tender process.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But well it wasn’t quite an open 
tender in the normal sense, it was a request for offers from 
three bidders, but that was at least a competitive process 
to an extent, you were aware of that not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   It happened before my time Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  What I am interested in is this, 
when you were negotiating the MOA for the single supplier 
contract between DLS and VR Laser there wasn’t even a 
request for offers from three or any other potential bidders, 
20 
it was simply that DLS had decided that VR Laser should 
be given this contract, without any competitive process   
You must have been aware of that? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair exactly – to confirm yes 
there was no tender, I did not have to submit a tender. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 360 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you weren’t – sorry? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, it was never that I submitted 
a tender, and I do not know what the internal workings of 
Denel was at that stage but I can submit, or I can confirm 
that when the agreement was negotiated it was negotiated 
without us submitting a tender for it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   This was entered into through 
negotiations? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now I appreciate that you were 
10 
not involved in these negotiations, leading to the contract 
between 
DLS 
and 
VR 
Laser 
for 
the 
single 
supplier 
arrangement, you were not there representing Denel and 
you were not required to advise Denel, correct?   You were 
there to represent and look after the interest of VR Laser, 
correct?  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   However you were aware that Denel 
was not a privately owned company, it was a publically 
owned company owned by the State, not so? 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you are an attorney, with 
obvious commercial experience, were you not aware that 
doing business as a privately owned company VR Laser 
was privately owned, correct? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 361 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you not aware that when a 
privately owned company such as VR Laser does business 
with a state owned entity such as Denel, or Denel LAN 
Systems Denel was required to comply with certain legal 
and 
constitutional 
requirements 
for 
a 
competitive 
procurement process.   You must have been aware of that 
surely as an experienced attorney? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair was not aware of the 
specific requirements Denel had to comply to, if I can just 
10 
explain the sole supply agreement, or the agreement 
because there was a similar agreement with DVS. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes we will come to that in a 
moment. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, I viewed this agreement 
Chair as a confirmation of an arrangement that was already 
in place with VR Laser and Denel in the process that was 
followed. 
 
How it normally would work, even if one thinks away 
the memorandum of understanding or the memorandum of 
20 
agreement, VR Laser would normally, the design team, 
would receive an RFQ, a request for quote, from Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   They would then, VR Laser, let’s 
say for argument’s sake to build two Casper vehicles.  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 362 of 404 
 
Then VR Laser would even normal drawings, cut body parts 
of the vehicle.  Then VR Laser would reply to the request 
for quote with a price, and Denel would decide whether 
that was acceptable or not. 
 
This agreement in itself never pre-assumed that VR 
Laser must get all the work.  What the – in my mind the 
reasonable background and the commercial sense of this 
agreement was Mr Chair, and you will see Mr Chair if I can 
take you to emails later, that despite the memorandum of 
agreement work was sent to other suppliers. 
10 
 
So what this agreement catered for was a thorough 
process in which Denel could assess whether the price that 
I was giving was fair and reasonable, I had to divulge my 
rights and in return for that I said but I am not going to 
divulge my rates and then to be used by other people. 
 
If Mr Chair I – there was one email that I sent at 
one stage to a Mrs Karin Geldenhuys and I am just using 
this as an example to explain the rationale behind this 
agreement.  A similar agreement was signed with DVS, 
Denel Vehicle Systems. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In fact if I may just stop you for a 
moment, Ms Geldenhuys was working for DVS, not DLS. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But are you saying that the rationale 
applied to both single supplier agreements. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 363 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   With DLS and DVS, right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair and if I am not 
mistaken Chair I have not seen those agreements, but I 
think they were almost identical. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   The DVS sole supplier agreement 
and the DLS sole supplier agreement, so what would 
normally happen Mr Chair in VR Laser, the design team 
would receive a request for a quote on various drawings.  
10 
The design team being experienced then would open the 
drawings. They would sometimes correct Denel’s drawings 
because it was very specific where you have to cut; where 
you have to bend the steel plate; at which angle you have to 
bend it.  Then the VR Laser design team would rectify those 
drawings and they would reply with a quote to say we have 
rectified these drawings to the standard being able to put 
into a system and here is our quote.   
 
Then what would happen normally sometimes we do 
not get the order. Then we would get exactly the same 
20 
drawing Chair from another supplier – a third supplier asking 
us for a quote.  So here was our drawing; the drawing that 
we corrected for Denel being asked to quote on by a 
different supplier and my design team came to me and say 
listen we have – we received drawings from company X it is 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 364 of 404 
 
the Denel drawing it is the one we corrected.  It is the one 
that we quoted on. What should we do?   
And that left VR Laser and myself in an untenable 
position because well I told them quote – quote this company 
exactly the same what you would quote Denel.  And then 
sometimes it would happen Chair that we get the work 
through the other supplier.  And that led to Mr Chair I do not 
know whether you maybe have Carine Geldenhuys’ affidavit 
Mr Kennedy whether I can refer to an email that I sent to Ms 
Carine Geldenhuys attached as annexure CG11 to her email 
10 
– to her affidavit.  Is that perhaps possible Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.   If you – if I can take you to your 
affidavit at page 569 you specifically deal with that at 
paragraph 14.14. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Yes Mr Chair I – if I can refer to – I 
do not have the entire bundle in front of me but the email 
that I sent to 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is that so. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Ms – to DVS was the one that I got 
by way of a Rule 3.3 Notice on that right top hand there is 
20 
page 87 it is an email that Ms Carine Geldenhuys attached to 
her affidavit. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I am aware of the annexure. But 
would you – would you deal very briefly with the point you 
want to make Mr Van Der Merwe please. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 365 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Yes, yes, no in my affidavit – and in 
that I said that we have – we are receiving I addressed it to 
Ms Carine Geldenhuys and the entire DVS team in 2017.  
Now these memorandum of agreements were signed in 2015.  
So I asked them, I said we receive – we are receiving more 
and more requests for quotes from smaller suppliers on DVS 
drawings.  We have noted this more regularly on parts we 
might have – where we might be the only company with 
material but it does not vary.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  .Yes. 
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Although we always attempted to 
assist these companies where we can it unfortunately 
reached a stage where we need to put certain measures in 
place before we will assist these companies.  Those – these 
were now the companies that we received RFQ’s for from 
other companies.  I think it is important that you take 
cognisance of the following reasons.  DBS drawings are 
shared with us in order to quote on.  We do not know in 
return whether you have a confidentiality agreement with 
place with these suppliers.  And my concern was that I also 
20 
do not know whether these suppliers were registered with 
the – with Armscor with the regulatory body.   
 
So them Ms Geldenhuys replied and said well thank 
you very much for bringing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry Mr Van Der Merwe I am very 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 366 of 404 
 
sorry I do not mean to be rude by interrupting you.  I just 
need to bring a bit of order to the sequence in which we deal 
with topics.  As I understand it from this email it was dated in 
2017, is that correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And at that stage the memorandum of 
agreement had already been signed between DLS and VR 
Laser 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And in fact what appears from your 
10 
affidavit when you deal with all of this in detail and we will 
come to it is that despite the MOA you complained that DLS 
was allowing other people to submit bids and that caused 
you problems, correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  No Mr Chair I did not complain that 
work was sent to other suppliers. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So what – but sorry my questions that 
have produced the answer that  you have been giving for 
about the last five or ten minutes was not directed to what 
happened after the MOA was concluded.   
20 
I am still trying to deal if I may please Mr Van Der 
Merwe with how the MOA came into being not with how it 
was implemented later or how you sent  an email raising 
issues about how drawings come back and other suppliers 
are approaching you and so forth.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 367 of 404 
 
So please would you indulge me and just bear in 
mind that nature of the question that I am putting.  I fully 
understand that you are eager to get your version out and I 
can give you this firm undertaking and if I do not keep to it I 
have doubt the Chair will – will discipline me for that.  But I 
can give you the firm undertaking we will get to the other 
issues post the conclusion of the MOA agreement.   
But it is my duty as an officer of the commission as 
part of the legal team to be taking it step by step 
methodically with firstly how the MOA came into existence.  
10 
So may I just ask you please to bear that in mind? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  I will do Chair and my apologies for 
elaborating on the question of was I not aware that Denel 
had to go through a process in order to give VR Laser the 
contract. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Yes.  Now my point I need to take 
you back to which is that you have confirmed that DLS did 
not go out and either go out on a publicly advertised tender 
or even go out by asking three bidders to submit their bids.  
Only VR Laser was approached to negotiate this contract, is 
20 
that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Again Chair I cannot say what 
happened in Denel but … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No you can say… 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  We did not follow a tender process 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 368 of 404 
 
when this agreement was concluded. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  I understand you were not 
working as part of Denel so you cannot explain things that 
they may or may not have done necessarily.  But you at least 
from the VR Laser perspective were aware that you were not 
competing with anybody else for this contract to get this 
contract, not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Mr Chair yes I – I knew that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  But I was not competing with 
10 
anybody else.  I had to – it was not – the other – if I may just 
– and that is why there was not a concern from my side and 
Mr Kennedy your question on should I not have known that it 
would be un – or that there was a process to be followed.  
My view was that other suppliers were not excluded by this 
agreement.   
I had to comply with or VR Laser had to comply with 
strict measures of which a 100% of these terms and 
conditions had to be met to be in favour of Denel and would 
be to the advantage of Denel.  This agreement obviously 
20 
made commercial sense for VR Laser as well otherwise I 
would not have signed it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I have no doubt that is true. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  So I – I did not see – I did not see 
Mr Chair this as an exclusion that VR – that Denel had to 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 369 of 404 
 
make use of VR Laser for all their steel work does not matter 
what like in a tender.  Like the Hoefyster hull.  They could 
not go to someone else.  But even with this agreement in 
place they were not excluded from going somewhere else. 
That was my understanding Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes but – but you negotiated this 
particular contract the MOA and it was – the reason – there 
is a reason why you refer to it as the sole source or as other 
witnesses have referred to this as a single supplier.  Now I 
accept Mr Van der Merwe and the agreement is before the 
10 
Chairperson – evidence has been led in relation to this 
before.  I accept that under certain circumstances if – if 
Denel was not happy with the quality issue from VR Laser it 
could ask another supplier to supply the item.  Correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And… 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And in relation to price if Denel felt that 
it was not market related the price that was being quoted by 
VR Laser it could also go out into the market, correct? 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair the agreement made 
provision for how it was calculated.  How I calculated my 
price.  Where Denel previously was not entitle to that 
information. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 370 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  So you correct Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But if you quality was good and if your 
price was acceptable to DLS it could not go out into the 
market.  It had to get it from VR Laser and nobody else.  
That is why it was called a single supply or sole source 
agreement, correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair if I wanted to enforce 
my contractual right that my price was price competitive. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  I – my quality was good and I could 
10 
have produced it in a time acceptable I could have enforced 
my rights, correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Indeed.  Now you have indicated 
already and I had to stop you from going into what happened 
later in the implementation of the agreement and how other 
suppliers were being approached for quotes when you felt 
that you – that they should have – they should have been 
coming to you for the business.  Leave that aside for a 
moment.  You could have enforced your rights at any time 
under the agreement if DLS was giving it to other people 
20 
where you were okay for quality; you were okay for 
performance and you were okay for price, not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Yes Mr Chair if I may just – Mr 
Kennedy correct I did never – I never complained that the 
work went to other suppliers in contradiction to – or contrary 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 371 of 404 
 
to this agreement.  There was the email that Ms Geldenhuys 
referred to must be viewed in context.  So – but I am sure we 
will get to that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We shall indeed.  Yes we shall indeed.   
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Yes Mr Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But Mr Van der Merwe the purpose of 
this agreement was that before Denel went anywhere else it 
would have to get the products from you unless there was a 
concern about quality or unless they felt that your price was 
too high.  Not so? 
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Otherwise you would not have 
needed this agreement.  Neither you nor Denel for that 
matter would have needed this agreement at all.  If there 
was not to be some preference given to VR Laser it would 
have just carried on doing what it did before which is to 
request for quotes from you and from other people, not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Agree – Agree Chair it was 
reciprocal advantage that flowed from – which VR Laser got. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  But my point is this and again 
20 
obviously the commission is looking particularly in relation to 
possible corruption or irregularity on the part of state 
entities.   
From the perspective of Denel what I am suggesting 
to you is this.  Its previous process of going into the market 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 372 of 404 
 
place for each supply of each item where they would ask 
different bidders to submit bids like they did for the 
Hoefyster platform hull they asked for three bids.   
This now meant that instead of going out into the 
market place they would only go to you and you would get 
the business and you would be entitled to – a guarantee that 
you would get that business unless there was a problem of 
quality or unless there – your prices were no longer 
competitive.  So in other words… 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Or the delivery would be late yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Or the delivery.  So there would be 
come sort of breach no so?   
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It would a breach if your quality was 
bad?  I would be a breach not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct.  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  If the delivery was late it would be a 
breach not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct.  Correct Chair and I am – 
and I get the point fully that as long as – as long as VR 
20 
Laser stayed within the ambit of the agreement Denel was 
supposed to send VR Laser the work. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That is it.  Exactly the point.  If I may 
complete the previous question?  Apart from the two 
breaches I have already identified a further breach would be 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 373 of 404 
 
if your prices were not market related, correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  But… 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  And Chair I may just – I have not – I 
do not have the agreement in front of me but it – I can 
confirm that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  So unless VR Laser was somehow 
in breach whether it be timeous delivery or prices that were 
not market related or quality.  Unless any of those breaches 
occurred VR Laser would get the work.  That is why it was 
10 
called sold source or single supplier.  Correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
Now 
you 
did 
of 
course 
have 
competitors in that market place not so?  Your affidavit goes 
to some length to say VR Laser was the most wonderful 
company it was by far the best.  Nobody ever questioned its 
quality and delivery and so forth.  Let us assume that you 
are right on that.  It is not true that VR Laser was the only 
supplier of this type of components in South Africa, not so?  
You had competition. 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  In a specific division in the company 
most definitely Chair.  If I may just elaborate on that and I 
will really try to be quick Chair that one must understand 
how VR Laser worked.  VR Laser was the only company that 
could supply a full turnkey solution on for instance armoured 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 374 of 404 
 
vehicles.  What that means is VR Laser did not have their 
own vehicle.  They did not have a VR Laser vehicle.   
They did work for various OEM’s, Original Equipment 
Manufacturers for instance Denel, Paramount at one stage 
so they would manufacture a Mercedes and the Isuzu and 
they would not have their own vehicles in that company.   
So that placed VR Laser in a position where work for 
different competitors could be done under one roof.  Now the 
term full turnkey solution is VR Laser had a design team 
which could support armoured defence work.   
10 
That means that if for instance to simplify it Mr Chair 
the – if we get a request for quote for a Casspir vehicle one 
vehicle would have 10 000 parts so the design team would 
literally draw these drawings on their program in order to 
optimise a steel seat how to cut the parts and how to put it 
into the factory.  That is the design team.   
So not all companies which cuts steel had a 
supporting design division.  Then for instance if we received 
an order the design team would look at the drawings, they 
would put it into the system.  Then it would go into the 
20 
factory.  
Then what we call it the first division or the first bay 
was the cutting division.  That is where you physically cut 
the parts out of the steel plate with a laser machine or a 
profile machine.  There were a lot companies which could 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 375 of 404 
 
have cut normal steel parts.   
Then it would – then after parts were cut it would go 
to the bending division which was the second bay in VR 
Laser.  After the parts were bent it would go to the 
fabrications department which is literally Mr Chair where the 
parts that were cut, bent are welded together. That is in the 
fabrication department.   
And you would see in the emails and the reference it 
has sometimes happened that DVS and LMT would give us 
the work to cut the parts but they would do their own 
10 
fabrication.  And then after the vehicle was for the hull can 
see the steel shell was fabricated that would move to VR 
Laser’s integration department.   
That is Chair where the vehicle would physically be 
put together, the wheels, the glass, the engine, the transfer 
case, everything will be put on the hull in order to make it a 
complete vehicle.  So if we say that there were many 
competitors I agree Mr Chair that their competitors when it 
comes to cutting steel plate and parts and there were 
competitors when it comes to bending.   
20 
We had a huge competitor next to us who cut a lot of 
parts and who bend a lot of part but none of – according to 
me your child is always the most beautiful but according to 
me no other company had a full turnkey solution and that is 
made VR Laser so valuable and Mr Chair if – but maybe we 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 376 of 404 
 
will get there Mr Chair but I just wanted to say for instance 
LMT and DVS.  DVS could integrate vehicles.  
They could fabricate vehicles but they could not do 
the other parts and it is sometimes happen that VR Laser 
would get requests for quotes and our design team would 
work on these drawings.  And then send it back to Denel and 
we did not charge for rectifying the drawings for instance 
that came from Denel or DVS.   
Then we would send it back with a quote how to cut 
on the cutting and the bending of the parts.  And then we 
10 
would get quotes from other suppliers on our drawings for 
cutting and bending the parts. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  I think… 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  And my objection to that was that if 
you want to – and again sorry Mr Kennedy it is on the 
implementation afterwards but if I can just deal with that 
here.   
My concern was that VR Laser was getting more and 
more of these things where we gave inputs without any value 
whatsoever.  And then other suppliers would get the work. So 
20 
what I told Ms Geldenhuys was decide what you want to do? 
If you want to work according to the memorandum of 
agreement then tell me so then we comply with that.  If you 
do not work – want to work according to the memorandum of 
agreement and work on a normal RFQ basis then tell me 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 377 of 404 
 
that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes  
MR VAN DER MERWE:  If you want to go out on tender then 
go out on tender but then tell me that.  Do not work under 
the auspice of one agreement and then you are not 
complying with that.  And that was my concern Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am afraid I must appeal to you Mr Van 
Merwe to please just heed your own warning given just a two 
minutes ago which is that you are straying into the other 
area that I am not asking you about.  You in fact giving the 
10 
same evidence you gave fifteen minutes ago that I asked you 
not to go into which is … 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Apologies Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Whether Ms Geldenhuys or DVS was 
honouring the agreement.  That is not my line of questioning 
currently.  So please. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Apologies.  My apologies. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So please may I just with the greatest 
respect to you Mr Van Merwe to try to stick to the point that I 
am raising.  So whether they breached the agreement is not 
20 
– is not our point of concern at this stage. In fact it is a 
matter of real concern to the commission I believe obviously 
it is for the Chairperson to make up his own mind. But it 
appears to me to be of real concern as to whether this 
contract was properly awarded by Denel to DLS and DVS. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 378 of 404 
 
And I want to go back to the main point.  The central point of 
my = of the line of questioning that I am trying rather 
desperately to try to keep you to.  And that is was it – well 
let me put it this way to you.   
It seems quite clear from the fact that prior to this 
agreement DLS and DVS were putting out items of work for 
quotations by different entities.  They did not have to come 
to VR Laser because VR Laser was not in a monopoly 
position within the South African economy, not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:    Correct Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You may well be right that VR Laser 
was offering a wider range possibly even as you referred to 
as a turnkey operation but Denel did not want to go simply to 
– previously to a turnkey operation it wanted to ask different 
people to give different quotes, not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  I do not know what Denel wanted 
Chair but I get your point Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But the point is whether they wanted it 
or not what they were actually doing before the MOA giving 
you single supply status was actually to go to the market 
20 
place and ask for different bids.  That is why you had to 
submit a bid and others also submitted a bid.  Their own bids 
not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Mr Chair … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that not what was done before the 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 379 of 404 
 
MOA. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Sorry is the question that is what 
they should have done? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No that is what they did Mr Van Merwe.  
That is what they did.  Before the MOA was concluded giving 
you single supplier status which we have already discussed 
what the effect of that was. Before that they would not 
always come to VR Laser and VR Laser alone.  They would 
be asking for bidders. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  No, no. Apologies I missed on. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  I misunderstood your question. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  I am sorry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay no that is fine it is late in the day 
we are all – some of us have been on our feet the entire day. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  No, no not an excuse. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I fully empathise for you. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Sorry, sorry Sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  With you Mr Van Merwe.  But please 
20 
just listen to the question carefully and just confine your 
answer to the actual question.  If in the past VR Laser 
always got the business and was always asked for its quote 
but nobody else was there would have been no reason for 
the MOA.  Correct? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 380 of 404 
 
 MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  So the MOA was there to avoid 
the previous practice of asking various bidders to put in their 
bids.  It would now be a situation where VR Laser would 
always be asked to provide the item every time without 
others being asked to bid unless you were in breach.  
Correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  I understand correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And – so VR – from a VR Laser’s 
perspective  it surely made a lot of sense commercially.  You 
10 
no longer had to compete with the rest of the market.  You 
no longer had to submit a bid in competition with others.  
You would automatically get the business unless you were in 
breach, correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Yes and I would be remunerated for 
service where I would not have been remunerated before. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  So it was – but the question is there 
was a benefit for VR Laser. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Commercial benefit in signing the 
agreement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  I completely agree. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So I want you to focus now on one 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 381 of 404 
 
simple point but it is a fundamental point Mr Van Merwe.  
Would you agree with me that the effect of this was to stifle 
competition?  No longer would they be asking the various 
competitors to submit bids in answer to the request for 
quotations.  There would not be quotations from anybody 
else except from VR Laser.  The effect was to stifle 
competition.  Not so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Chair the word stifle exclude other 
bids – other quotations.  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  That is correct.  It precluded DLS 
10 
from getting  - asking anybody to – anybody else to give 
quotations because you and you alone were entitled to that 
business unless you were in breach.  I fully accept that if 
you were in breach then they would go elsewhere.  But 
unless you were in breach they could not go elsewhere, not 
so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now were you not aware – trust 
me Mr Van Der Merwe the commission will be looking very 
critically and clinically at anybody else’s involvement and 
20 
responsibility.  And it will no doubt appreciate that you were 
there looking after the interests of VR Laser rather than 
Denel.  But I am just putting it to you that you as an attorney 
would surely have known that Denel could not do this.  It 
must have been subject to some laws – procurement laws 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 382 of 404 
 
that required competitive processes in procurement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think – I think he answered that question 
Mr Kennedy before. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja he said what was in his own mind. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why he did not think the – he did not think 
there was anything wrong.  I think he expressed what he  - 
was in his mind.  And of course he also said well he did not 
know the internal workings of DLS or Denel.  Mr Van Der 
10 
Merwe have I understood you correctly? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  You hundred percent correct Sir – 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  And if I may just add that I was 
under the impression that if it was and again I cannot 
remember when it was raised during the meetings and the 
discussions but I had it that if it was a specialised service 
that like VR Laser could offer it was not necessary to go out 
on tender and that was in my mind that it made commercial 
20 
sense for Denel to award this to VR Laser and the details I 
do not know on exactly what they had to do and so in my 
mind it made commercial sense for Denel and I was under 
the impression that they were entitled to sign that under 
those circumstances Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 383 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right thank you.  And thank you for the 
guidance Chair I will – which I will obviously follow.  The 
DVS memorandum of agreement was a similar agreement as 
you have indicated with the same sort of objective from 
Denel’s point of view as well VR Laser’s point of view, 
correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And it had the same effect as the DLS 
agreement that you and I have reached agreement on a few 
10 
minutes ago.  Correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now if I can just take you please to 561 
– page 561.   
MR VAN DER MERWE:  There Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You refer to yourself having personally 
had meetings with Mr Johan Steyn.  He was at the time the 
CEO of DVS, is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And it is the legal representative of 
20 
Denel, DVS Systems.  A lady whose name I cannot remember 
now.  Is she the person you deal with later in your affidavit 
when you supplemented it?  Ms Geldenhuys. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I think that was Ms Geldenhuys.  
She was the legal compliance officer if I can remember 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 384 of 404 
 
correctly. 
 
I 
am 
almost 
99% 
certain 
it 
was 
Careen 
Geldenhuys Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  But she has given 
evidence as to her correct job title but it included exactly the 
function you have referred to.  And she confirmed also that 
she was involved in these negotiations.   
 
Can you recall whether Mr Steyn and Ms Geldenhuys or 
whoever else it was, the lady that you are not a hundred 
percent sure of, can you recall if they indicated whether they 
were happy with the agreement?   
10 
 
Because they have given evidence that in fact they...  
Oh, sorry.  The Commission has heard evidence that they 
were not happy with the whole idea of the single supplier 
agreement being awarded to VR Laser without a competitive 
process.  Were you aware of that? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No.  Mr Chair, I was not aware of 
the unhappiness about singing any agreement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now may we then turn and that 
I propose to be brief Mr Van der Merwe because I think you 
have covered a lot of this already.  I want you to turn to the 
20 
section where you deal with Ms Geldenhuys’ statements.  
And if I can you take please to page 565? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I am there Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And then you refer at paragraph 
13 to how it came about that you updated your previous 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 385 of 404 
 
statement.  You have indicated that.  And then at 566, you 
deal specifically with Ms Geldenhuys from DVS and various 
emails that passed between you and Ms Geldenhuys.  
 
Is it correct that there was email correspondence where 
you were raising concerns that you have already summarised 
for the Chair in you earlier evidence when I interrupted you, 
to the effect that in the implementation of the memorandum 
of agreement with DVS, that they were the single source 
supplier, that in practise you were getting all sorts of 
problems because other suppliers were coming to you with 
10 
drawings and asking you to do the work which you had 
already quoted on for DVS.  Is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair.  And under 
circumstances where I quoted them and they got the work 
which meant inevitable that Denel was paying more. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   But I was...  I...  It is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  And then you say 
in paragraph 14.5:   
“VR Laser was, with respect, not a corner café.  The 
20 
skills 
in 
the 
company 
was 
simply 
unmatched 
anywhere.  VR Laser from a commercial perspective 
would never survive if proper projection targets were 
not set.” 
 
So it suited you, as you explain this part of your 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 386 of 404 
 
affidavit, that it suited you from a VR Laser point of view to 
be able to project by way of targets...  Sorry.   
 
To project what business you would be getting in order 
to see whether you could meet your targets, et cetera.  It 
obviously made commercial sense from VR Laser’s point of 
view, correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes  And also, I regards to 
projection targets.  It also meant delivery targets.  If Denel 
or DVS would approach VR Laser and say we have to build 
12 vehicles for Namibia, that the – and this is when we have 
10 
to deliver these vehicles.  I would need to order the steel 
from Switzerland.  So put projection targets and making sure 
that all the targets were met.  So it was important from that 
perspective as well Mr Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And then at the foot of the page 
567, you say: 
“When 
the 
Sole 
Supplier 
agreements 
were 
negotiated... (so this is before they were being 
implemented) ...when they negotiated, discussed 
and signed, I indicated to both DVS and DLS that 
20 
there 
is 
absolutely 
no 
use 
for 
me 
signing 
a 
Memorandum Of Understanding (you underline that) 
which is not the worth the paper it is written on.” 
 
And then you go to explain why you were unhappy with 
the so-called MOU, the Memorandum of Understanding.  And 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 387 of 404 
 
that you needed a binding agreement, not simply an 
understanding.  And effectively, may I summarise in broad 
terms, my understanding of your point which makes sense, if 
I may say, with respect. 
 
A Memorandum of Understanding was simply a sort of 
indication of goodwill.  We are going to in future probably 
give you business but we are not bound to do that, correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct.  Mr Chair, I had to report to 
Exco and to the board and to give preference to Denel or 
DVS work on what might happen, I informed them that I 
10 
cannot advice, you know, to sign an agreement for the 
benefit of VR Laser if it is an understanding.  What is then 
the purpose of the document?   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   So you are correct Mr Kennedy.  I 
insisted on an agreement, a binding agreement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And you insisted on that so that it 
would be binding, unlike an MOU.  And binding in the sense 
that if DLS or DVS did not comply with that agreement, there 
would be consequences potentially.  You could hold them to 
20 
it. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Because they were now be bound, 
correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   [Transmission poor – speaker 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 388 of 404 
 
unclear]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If necessary, even by going to court to 
get an order to compel compliance with the agreement, not 
so? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   If necessary, like any agreement 
that I can enforce my rights.  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If indeed or to ask the court to give 
you damages if there was a breach of the contract, not so? 
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You are nodding.  Can you just 
confirm? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I agree, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So I fully understand.  Now 
Ms Geldenhuys has actually given evidence that from her 
point of view, she was comfortable with the idea of a 
Memorandum of Understanding precisely because it did not 
20 
bind DVS but she as uncomfortable with a Memorandum of 
Agreement precisely because of what you needed, which was 
you needed to hold them bound by an agreement. Did she 
express that to you at the time? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I cannot recall that Mr Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 389 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I cannot recall that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Now and then at the foot of 
page 568, you go back to the point about not knowing what 
the internal processes in Denel were.  I am not going to go 
further into that.  Now if we can look at page 569.  You refer 
to that email that is attached to Ms Geldenhuys’ statement.  
and then you set out the context in which you expressed 
yourself in the way that you did, in 14.14.3.  Do you see 
that? 
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   14.14.3? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, Mr Chair I am there 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The...  Yes, if I might just have a 
moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, 14.14.3.   
“The only purpose of the Sole Supplier Agreement, 
thereafter, would be to set out their transparent 
20 
process in terms of which VR Laser would at least 
be able to provide its specialised services to Denel 
one a sort of right of first refusal basis.” 
 
Does that sum up your understanding of the Sole 
Supplier Agreement, that if – essentially, it would not 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 390 of 404 
 
guarantee that you would always get the work because if you 
breached, you would not get it but, otherwise, you had the 
right of first refusal.  Correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair.  The ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct.  Correct, Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And then you deal with the 
discussion, for example in 14.14.4 that the points you have 
made earlier about you were receiving drawings from both 
DVS and DLS, you would correct them at no charge.  And 
10 
then you found later your competitors were now making 
enquiries or submitting bids on the basis of your work.  
Correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   And based on correction that I – we 
either made or... 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  If I might have a 
20 
moment, Chair just to... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now if I can take you to page 572, 
paragraph 14.26 ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 391 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   572.  Paragraph 14.26.  You say: 
“It is indeed so that these sole supplier agreements 
were signed in a business environment.  Agreements 
like these get signed every single day in order to 
move business forward.” 
 
Are you stating that applies throughout the economy?  I 
can understand you may be saying that in the private sector 
that is a common situation.  But are you suggestion that, in 
fact, these things get signed every day even in government? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No, Mr Chair I will not suggest that 
10 
it gets signed every day in government and that would not be 
my suggestion. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   But what I was...  Apologies.  My – 
and it was against the background of Mr Wessels and 
Ms Geldenhuys 
complaining... 
 
Well, 
not 
complaining.  
Saying I was – they were quite happy with the Memorandum 
of Understanding.  And my reply to that is, I was not because 
it was not a binding agreement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   And that is why, in that context, 
agreements like this, gets signed every day.  So I did not 
want to infer that in government.  I do not have enough 
knowledge about what gets signed in government Mr Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  And then in 14.29 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 392 of 404 
 
at the foot of page 572, you say – if you may make a 
submission on the purpose, in the affidavit.   
“...a private individual responsible for the well-being 
of 
a 
company 
and 350 
employees in 
a 
very 
competitive 
and 
limited 
South African 
Defence 
Sector.   
The problem with state-owned enterprises, that 
every single CEO and Management Team appointed 
by a new political dispensation, blames the previous 
management for all the wrongs of the entity.   
10 
A 
state-owned 
enterprises 
have, 
unfortunately, 
deteriorated 
in 
competency 
and 
a 
clear 
understanding of pure business principles to such 
an extent that they may have upon themselves.  
State-owned enterprises have become so involved in 
political faction fighting, that they have completely 
lost their sense of doing business for profit.” 
 
Now are you directing that general comment about, in 
your perception, why there may be difficulties in state 
entities?  Did you apply that to Denel specifically? 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, I...  At the time of 
deposing to this affidavit, I did.  And I did that for the reason 
and it might not have been necessary to go so wide, but it 
must also be viewed in the prior – in the paragraph 14.28, an 
email that I sent to Mr Sadik, the CEO of Denel.  I do not 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 393 of 404 
 
know whether he is still the CEO.   
 
In which I voiced my concerns about allegations that was 
made against VR Laser.  And that VR Laser was responsible 
for the demise of Denel.  So I here was to say that it was 
most definitely not VR Laser.   
 
A company with 300 employees, hard-working people, a 
company that works six days out of the week, 24-hours.  It 
was most definitely not VR Laser that led to the demise of 
Denel like it was stated, I think previously in the Commission 
by some of the people giving evidence.   
10 
 
And what I wanted to state here was, that from the 
inception of – when I got to VR Laser, I played open cards 
with everyone.  And my emails, my letters of demand – 
please pay me.   
 
I specifically addressed negative issues attached to VR 
Laser, the Gupta family, what has been written about VR 
Laser in the newspapers.   
 
And not one single person came back to me, at that 
stage, and said that:  You know what, we are not going to 
comply 
with 
this 
agreement 
because 
there 
was 
no 
20 
compliance in Denel.  You know what, we are going to cancel 
this agreement for this order because it was obtained 
unlawfully or irregularly.   
 
And my concern here Mr Chair was that for – you know, 
it might be outside the scope.  But why I raised it here was, 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 394 of 404 
 
my personal view was that people should, employees and 
state-owned 
enterprises 
and 
employees 
is 
state-owned 
enterprises should stand up.   
 
I do not know – I did not know in VR Laser what was the 
procurement policies of Denel.  If there was any problem or 
if there was a split in the Exco decision in Denel or if 
someone did not agree, they should have told me.   
 
Or they should have said to VR Laser:   Listen, we do 
not agree with this order.  Or:  We are not going to comply 
with the Sole Supplier Agreement.  So that was my 
10 
frustration.  If that gives an explanation. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you, Mr Van der Merwe.  
I want to pick up just some final issues now.  And I would 
like to take you, as I promised I would, back to page 554.  
These are about the banks and so forth and how you came 
ultimately to resign.   
 
Now you have indicated at page 553 at the bottom to the 
top of page 554, that you diversified the business of VR 
Laser and into other areas of endeavours such as mining.  Is 
that right? 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you have indicated that, in fact, 
you managed to turn around the fortunes of VR Laser from a 
loss-making company to one making a profit of a few million 
rand.  Now ...[intervenes]  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 395 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   [Transmission poor – speaker 
unclear].  But I honestly also need to add that that fortune 
only was bestowed upon me in the first year.  And the 
second year, I did not have that fortune. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And the Commission has heard 
evidence about the amounts that were involved in payments 
by the Denel companies to VR Laser.  Presumable, payments 
that you did receive later, you had problems in getting 
payment but at least you got payments which in fact 
contributed to VR Laser’s fortunes.  Correct? 
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct.  We got paid for work that 
we did.  Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Then you have talked about some 
impressive growth in a number of employees.  And then you 
deal with in paragraph 3.23 ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   That...  Chair, if I may?  I am 
terrible sorry to interrupt Mr Kennedy.  If I can just explain 
there the growth in employees and for background.  Our 
mining division grew extremely fast.  So most of the growth 
of VR Laser was based in the expansion of our mining 
20 
division.  Most definitely not the defence division. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you were responsible as CEO also 
for the mining division, is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 396 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair.  We...  Ultimately, 
the mining division did not have a separate CEO.  We...  
However, when the mining work got bigger, I decided to 
allocate 
one 
of 
the 
management 
staff 
who 
had 
the 
experience in mining, to allocate him to that division that 
was still supervised by me Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  So you would have been aware of 
its operations.  Did the mining division get involved in any 
transactions with state entities? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Not? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright.  then you deal in paragraph 
3.23 with reputational issues particularly the shareholders 
being Gupta linked and that diminished, you say, all the good 
work that the employees of VR Laser did to grow the 
company.   
 
And then you mention, and I just want you to explain 
very briefly, if you would Mr Van der Merwe, the problems 
that you picked up in relation to the banks. 
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, we had a...  VR Laser had 
a bank account.  They used the same bank when the new 
shareholders took over and – but I remember, my financial 
manager who came into my office just one day and said she 
got the call from the bank.  They wanted to come and see us.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 397 of 404 
 
 
And at that stage, the bank accounts of other Gupta or 
Oak Bay companies were already starting to be closed.  And 
she said that, you know, she expected the account might be 
closed.   
 
So on that day, I think there were three representatives 
of the bank.  They came in.  They explained that due to 
reputational risk, they have to close the bank account.  They 
were not willing to engage with VR Laser anymore.   
 
I can remember vividly that I asked them and I said:  Is 
there anything that VR Laser did?  And they said no it is a 
10 
related risk, related issue with the shareholder.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  Now just to pick up 
a...  Yes? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   My apologies.  You asked in regards 
to things what I did.  So when the bank account was closed, 
I contacted...  Mr Chair, we got about – there were about, at 
that stage, 30 banks in South Africa.  I was left with my 
hands in my head and I phoned with my financial manager 
more than 30 banks.   
 
Every single bank that we could find and asked them and 
20 
I said:  This is the background.  I did not want to waste their 
time.   
 
I played open cards.  I said that, you know, these are my 
shareholders.  Exactly these are the issues.  My books, I will 
keep my – open my books for you.  Will you be willing to give 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 398 of 404 
 
us an account?  And all of them said no.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But may I just pick up a few additional 
points?  Just one point in relation to the MOA with DLS and 
similarly with DVS.  You indicated in your evidence that was 
entered into through negotiation.  Who introduced this 
concept of a Single Supplier Contract?  Was that a VR Laser 
suggestion or was that an initiative or a suggestion that 
came from Denel? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chair, I cannot remember.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
10 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I really cannot remember who 
initiated it.  I need to state that, VR Laser and Denel had a 
relationship where, for instance, there was every week 
management meetings in regards to the process on work that 
was being held on the VR Laser premises, where hulls were 
signed 
off. 
 
Vehicles 
were 
inspected. 
 
So 
it 
was 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   It was so many communications.  I 
cannot answer.  Sorry, Mr Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If you cannot remember, that is fine.  
You must just indicate that.  And can you recall, do not tell 
us if you cannot, but can you recall who the person was that 
you first had discussions with from the Denel side in this 
regard? 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 399 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Mr Chairman, no it – normally – I 
might have had those discussions with Mr Stephan Burger if 
I can remember correctly and Mr Reenen Teubes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Mr Van der Merwe, in relation 
to Denel Asia, did you have any role in relation to the VR 
Laser Asia entity? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes, I – my involvement there Chair 
was – again, it emanated from – I had to advice on a 
possible – I was advised that there was a possible joint 
venture to be formed.  I was not involved in the initial 
10 
discussions and I cannot say whether it was the shareholder, 
Mr Essa who initiated it or one of the directors.  I do not 
know but I was informed that I – there was a possibility of 
such a joint venture. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   
MR VAN DER MERWE:   And that – then they seek my advice 
on the drafting and the signing of an agreement, a 
shareholders agreement and...  So it was more from my legal 
side. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  
20 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   With my assistance.  And then I got 
involved.  And so I was involved from there on in the 
Denel/Asia saga. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  Now the 
Commission has already heard evidence that the plan was 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 400 of 404 
 
that although Denel would put up no cash for marketing 
purposes, a hundred million was to be provided by VR Laser 
as its contribution to the joint venture for marketing 
purposes.  Were you aware of that? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indeed.  VR Asia.  It was to be 
provided by VR Asia. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   VR Asia.  Are you aware of that 
hundred million rand, if anything was actually paid? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No, nothing was paid.  The – it was 
– and I do not have the agreement and I think I last saw the 
10 
agreement three years back but I can remember the – one of 
the liabilities were, it was twenty million rand per year for a 
period of five years.   
 
And that is how they got to the hundred million rand 
eventually.  But it – soon after the establishment of Denel 
Asia, an instruction came through.  I think it was from the 
Minister of Finance to hold any and all actions in regard to 
Denel Asia and so nothing happened then ...[indistinct] 
[speaker unclear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  I would like, finally, to deal with 
20 
your departure from VR Laser.  You indicate in your affidavit 
that you decided in January 2018 to resign.  You say that 
that was after you had tried your level best to manage the 
banking crisis.  That is the banking crisis that you referred to 
already.  So after ...[intervenes]  
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 401 of 404 
 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair.  And you know, I had 
the view that the new broom might sweep cleaner. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I was there for three years  I did my 
level best.  The company was in a state which if Denel did 
not pay that, you know, it – they could not survive.  And I 
therefore resigned in January 2018. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you have also referred to a further 
personal consideration which was that you were concerned 
that if you were out of legal practise for too long, it may be – 
10 
it may put you at an disadvantage if, in the meantime, your 
peer group had moved on with many more years of 
experience.  Correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Indeed so.  That was the trade that 
I knew. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ja. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   I gained valuable experience whilst 
being at VR Laser and to tell you, only if one is out of the 
law, it is when you miss it.  And I love the law and I decided 
to go back into the legal fraternity.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And you, in fact, have, as your 
affidavit says reapplied for admission.  Are you, in fact, back 
on the roll of practice?  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Yes.  So you just remove yourself.  I 
removed myself from the roll from practicing attorneys.  You 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 402 of 404 
 
do not have to reapply to be admitted.  You just write a letter 
to the Law Society and say that you will now be practising 
again with this firm and this is your trust details.  So I then 
was 
readmitted 
as 
a 
practicing 
attorney. 
 
Well, 
not 
readmitted.  I just informed the Law Society that I am 
practising again.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   And they then indicated on their 
records that I am practising again.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So your affidavit indicates on the 
10 
following page 554 that you have always had and you still 
have a good relationship, not only with the Gupta family but 
also the Oak Bay Management.  Is that right? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct.  What is left of them Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you do still work for Oak Bay.  You 
have said that in 3.27.   
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And in this Commission, you have 
acted for Mr Duduzane Zuma.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In your capacity ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN DER MERWE:   On one specific matter Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And in your capacity as an attorney.  Is 
that right. 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Correct.  Correct Chair. 
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 403 of 404 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I just have a moment, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you very much, Chair.  And 
thank you Mr Van der Merwe, particularly, given the late 
hour.  We appreciate your assistance.  Thank you.  Thank 
you, Chair.   
MR VAN DER MERWE:   No problem.  Thank you, Chair.  
Thank you, Mr Kennedy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you very much Mr Van der 
Merwe for making yourself available to give evidence even 
10 
as late as this.  Thank you very much 
MR VAN DER MERWE:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you to you, Mr Kennedy.  And your 
colleagues, your team.  Thank you to everybody for sitting 
until late.  We will now adjourn and then tomorrow, you have 
two witnesses Mr Kennedy?  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Three witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Three witnesses. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I think – did you say we would start 
20 
at nine? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If that suits you Chair. 
MECHANICAL INTERRUPTION: 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...half-past nine 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   09:30.  Thank you, Chair.   
11 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 304 
 
Page 404 of 404 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Seeing that are finishing so late this 
evening.  Okay so tomorrow we will start at half-past nine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 12 NOVEMBER 2020: 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
