 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
16 APRIL 2021 
 
 
DAY 376 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 335 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
16 APRIL 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 3 of 335 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 16 APRIL 2021 
(There is no sound for the first minute and 37 seconds.) 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson is to put the relevant 
parts of the affidavit to Montana and ask him whether he 
accepts what he said or denies and if he denies what the 
basis of the 00:01:42. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  The lighting does not 
seem to be very good.  So if somebody could do something 
about it.  Okay alright ja they will attend to it.  Yes, yes Mr 
Soni. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson then we would like to 
start with the affidavit of Mr Molefe – Mr Montana Mr 
Molefe’s… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh and if you are ready to start at least 
Mr Montana should… 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh should be sworn in I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do the oath ja or affirmation.  Please 
administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MONTANA:  Tshepo Lucky Montana. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MONTANA:  Not at all. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 4 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  Correct. That is correct. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry okay let us start afresh.  I – if 
you could speak up a bit I did not hear the answer.  I need 
to hear the answer. 
MR MONTANA:  Sorry Chair I am too tall  the system is 
just a bit – sorry about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you – and it is – I think it does not 
come out so you cannot raise it.  No but that is fine just try 
your best – oh okay.  Okay just start afresh Registrar. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MONTANA:  Tshepo Lucky Montana. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MONTANA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR MONTANA:  I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry I did not hear that answer. 
MR MONTANA:  I said I do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay thank you.  Yes continue. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 5 of 335 
 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MR MONTANA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Montana; you may be 
seated.  Yes Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please.  Mr Montana you have 
heard what I have said to the Chairperson about the 
approach we intend adopting.  I want to start with the 
affidavit of Mr Molefe first you will find it in Bundle D which 
is in a file in front of you. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Thanks Chair Mr Soni you – you probably 
have been interacting with the commission in the last few 
days and I requested I think on Monday I requested the 
opportunity to make a statement.   
I received an email yesterday I think it was just 
after lunchtime in the afternoon I thought I just going to 
make – jotted comments at the beginning before we start 
Chair and I was told that no you can – you can make your 
statement but if you – if you submit that and I think I have 
been in interaction with your team and sent them email 
20 
even in the early hours of this morning Chair because I 
think – Chair I think there has been a lot said about the – 
about PRASA, about me and I think it is more than fair that 
I be afforded opportunity to – to address a few things that 
are of concern to me. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 6 of 335 
 
 
Chair I have honoured notwithstanding the fact … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second before you proceed Mr 
Montana.  I did hear that you might wish or you would wish 
to make a statement.  I think I have been told there is a 
statement but I have not had – I have not actually seen it.  
It might have been sent to me but I just have not had time 
and I have not read it.  I normally want to see it if it a 
written statement so that I can satisfy myself that it is not 
going to implicate people who have not been notified and 
so on.  So – so I assume you have got the statement Mr 
10 
Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We received it – I received it a few 
minutes ago Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MONTANA:  It is about 98 pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I just looked at it very quickly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So I do not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have not had a chance to… 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I have not even… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Except for the fact that it is from Mr 
Montana I know nothing about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Is that more or less correct it is 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 7 of 335 
 
about 98 pages? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair indeed.  I – the intention is not to 
read the full statement.  Chair you would recall that I have 
raised numerous concerns about the process that we have 
embarked upon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  At the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And Chair I think let me say that the 
commission told me I think it was at five past two 
10 
yesterday that if you want to make a statement it must be a 
written statement submitted.  And I submitted it – it is true 
because I had to sit down and write the statement in the 
early hours of this morning.  And I know Chair that the 
procedure is very important. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  (Speaking in vernacular) Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  That… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Especially (speaking in vernacular). 
20 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair indeed Chair.  So I think I 
would appreciate Chair I promise I am not implicating 
anyone. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Beyond what I would have said in my other 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 8 of 335 
 
affidavit that is the subject of discussion and debate 
between myself and the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well just before you proceed Mr Montana 
both you and I have just said some things in a language 
other than Isi-Zulu we need to share with everybody so you 
must start to say what you said in Isi-Zulu or is it Isi-Xhosa 
then I will also say what I said.  I will put it in English so 
that nobody thinks that we do not want some people to 
understand what … 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I am not sure if I can try. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  (speaking in vernacular). 
MR MONTANA:  (speaking in vernacular) I can translate 
Zulu I am Pedi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  (speaking in vernacular). 
MR MONTANA:  (speaking in vernacular).   
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe … 
MR MONTANA:  You are better placed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe in a friendly you meant you are 
asking in a friendly way you are not fighting. 
MR MONTANA:  In a respectful manner Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  In a respectful way.  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  That we may not have – because of the 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  That I have received.  Chair I mean let me 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 9 of 335 
 
be very frank. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Maybe before you do that let me say 
also what I said I simply said in Isi-Zulu that especially 
because he had just taken the oath literally translated what 
he said was he was asking in a – what is it – church spirit 
literally you know or… 
MR MONTANA:  (Speaking in vernacular). 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is meant – it is meant to say in a 
respectful way.  So I said particularly because he had just 
taken the oath.  That is what I said.  You – you are – I get 
10 
the impression that you are now saying well because that 
statement we have not read and it is long one needs a lot 
of time.  I am suspecting you want to say can you just be 
given a chance to say a few words.  Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And are not going to implicate anybody. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed – indeed Chair I will appreciate 
that indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Five minutes? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ten minutes? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I think we – I thought you were 
working on averages of thirty minutes Chair for… 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I – no I have been – I think I cannot 
say that I have been definite with everybody but generally 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 10 of 335 
 
speaking it has been between ten to fifteen minutes maybe 
twenty but if somebody says I know so and so he went to 
thirty then maybe that might be happen but most of the 
time it has been ten, fifteen, twenty minutes.  Is that fine? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair no I think that is fair I will respect 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine I will allow you.  I will take 
your word that you will not implicate anybody.  Thank you 
10 
Mr Montana you may make your – your remarks. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you Chairperson, Deputy Chief 
Justice for an opportunity to address you today.  It was in 
my initial application Sir to address a wide range of issues 
facing our country here today that is beyond the challenges 
of PRASA. 
 
Those of us we had the opportunity to serve in 
government, in leadership positions. I think we have got 
the duty when we come here not implicate other people, 
not to attack other people, not to deal with the real issues 
20 
facing the country and I think in the course of my testimony 
today I wish to do that. 
 
Deputy Chair – Deputy Chief Justice behind the 
story of PRASA there is a story about our people.  It is a 
story about the possibilities that we have as a country.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 11 of 335 
 
And I think it is very important that we – we ready to take 
time to discuss it.  I know that a number of issues have 
been made.  I have expressed my reservations.  I have 
made the statement Deputy – Deputy Chief Justice that I 
find the commission biased.  I find the commission 
pursuing a predetermined agenda and I want to put those 
on record today. 
 
What I mean by that because I think it is very 
important and let me put on record that I had serious 
reservations 
Advocate 
Soni. 
 
When 
I 
received 
this 
10 
particular summons because – because I would be having 
an on-going battle with the commission.  I have prepared 
an affidavit. 
 
My interaction with this commission there is nothing 
to do with the allegations made by Mr Popo Molefe, by Ms 
Ngoye and Mr Ollerman. 
 
I wrote to the Chair on the 26 t h of July 2019 asking 
for an opportunity to testify highlighting a whole range of 
issues that I intended to address.  Chair the commission 
came back to me at that time they wanted to curtail my 
20 
evidence.  They wanted me to take some parts that deals 
with the appointment of Werksmans Attorneys and a whole 
range of investigators. 
 
I followed the commission very closely Chair and I 
have taken issues with a number of – with the way in which 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 12 of 335 
 
the 
commission 
has 
addressed 
issues 
and 
I 
again 
respectfully Chair you said in one of the statements that 
there will be a time when we have to sit and face each 
other to – face each other … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  You want to say something to 
Mr Montana? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I just wanted him to adjust his 
microphone. 
CHAIRPERSON:  His mic okay alright. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you Mr – thank you.  Thank you 
10 
Advocate thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR MONTANA:  And Chair I – I think that the issues that I 
wanted to raise relates to how the commission and I am 
afraid Chair that some of the issues that I want to raise 
relates to some of the comments that the – as Chair and 
you know it was a difficult thing.  I said how do I say this 
without – tell the truth, be forthright whilst at the same 
time 
respecting 
the 
Chairperson 
and 
respecting 
this 
particular commission. 
20 
 
Chair let me – let me indicate that the way in which 
as a country with these 00:13:50 state owned enterprises 
and public enterprises that there are successes and 
failures I think serves as a constant reminder of our 
collective national side. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 13 of 335 
 
 
We are quick to find fault and apportion blame as a 
nation.  We tend to engage not to engage seriously and 
think deeply about the rest of the issues facing our country 
today. 
 
We as a nation we – we speak loud (African 
language) but we are hesitant to fight or even frown upon 
the deep inequalities and the indignity of the majority – 
that the majority of our people are subjected to. 
 
We seem to be a nation defined by short memory, 
forgetting who we really are and where we come from.  We 
10 
seem to be a people that fail to recognise that we are 
bound by our history and that we have a common future 
and that is why you see others think they can come to the 
commission and score a victory over others. 
 
Chair I think that this commission has got an 
important role for our country.  It is beyond – it has a 
choice to either depend a conflict and the divisions in our 
society or lay the basis for united and a prosperous future 
for all South Africans. 
 
We are a nation that refuses to – to accept that we 
20 
are first and foremost an African country and Chair we fail 
to understand our position.  We are – I always say we are 
a nation at war with each other. 
 
Chair there is – the notion of state capture it finds 
resonance with our – with this national side.  It is our 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 14 of 335 
 
psychosocials psychological and emotional makeup which 
define our - we respond collectively when we hear and that 
is why in South Africa there is news every day.  But the 
responses have been very short term in nature and not 
strategy. 
 
I think we have made many gains Chair as a country 
I think that our SOE’s in particular; key SOE’s and public 
entities they have played a major role and they are being 
destroyed today. 
 
If we look at PRASA Chair PRASA has made major 
10 
gains over the last ten years within a very short space of 
time however those gains have been reversed within a 
period of three years and more specifically after I had left 
PRASA. 
 
We have invested as a country over R100 billion to 
change the face of public transport.  Today we have 
nothing to show for the massive investment in our railways 
and – and no serious discussion oh no this is how we got 
to where we are today.  Just under three years.  
 
Infrastructure and I am referring Chair to between 
20 
2018 and today we have over an infrastructures estimated 
over R30 billion that has been destroyed and part of the 
reason Chair is because we chose that we – security 
contracts are irregular we are going to cancel them and the 
result has been the infrastructure has been destroyed in 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 15 of 335 
 
the country. 
 
So we are a country that is prepared to lose 
R100.00 to save R1.00 Chair and that is why we see all our 
things are falling apart in the country.   
 
Chair – and this does not only affect PRASA it 
affect our national airline.  I can go on and on and on 
about South African Airways. I can go on and on about 
Transnet, Eskom and all of those things. 
 
All what has been said here in this commission 
Chair is actually not the totality of our experience and 
10 
reality of our country. 
 
Deputy Chief Justice I will add Chair and ask you 
that we leave at – we look at our history in the round.  We 
fail to build on our strengths as a country.  There are 
massive resources and capacity represented by key SOE’s 
and public entities like Eskom, Telkom, ACSA,  
Transnet and PRASA itself and many others are 
being daily destroyed because we fail to understand these 
are important instruments in the hands of a democratic 
government to drive economic transformation.  We change 
20 
the wellbeing of the people and to withstand the storm so 
prevalent in our world. 
 
Chair you know the 00:18:14 of state capture and 
are many and in my affidavit that this commission has yet 
to accept have been able to elevate the meaning of 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 16 of 335 
 
irregular to becoming to mean criminality and corruption. 
 
That is not correct Chair.  The truth is irregularity is 
not seen as much with corruption.  Indeed the irregular 
expenditure and a poor control environment create a 
favourable condition for fraud and corruption.  There are 
instances where irregularities are a direct result of corrupt 
practice however irregularity in itself does not con – does 
not constitute corruption. 
 
And I want to make that point very strongly and 
debate it in this commission Chair.  When the Minister of 
10 
Public 
Enterprises 
Pravin 
Gordhan 
and 
our 
National 
Director of Public Prosecutions Chair Shamila Batohi speak 
of billions lost to state capture they are not referring to 
corruption or stealing money but they actually draw figures 
from irregular expenditure. 
 
As a nation we are now using irregular expenditure 
as a barometer to measure corruption.  Our courts in my 
view Chair seem to have fallen into this trap.  We have 
created an unfortunate picture of South Africa as an 
extremely corrupt nation.  We are saying it everywhere 
20 
including our – our delegations go to devils when we are at 
international forum.  We even say that we are the most 
corrupt 00:19:45 investigate. 
 
Even – even the Chairperson has been making 
statements about the leadership of the country being 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 17 of 335 
 
serious about fighting corruption.  I ask the question Chair 
is this factually correct?  And how do we feature or should 
we be feature – should we feature among the most corrupt 
nations in the world? 
 
If we make a distinction you would actually realise 
that we need to make it ten because Chair we truly live in 
the age of madness in my view. 
 
 
South Africa and her people will never be able to 
dream big and take both initiatives to transform our 
country.  As long as the dominant narrative about our 
10 
country is informed by the false nation of state capture. 
 
Our 
country is in desperate 
need of political 
business, the ritual and community leadership which will 
confront the real problems facing our country and the 
continent including addressing the history or demands of 
the black majority in our country. 
 
A leadership which accept that we shall not have 
meaningful freedom and sustainable growth when the 
economy fails to mobilise into productive activity 70% of 
his greatest resources. 
20 
 
Nelson Mandela said the greatest resource are our 
people.  The country needs a leadership with the courage 
to make the break with a structure of the economy 
inherited 
over 
100 
years 
ago 
that 
breeds 
massive 
unemployment, poverty and equality.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 18 of 335 
 
 
It is a leadership that recognise and or that should 
abandon the very notion of state capture and how it is 
destroying the very fabric of our own society. 
 
Chair both in my statement as well as in my 
affidavit that I put before the commission I detail exactly 
this so that I can substantiate it. 
 
Chair when on the 26 t h I wrote – I wrote the – to 
you requesting for an opportunity to help – to assist the 
commission in its work I was more than happy and this 
followed the decision of the African National Congress the 
10 
ANC that is members and members of the public should 
cooperate with and assist the commission in its work. 
 
Well I must also put on record Chair that whilst I 
followed that I think that the ANC is not paying attention to 
the workings of this commission because this commission 
is very important.   
It is not about DCJ Zondo, it is not about people 
who testify it is about the future of our country and 
therefore that balance because today we can use the 
commission to chase others tomorrow because of the 
20 
nature of society and the changing political dynamics 
others will be chased and I think that is very important. 
 
Chair let me just highlight a few things that I – I 
take specific exception with some of the things that the 
Chairperson again with the utmost of respect Chair – it has 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 19 of 335 
 
taken me two years before I come to sit before the Chair 
and this is not because of my own making it is because 
this commission has tried at every stage of the path to – to 
undermine everything that I have submitted Chair. 
 
But let – I want to elaborate on the -  on the – on 
what I call bias and a pursue of the predetermined agenda 
by this commission.   Chair and this is based on evidence 
and I think you would recall Chair again in (African 
language) to the commission (African language) but I think 
that less tell certain truths that make me actually upset. 
10 
(African language) sitting with my own family and listening 
to some of the things being said by the commission or its 
Chairperson. 
 
Let me deal with the first one Chair.  I think that the 
Chair dealt during the testimony so Popo Molefe, Martha 
Ngoye and Fana Dingiswayo on the matter of the – of the 
directorate for priority crime investigation and the national 
prosecution 
authority 
and 
the 
various 
PRASA 
investigations the Chairperson was so vociferous.   
At some stage Chair you even told your people to 
20 
meet after – after in your chambers you even said cleaned 
all the money if he has gone home let them call 00:23:49 
when you are done.  
 
I have done each and every Chair I have got with 
me the clips of each and every hearing that the – that you 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 20 of 335 
 
have done. 
 
Chair I - I urge you to have a serious look at these 
things because I think that you will realise when you are 
alone or when you write your report that these were grossly 
unfair. Actually they suggested that this commission is 
captured and let me indicate Chair what I mean by that. 
 
Chair the – the – you said that there is corruption, 
evidence of corruption and you – and Chair at some stage 
you nearly hit the Chair.  The DPCI and NPA were not 
willing to act.  Chair I want to say today this is factually 
10 
incorrect. 
 
The – PRASA had requested and this is part of the 
evidence by annexure that I – that I brought to the 
commission.  PRASA had requested the DPCI to prioritise 
the Swifambo as well as the Siyangena investigations.   
The DPI did exactly that Chair but when the DPCI 
ask and again it is black and white in the correspondence 
between the two organisations asked for evidence not what 
PRASA presented in the civil case but for a criminal 
investigations 
both 
Popo 
Molefe 
Matangoye 
failed 
to 
20 
deliver that evidence because it does not exist Chair and if 
it was delivered Chair I want to say it was not delivered 
here because I listened to all of theirs.   
They made statements and Chair I find it quite 
extraordinary that – that if we are committed to justice it 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 21 of 335 
 
means therefore that you must hear both sides in this thing 
and then make a determination. 
 
Chair this thing was not presented here I want to 
argue that and I think that the Chair and excuse me for – 
for the word that I will use because that is not the word 
you use but for lack of a better word the Chair blasted the 
DPCI as well as the NPA. 
 
Chair you know it is a sad state of affairs if the 
Chair had looked deeper into the decision you actually 
have 
realised 
that 
what 
was 
happening 
Werksmans 
10 
Attorneys 
with 
Popo 
Molefe 
were 
actually 
trying 
to 
influence the DPCI and the NPA.   
 
They actually took a company one of the companies 
contracted to them and they said to the HAWKS you guys 
do not have the capacity to investigate what is called 
complex investigation.  They did that because they wanted 
to write a script that Lucky Montana and others we must 
manufacture evidence inside the HAWKS itself. 
 
And Chair when I was – when I listened to your 
comments I was so angry.  I was seething Chair because I 
20 
say Deputy Chief Justice is actually undermining the very 
independence of the – of – it may not have been 
intentional Chair but is undermining the very independence 
of both the DPCI and the NPA and the ability to prosecute 
without fear of him. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 22 of 335 
 
 
The HAWKS terminated the – their engagement with 
Howard when they realised that in fact this company was 
contracted to Werksmans it was doing both sides and 
trying to influence it.   
 
Now Chair if we talk about justice your comments 
are 
actually 
strengthening 
Popo 
Molefe’s 
hand 
and 
Werksmans in them trying to force the HAWKS.  I think 
Chair actually – I wrote in my statement I think it is 
actually not only unfair conduct but I think that it is 
actually unlawful in my – in my view. 
10 
 
Chair it is one issue and let me also inform you – 
Deputy Chair – Chief Justice it is not only those charges.  
They told you about only charges that relates the charges 
that they have made.  There were charges and in my 
statement I provide even case numbers.   
I opened a case in Hillbrow where I show that Popo 
Molefe, Martha Ngoye paid what you call South African 
fence and gate irregularly and that money ended in the – 
some of that money ended in the – in the foundation trust 
of Popo Molefe. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Remember 
the 
promise 
about 
not 
implicating. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair I – (African language) on this 
unfair thing because I think that is the crux of the thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 23 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  Sorry – sorry Chair I will move this piece.  
Chair that money ended in my affidavit I asked the 
commission please subpoena the accounts of Popo Molefe 
because he – Popo Molefe has been one of the best 
witnesses 
here, 
the 
most 
preferred 
witness 
of 
this 
commission. 
 
If you calculate the amount of time when before the 
– the lockdown Chair you ask Advocate Soni here you said 
him, how much time do you want with this witness?  He 
said thirty minutes.  He went to a four days Chair he had – 
10 
he had four days and he was called across beyond PRASA 
itself.  Popo Molefe had the most amazing time here. 
 
Yet this commission is revisioned to ask about all 
the unlawful things that he has done some of them we have 
laid charges. 
 
I have opened a case at Brooklyn police station.  
Chair this commission did something other than the NPA 
the manipulation on the NPA matter – HAWKS and the NPA 
matter.  Advocate Soni says to me here today he wants me 
to respond to the issues raised by your own investigator 
20 
and PRASA 00:29:37. 
 
Chair really Advocate Soni we know that this 
commission never did an investigation on this matter.  
Never even in – came to – they never even gave – gave me 
the opportunity to come and speak.  This commission took 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 24 of 335 
 
a 22 page affidavit written by Mr Paul O’Sullivan 00:30:03 
at Brooklyn police station suddenly it is preliminary report 
of the commission. 
 
Chair how do we respect the commission?  Mr Soni 
himself he is sitting here highly conflicted.  I do not know if 
he disclosed to you Chair that he in fact had written an 
opinion for Werksmans.  Mr Vincent Maleka is no longer 
with the commission I am not sure Chair but when you look 
at issues about irregular ad-hoc contracts he did an 
opinion.   
10 
Now we come here the commission tells me take out 
stuff about Werksmans but its own evidence leaders – its 
own investigators are conflicted on this – on these 
particular matters. 
 
Chair I will not go much into details 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  But I think that I find the commission 
highly – highly compromised because these issues is not 
just – I mean there are instances  which shows Chair.  I 
know people have said ask for the commission for the 
20 
Chair to recuse himself. 
 
Chair for me I am raising issues I do not even want 
here I am happy that you are Deputy Chief Justice you are 
chairing this commission.  But also I am saying Chair like – 
and we always say that when someone is in a position of 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 25 of 335 
 
leadership, a position of authority and this would be my 
final point it is God and it is those who have given birth to 
you – (African language) and (African language) but none 
Chair I am a child of somebody.   
I am born, I am a son of Karee Stephen Matlala 
(African language) these are people who gave birth to me 
and they hear this commission making serious attacks on 
me  Some of them so factually incorrect and I think during 
the – throughout the – this testimony and answering 
questions I will be able to do that. 
10 
 
Chairperson (African language) and this – these are 
not cowards.  Both Bakoni Matlala (African language) these 
are warriors Chair in history and their blood in my blood 
veins here are not cowards.  It is the Matlala’s, it is the 
Kekana’s, it is the Montana’s.   
Chair and I think that we should be – and when we 
deal with these issues I want to show this commission but 
this – this affidavit that I placed it defines Chair the 
starting point.  Not because I do not respect you Chair I do 
not respect the Advocate Soni but I think a lot of things I 
20 
am going to take them head on based on the evidence and 
I hope that the commission will treat me with the kind of 
fairness and give me the space in the same way that you 
have given Popo Molefe in particular. 
 
For all the hearsays he was not there when PRASA 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 26 of 335 
 
did all this work Chair so I put that Chair as an opening 
statement and hope that we will deal with some of the 
issues in the course of the – of the conversation. 
 
Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you Mr Montana for largely 
not really implicating anybody.  I just want to say to you 
that I commend the fact that whatever concerns you have 
with the commission, its legal team or investigators or even 
with the Chair you have articulated those concerns I 
believe in a constructive manner and – and I have not seen 
10 
anything destructive or disrespectful in the manner in 
which you articulated your concerns. 
 
We as a commission should be open to people 
articulating their concerns about us.  This is a very deep 
and important commission.  It has got many people, men 
and women who are quite committed to its work would 
invest that they fair but we – it would be wrong to – for us 
to think that we never err – that we never make some 
mistakes 
or 
that 
everything 
we 
say 
will 
always 
be 
understood in the way we intended. 
20 
 
We – I certainly accept that sometimes I may say 
something 
intending 
one 
meaning 
and 
it 
might 
be 
understood in a different way.   
 
So I hear what you have said all I can say to you is 
I am very keen to hear all sides.  I am very keen to hear 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 27 of 335 
 
different 
perspectives 
about 
matters. 
 
When 
I 
gave 
judgment in the – or a ruling in the matter of the 
application by Mr Ajay Gupta for leave to cross-examine 
some witnesses and I dismissed the application one of the 
things I said was if they were to come back I would grant 
them leave to cross-examine. 
 
I had no doubt about that as long as they complied 
with the rules.  I am very keen to hear particularly persons 
who are implicated in a very serious way.  I want to hear 
their side of the story before any findings can be made.  
10 
And where they do not participate it is a pity because I 
would really prefer to have all – everybody’s perspective. 
 
So I can assure you that there is no predetermined 
outcome I have on anything but I respect everyone’s view 
but certainly I can assure you of that.   
 
I can assure you that I am looking at all evidence.  I 
may at a particular time think along certain lines on 
something but it does not mean I have made a finding.  
When I hear another side I am still open to saying oh but 
that was not right.   
20 
So – so – but I – I am happy that you are here.  I 
am happy that you – you are ready to deal with issues and 
whatever concerns you have you have articulated and you 
have articulated them in a manner that is constructive as 
far as I am concerned. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 28 of 335 
 
 
So – so we will continue.  I must just say this 
because maybe I will not – I might forget you made 
reference to your affidavit that you sent last year I think … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry Chairperson I have been asked 
to ask you to put your mic at the centre they are not being 
able to record – I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I am used to people saying my voice 
is loud and 00:39:04.   
10 
MR MONTANA:  But voice Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so I just want to say about that 
affidavit Mr Montana because I did read it – the whole of it.  
It contained a number of things that I was very interested 
in and I can tell you now and I shared this with Mr Soni 
then that the impression I had after reading that affidavit 
was that it appeared that you had taken a decision to really 
be helpful to the commission.  That was the impression I 
have – I had and I shared it with Mr Soni. 
 
There are a number – there are many matters that 
20 
you deal with in that affidavit that I think are very important 
and as you know the commission I determined a date when 
I wanted you to come and testify early in January 
unfortunately there were issues about annexures and so on 
but I just want you to know that that is the impression I had 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 29 of 335 
 
after reading that affidavit and I want you to know that 
there are a number of matters in that affidavit that I was 
very interested in. 
 
Indeed the legal team had gone to the extent of 
even sending the affidavit or portions thereof to implicated 
persons 
even 
though 
the 
annexures 
were 
not 
there 
because the idea was they wanted as I understood it to 
expedite matters.   
 
So I thought it is important to mention that so that 
you know it and – and of course there were challenges 
10 
about the – there were challenges that we all know – know 
of.  So – but I thought that that is – that is all I wish to say.  
 
But I must also maybe say that you will have 
noticed that the issue of the – of Werksmans has been 
brought to the commission and that is because in part 
because your raising of the matter made it possible for one 
to say let us have a look because he – he raises this issue 
he feels strongly about it.  So it has been brought to the – 
to the commission and – so I just mention that. 
 
Okay let us – oh you want to – yes Mr Montana. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair.  Chair I think we should – 
we should proceed but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  But I am actually pleased to hear Chair 
that in respect of the matter of the affidavit because this 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 30 of 335 
 
was the issue that I was going to raise today that I 
prepared an affidavit and it recalled that my affidavit was 
not prepared in response to any allegation. 
 
Popo Molefe testified in March eight months after I 
have approached the commission after I had given the 
commission and I said I want to assist the commission with 
information that I know in my role in government from 
public enterprises when we restructuring all the state 
owned enterprises to transport and my life in PRASA and I 
said I am willing to do that Chair. 
10 
 
The problem with the summons today is that it 
invites me – my affidavit has not been admitted as 
evidence and we know the commission has spoken Chair 
about my annexures and I will not drag the issue but I just 
want to put it on record.   
 
Chair the – when I submitted my affidavit as I have 
said I think you have seen it is a 447 page affidavit and I 
said I do not want to burden this affidavit I will submit my 
annexures 
separately 
and 
I 
think 
I 
worked 
to 
the 
commission.  They came to my house to collect all the 
20 
papers.  Every number links to – oh and the annexures 
links to the issues that are there.   
 
The commission has said to me no but these things 
are not properly marked or numbered and I said no, no it is 
fine let me work with the commission so that we correct all 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 31 of 335 
 
the – what you saying is not properly marked or numbered 
so that – the commission said to me Chair you did not use 
what you call it established practice – the format that we 
use.  And I asked Chair can I have this format so that my 
annexures are in line with what the commission requires?   
 
It has taken me over three months and I have 
realised that not such format exists Chair.  So I am 
pleased Chair that I think that your words are assuring, 
that you have looked at the commission and Chair I am not 
raising 
the 
issue 
of 
Werksmans 
and 
to 
talk 
about 
10 
irregularity. 
 
In fact the conclusion of my annexure I – because 
this impact on our – on our democratic dispensation as a 
country and I say in my -  in my affidavit there in my 
conclusion 
the 
work 
of 
this 
commission 
would 
be 
incomplete without it looking deeper because it is not 
about irregular and fraudulent expen – appointment. 
 
It is Chair about the fact that I submitted this 
evidence, a lot of reports that shows that Werksmans and 
the companies working with them have actually based their 
20 
reports including those that they have given to the HAWKS 
through irreg – unlawful surveillance activity. 
 
My house has been broken a number of times.  My 
son nearly died.  So these are matters of life and death but 
is the – the matter we discuss of the HAWKS and NPA 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 32 of 335 
 
actually shows the extent to which democratic institutions 
can actually be manipulated to achieve nefarious goals as 
it were and that is the spirit in which I am raising the 
Werksmans issue. 
 
But Chair thanks very much that you have said you 
will have a look at it and I am hoping that the commission 
will engage me so that go deeper because in each and 
every – after every paragraph I put an annexure to support. 
 
You 
ask 
Chair 
finally 
you 
ask 
some 
of 
your 
witnesses here Mr Koko the commission ask him Mr Koko 
10 
why do you interact with is it Regiment Capital when the 
contract is with McKinsey or whatever it is called? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or Trillian. 
MR MONTANA:  Or Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not McKinsey – McKinsey. 
MR MONTANA:  Exactly those parties Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  McKinsey ja. 
MR MONTANA:  But that was the point that Advocate 
Seleka took on here with Mr Koko.  You will see Chair 
when we say Werksmans has been paid R350 million we 
20 
actually refers to companies that are not contracted to 
PRASA but who are contracted by Werksmans. 
 
Some of them their job simply to chase after me, 
break into my houses so that they can try to find anything 
that they can – so that I can be prosecuted through what 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 33 of 335 
 
you call manufactured charges and trumped up charges 
Chair. 
 
So I am glad that we open up this thing then we are 
dealing with the real state capture that we should be 
looking at Chair.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let me say this about your affidavit.  
Because of where we are in terms of time for the 
commission I do not know if much can be done if the issue 
of annexures were to be fixed but I would be – I would be 
very happy if they would be a way to sort out that issue of 
10 
annexures because as I say your affidavit has a lot of 
things that I think are very important that this commission 
would like to look into. 
 
It is just a pity that we are where we are in terms of 
time you know.  So I would be very happy I know that 
between yourself and the commission maybe certain things 
have been said and all of that but maybe a discussion that 
we have been having this morning maybe it might just open 
the way or an attempt to try and sort that out (African 
language).  Mr Soni you remember the phrasing (African 
20 
language). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  In a spirit of cooperation and 
without fighting and so on so – so – because then once 
that has been fixed one can apply one’s mind to what can 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 34 of 335 
 
be done with it at the time where we are.  Okay alright.  
Thank you.  We are at six minutes to eleven I wonder 
whether we should just take the tea break now and then – 
so that when we come back we go straight up to lunchtime? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe we should do that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson may I place something on 
record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am not going to… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You –  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am not going to deal with other 
matters that Mr Montana has raised.  Mr Montana says I 
am conflicted.  As the – an officer of court and I accept this 
is not a court but in general I am deeply conscious of not 
involving myself in activities that might involve a conflict. 
 
So I want to place on record I have never been 
briefed by Werksmans Attorneys in any matter involving 
PRASA or Mr Montana.  This is not the first time Mr 
Montana has raised it.  He has raised it with journalists 
20 
who communicated with me and out of concern I wrote to 
the lead counsel of the commission Mr Pretorius and 
placed on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What the position is and so let me do 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 35 of 335 
 
it now because it will form part of this record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you told me. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I did as well Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I have never been briefed by 
Werksmans Attorneys in respect of either Mr Montana or 
PRASA ever before or after the commission.  I was briefed 
by Werksmans once about fourteen/fifteen years ago in a 
matter in Durban it was a commercial matter it had nothing 
to do with PRASA.  
10 
 
In regard to PRASA one matter on which I was 
briefed was a matter in which I was asked to give an 
opinion on whether criminal charges could be brought 
against Mr Montana. 
 
I am surprised that Mr Montana thinks that that 
disqualifies me because that opinion said that given the 
position Mr Montana occupied he could not be criminally 
involved.  But it had nothing to do with anything that the 
commission is in. 
 
And Chairperson when I came to the commission I 
20 
was not aware of what stream I would be fitted into 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But I just want to assure you 
Chairperson, public at large and perhaps Mr Montana if he 
is open to persuasion that I am not conflicted at all. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 36 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no that is fine.  Let us take a – 
the tea adjournment now so that we do not start stop, start 
stop.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We take the tea adjournment now and 
after that we will go up to quarter past. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Eleven and then we will resume at 
quarter past and then continue.  We adjourn. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chair. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson there is Mr Hotz from 
Werks – Werksmans he wants to place something on record.  
He asked me to place – to indicate to you Mr Hotz from 
Werksmans. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is that we are supposed to start with 
the witness evidence now. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hotz what is that?  Put on your mic.  
We have been meaning to commence with the witness’ 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 37 of 335 
 
evidence. Somebody will help you.   
ADV HOTZ:  Thank you Chair.  Chair in light of the 
proceedings this morning I merely wanted to alert the Chair 
unfortunately our senior counsel could not attend this 
morning but I wanted to place on record Chair as you would 
be aware that Werksmans has indeed applied to the Chair for 
permission to cross-examine Mr Montana.   
Obviously we – we are in your hands Chair as to how 
and when but I merely wanted to place on record that there 
is that application Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  At some stage I – it 
would be dealt with there are a lot – quite a number of 
applications for leave to cross-examination that are being 
finalised so – okay alright.  Thank you.  That is – yes Mr 
Montana. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I – I unfortunately I represent myself 
as well on the legal side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  But Chair I think I would – I would also take 
legal advice on this issue.  I have welcomed the – when the 
20 
commission alerted me to the fact that Werksmans wants to 
cross-examine I said no I welcome in fact there are a lot of 
things that the – I think that it would be good for them to 
cross-examine me.  Chair but they – they can do that only on 
the basis of my affidavit. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 38 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I am here to reply to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no they are not going to do that today. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes, no Chair I accept that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  But I am saying even procedurally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  It is on the basis not of my response to Mr 
Popo Molefe but it should be under basis of my affidavit 
which is not the statement.  So I think – I think Chair we will 
10 
deal with it at the right time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  And I will take legal advice once you have 
made your decision Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes well put it this way if you – if subject 
to issues of time and condonation if you did not previously 
file anything in relation to it having read what they wrote in 
support of the application you might when you take legal 
advice get advice as to whether there is anything you should 
put before me before I make the decision.  Okay alright.  Mr 
20 
Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Just one 
more housekeeping.  Mr Johan Van Loggerenberg who was 
mentioned in Mr Montana’s affidavit asked me to place on 
record that he is here – he is not represented but he just 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 39 of 335 
 
wants to place on record that he is in fact here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh was he mentioned in the affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That we – is not being used today? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh as long as he is advised that it is not 
being used today. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Montana can I just explain what I 
10 
want to do today and it can either be fast tracked or it can be 
a slow process.  Mr Molefe has made a number of 
allegations against you in his affidavit.  I want to look at the 
relevant parts or the relevant paragraphs of his affidavit and 
ask you whether you deny or confirm the correctness of what 
he said and anything you may want to add.  
 
Okay I am going to refer to specific paragraphs and I 
hope you will not mind I will read them it just becomes easier 
so that the record is complete and your answer to that 
question appears all in one. 
20 
 
Is that alright?  I want to start with you will have … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let say first Mr Soni what bundle we are 
using. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For the record. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 40 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Bundle D Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  PRASA Bundle D.  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  PRASA Bundle D. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And it is Exhibit SS6.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That – and that will be Mr Popo Molefe’s 
affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That – that is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now have you got it Mr Montana? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  I have got it thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can keep your mic on all the time Mr 
Montana. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  If you – we are going to look at page 
numbers and paragraph numbers. I will start off with page 
number the first page is page 3 it is the page on the top right 
hand corner in red.   
MR MONTANA:  On the top. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Page 3. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  Top right. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Page 3 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It will read 003. 
MR MONTANA:  3 ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 41 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So at paragraph 11 he says that he was 
appointed to the PRASA board on the 1 s t of August and soon 
thereafter he met with you in your capacity as Group Chief 
Executive, is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He says you then congratulated him on 
his appointment and told him that the previous – that you 
had 
told 
the 
previous 
chairperson 
that 
you 
intended 
resigning as you had been with PRASA for many years and 
that you still intended resigning in the future, is that correct? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair but the – that was not 
on our first – on our first meeting ja, but that is correct, you 
are right. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So can I just ask and it is on record but 
is it relevant that it was not at the first meeting? 
MR MONTANA:  It is relevant Chair because we – I think at 
the first meeting it was immediately after Mr Molefe had 
been appointed the whole board had been actually appointed 
by cabinet.   
There was a cabinet statement issued and I then 
20 
obtained his mobile number; called him to congratulate him 
and made arrangements to go and see him.  He was playing 
golf at the Gauteng Golf Estate.  He had arranged a venue – 
met there.  I introduced myself.  We spoke about the history 
– where we come from and how I know him particularly as a 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 42 of 335 
 
young activist in the UDF in the 1980’s and then I left – I 
gave him three documents.  I said these are your bedtime 
readings.  It is not the board induction we will have a board 
induction at the right time.   
I gave him the strategy of PRASA what they call a 
corporate plan.  I gave him some of the documents dealing 
with the – with our modernisation program and I gave him 
our document outlining our real estate strategy and that is 
how we parted ways.  He says I will read and then we start 
with the process and we will have an induction.   
10 
So the – the issue about me intending to resign I 
raise it of course a few months later and this is after Mr 
Molefe had said to me, you know we think got a new board 
you must sit with us one of the three years.   
And I said no and there is a reason for that I think at 
a later – in the course of the conversation we will come to 
that Advocate Soni.  But the reality is I said to him at that 
time that look I have been here for almost ten years.   
My health is not good I want to step aside and 
everything but there will be subsequent meetings where 
20 
some of these things were dealt with but the – but – so that 
was not the – in the first meeting but it happened almost 
within the same – more or less the same time – timeline. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On a lighter Mr Montana you say you 
wanted to step aside or step down at that time? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 43 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  I wanted to do both Chair step aside but I 
still have thirty days in respect of the step aside the rule 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then in paragraph 12 Mr Montana 
he is – Mr Montana – Molefe says he responded by saying 
that 
PRASA 
was 
carrying 
out 
a 
major 
program 
of 
modernisation and the board would need you to remain and 
lead the team at PRASA to discharge historical past, did that 
happen? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Chair indeed that – that happened.  Mr 
Molefe had wanted me or rather suggested to me that I 
should stay at PRASA for another three years. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right then in paragraph 13 he says and 
starting in the second sentence on the second line of 
paragraph 13. 
“There 
is 
– 
PRASA 
was 
beginning 
its 
execution 
of 
an 
ambitious 
government 
program of modernisation.” 
And then at paragraph 14 he goes on to say: 
20 
“That the cost of that was going to be R172 
billion over a period of 4 – of 40 years.” 
Is that more or less correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair the – the ambitious program to 
modernise our railways was of course underway at that time 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 44 of 335 
 
when Mr Molefe arrived.  The R172 billion investment would 
have been over a 20 year period and not 40 years.  Over a 
20 year period. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  20? 
MR MONTANA:  20 ja not 40 years. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then at paragraph 15 he says that: 
“At the time his board assumed office most of 
the major programs which had – which ran 
into billions had already been concluded.” 
Is that correct? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  No that is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then he says: 
“The board asked you in your capacity as 
CEO to make detailed presentation on the 
status of the various contract – contracts 
including future contracts.” 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair that is not correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The board did not ask? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no, Chair we had a – an induction 
20 
program.  This induction program addressed everything.  It 
was addressed by – firstly by me – we welcomed the new 
board where I briefed the entire board on the strategy and 
we gave them two big files.   
 
So the one on the strategy side summarising those 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 45 of 335 
 
issues and the other one was address – were issues 
addressed on the – on the regulatory legislative side which 
was addressed by the Company Secretary Mr Lindikaya at 
that time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am just asking did that never happen 
that the board asked for presentations. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I – in fact on the day he said that I 
was sitting here listening.  I came especially for that and I 
want to say that it is a – and he said I refused to cooperate 
with them.  That is false Chair.  How would I go and see the 
10 
chairman at the golf estate, offer him documents about 
PRASA when we welcome him.  And then a few months later 
I withhold documents.  I – for me it did not make sense.  
There is no objective basis why I withhold this. 
 
Chair let me say the PRASA modernisation program 
and I think that is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Wait before you continue I wanted to say I 
was not sure whether he said you refused or he simply said 
you – you never provided the documents. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair even that is false. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I had – we actually provided so much 
information if there is one thing is a weakness and you can 
see Chair I wrote these statements in the early hours of this 
morning.  I provide information and – and there was no 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 46 of 335 
 
reason because we – you see we were not involved in 
criminality. There is no reason for us to hide documents and 
do these kind of things.   
So Chair it is not – his assertion is  - is so incorrect – 
it is wrong and I do not know where – where he finds that – 
where he finds that – where or how he can make such a 
statement.  He got all the information including regular 
quarterly meetings of the board.   
I wrote detailed reports and annexures on issues that 
the board had to deal with.  There are contracts of course – 
10 
if we deal with one contract the rolling stock renewal 
program the R53 billion to replace the entire fleet of 
MetroRail.   
I mean these documents are with lawyers it was – 
they were so big I do not even carry those documents.  But 
they were accessible to the board.   
Let me – let me hasten to add though Mr Soni Mr 
Molefe and I when we were invited to Parliament and I 
cannot recall the date now to brief and he has just joined 
PRASA to brief the Standing Committee. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Portfolio Committee. 
MR MONTANA:  The Standing Committee on Appropriation.  
It was chaired at that time by Mr – Mr Paul Mashatile.  We 
went there; I briefed the committee; I presented to the 
committee and then he opened of course and said the CEO 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 47 of 335 
 
will take us through a presentation.  At the end Mr Molefe 
then in fact was saying – was talking about the rolling stock 
program more specifically that you know we have even 
investigated this matter and we find that it is perfect it is 
done in a proper way. 
 
Now Chair I did not know that was in – it was being 
investigated.  For the first time just three months of Mr 
Molefe – of Mr Molefe being in PRASA I heard in Parliament 
from his own statement that they have investigated this issue 
and they are satisfied with the fact that this contract was 
10 
done properly. 
 
Chair when we deal with the Werksmans issues we 
are going to come to this particular issue.  Mr – so it actually 
shows that the relationship in my affidavit I say there is a 
network and this I want to bring you to – to this particular 
network that has been in operation including the fact that 
they started investigating me when I was still at PRASA 
without actually even any board resolution – board resolution 
to that effect. 
 
Chair I want to assure this committee I am – I have 
20 
got my own shortcomings and the witnesses but I respect 
authority and that is why when Mr Molefe was appointed the 
first thing I did was to congratulate – to welcome him, 
congratulate him.  It was not – I would have waited – I could 
have waited for the board induction when they came at 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 48 of 335 
 
PRASA.  I followed him to where he was and said Mr Molefe 
– I even told him that he inspires me Chair and I think he 
mentioned that point because the relationship with Mr Molefe 
even though he did not know me personally at that time but 
there is a long history to it which I think may not be relative 
at this – at this point in time. 
 
Chair – Chair there is no reason why I would withhold 
any information from Mr Molefe for the board as they – as 
they were a properly constituted board of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Soni. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chair.  So we can accept 
that when Mr Molefe says that he asked for these you were 
not cooperative and he had to secure – he and the board had 
secure the documents as he says in the rest of that 
paragraph from the attorneys concerned. 
MR MONTANA:  Not on his. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That that is not correct. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I want to say that is – and Mr Molefe 
knows he is probably watching this he knows that this – that 
is not correct. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  At least we know the areas of 
difference so … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and it is not a situation where he 
might be mistaken about the timeframe where he locates that 
request – maybe it is a request that happened later because 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 49 of 335 
 
I think your – you started by saying you – the request was 
not made, is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you said on your own you had provided 
a lot of documentation. 
MR MONTANA:  At my own initiative Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair let – let me say the relationship and I 
deal with this at length in my affidavit.  My relationship with 
Mr Molefe when he became chair between August until 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  2014. 
MR MONTANA:  August 2014 until November – end of 
November we had a very good relationship.  We had one on 
one meetings.  Well then we had one on one meetings in fact 
most of the meetings were not even taken place at PRASA.  
They were taking place at his offices – he is a director of 
Lereko Investments which is based in Illovo and most of the 
meetings were happening there. 
 
But Chair I will explain in the course of this – of this 
testimony.  I knew why Mr Molefe was there.  You heard the 
20 
testimony of – of former Minister of Transport Dipuo Peters, 
Mr Peters spoke about you ask a question to Mr Molefe in 
March you ask him what happened in the relationship, why 
things were good and why things turn bad?   
Chair I do not know if this is the right time but I want 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 50 of 335 
 
to help you understand, answer that question for you 
because both Mr Molefe and Mr Dipuo Peters did not provide 
you with the right answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR MONTANA:  Outside in the streets Chair on a lighter 
note to say at that time it was the same Whatsapp group and 
then it went the other way pear shape and that is why we 
have the kind of problems that we are talking about Chair.   
 
So he did – he did not make any mistake Chair he 
just know that his assertions – his statement to the 
10 
commission was not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You must not forget I would like you to 
make an input on that question but maybe at the right time 
so – so you and Mr Soni – Mr Soni will also keep an eye as 
to when the right time would be. 
MR MONTANA:  (Inaudible). 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you can deal with it. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then he says in paragraph 16: 
20 
“That there was a problem in that the 
2014/15 
audit 
indicted 
that 
there 
was 
irregular expenditure of more than R500 
million.” 
And that the Auditor General sorry if you look later in the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 51 of 335 
 
paragraph and the Minister and the board’s audit committee 
had convened an urgent work shop to deal with these 
concerns. 
Are you aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair you know sometimes when you do 
things as an afterthought because you want things to fit into 
each other you say things like that.   
 
In 2014 we had a delay to our audited financial 
statement.  Not because of management problems Chair no 
because there was a huge issue between us and the Auditor 
10 
General at that time.  It had to do with the locomotives.   
 
As you know the locomotives Chair we are going to 
talk at length about that.  The locomotives were – were – 
Chair we unlike the commuter trains which we build a factory 
but the locomotives 88 of them but we ended up contracting 
for 70.  They have to be built in Spain and I know there has 
been a lot of debate about whether we should have built 
them or not I think at the right time again I will deal with that 
issue Chair to show the issue of public interest. 
 
We never faced this challenge about the R500 
20 
million.  Chair when I was at PRASA and I know that Mr 
Molefe painted a picture – he does that at the end of his 
paragraph as an organisation that is dysfunctional, that has 
got weak controls or non-existent and many individuals 
deployed in strategic positions lacked the required skills to 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 52 of 335 
 
adequately fulfil their roles.  
 
You know this PRASA I do not know Chair.  I was at 
PRASA I was CO for nine consecutive years. We have never 
had a qualified audit when I was at PRASA.  This was not 
conveyed to this commission and that is very important 
because there may not have been – have been – there may 
have been audited financial statements and annual reports 
and the Auditor General making certain findings but when the 
audit was delayed in 2014 the Auditor General said to us we 
want to travel to Spain to go and verify the components that 
10 
have been bought and everything and see how they should 
be treated in the accounting – in the statements of PRASA.  
Okay – that is what the Auditor General said. 
 
We then agreed; we prepared for the trip.  The 
Auditor General then came back to change its position and 
said no we want PRASA to treat the Swifambo transaction as 
a pre-payment together with the other rolling stock program 
and if you do not do that we will disqualify – we will 
disqualify oh sorry we will qualify the financials to PRASA. 
 
This was towards the end and this board has just 
20 
joined.  This workshop that the Chair is referring to is 
actually the first induction workshop and it is at that meeting 
that we indicated to them that we may need a special agent 
Audit and Risk Management Committee of the board to meet 
to deal with this particular issue. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 53 of 335 
 
 
So when I read and listened to Mr Molefe sitting 
there; up there manipulating these facts to convey to the 
commission that we have got this dysfunctional entity.  No 
that is not PRASA Chair.  
 
The PRASA that we – that we formed and I played a 
leading role in this establishment had major problem there 
because our railway system was falling apart.  But I will tell 
you Chair that when I was CO of PRASA some of my former 
colleagues are here if a train does not move old – this old 
trains and I do not get the satisfactory response the 
10 
management knew that I will act.  They know that I will fire 
them and ask them to say let us get them to the trains in the 
early hours of the morning so that we can deal with the real 
business of this organisation. 
 
So Chair this picture that is being presented here 
that the commission should look at the – at these entities as 
being – you know if there is one entity that I think South 
Africans notwithstanding its many challenges should have 
been proud of.  I think one of them should have been PRASA 
and take out Montana there and deal with this entity and I 
20 
think in my statement I detail some of the things that we 
have achieved and I deal with what happened the period 
after. 
 
So Chair we never heard.  I only appeared to in 
SCOPA once Chair on each 00:24:02 irregular expenditure.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 54 of 335 
 
That was in 2013 I think and there the amount was R32 
million Chair – R32 million in 2013 and this amount had 
nothing to do with theft of money.  It is a fact that PRASA 
because of financials – cash flows could not pay the 
Municipalities in time and they charged interest.  The Auditor 
General said to us because you are paying and you are 
paying with interest we will then treat that – those interests 
as irregular or wasteful expenditure. 
 
I had to go and explain it to SCOPA. 
 
2014 the financial year the irregular expenditure was 
10 
only R100 million Chair – only R100 million.  What happened 
is that the R500 million had to do with – and I had left 
PRASA that time when they finalised in July I left on the 15 t h 
the board and management had then to finalise the financials 
Chair.  They ever go to the prior year.  I was outside PRASA 
when I hear about R500 million which then was included into 
that thing which was used as a justification for the irregular 
appointment of Werksmans Chair. 
 
So again you know – you know Chair the extent to 
which Mr Molefe I think that when you – when I listen to the 
20 
testimony of Ms Dikeledi Magadzi the current Deputy 
Minister of Transport and a former chairperson of the 
Portfolio Committee on Transport when you listen to the 
testimony of Martha Ngoyi – sorry Chair not Martha Ngoyi I 
am sorry I was talking to her just now that is why she is – of 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 55 of 335 
 
Dipuo Peters you actually see that in fact the evidence of Mr 
Popo Molefe and I am trying to avoid using a strong word but 
Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Did not assist the commission it was trying 
to create and it was – it was a political statement more than 
providing the commission with facts.  Unfortunately I had 
written my affidavit before he make these allegations but I 
did later incorporate some of those things. 
 
It is false Chair.  The reason why the Audit 
10 
Committee is not R500 million – it is not a R500 million 
which came at a later stage but it has to do Mr Soni with the 
fact that the Auditor General wanted to change what you call 
an accounting treatment of how we treat locomotives. 
 
So if PRASA pay Swifambo money and this money 
goes to Vossloh and they buy an engine from another 
company now that engine is in Spain but PRASA had paid 
the money how do we treat that in the books? 
 
So there was a debate about that which impacted on 
the financials and not irregular expenditure or stealing of 
20 
money as being projected here or lack of controls Chair. 
 
And so it is not correct Mr Soni  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I just ask you to turn to page 38 
this – because the basis that Mr Molefe bases that on PM2 
and I do not want you to think Mr Montana that I am trying to 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 56 of 335 
 
favour Mr Molefe’s version I am just trying to on the basis of 
the information before us to show you that it does appear in 
the financial statements.  If you look at page 38 which is 
PM2. 
MR MONTANA:  Remind – PM – remind me Chair we are 
using the numbers at the top is it not? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes 038. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The red numbers but he – he will not 
mention the letters and every – and the 0 he will just say 38 
so you. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Page 38? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You will see at paragraph 14 it says: 
“As disclosed in note and that not was to be 
attached to the financial statements the 
agency incurred irregular expenditure to the 
amount of R550 million.” 
MR MONTANA:  Yes but I am saying this – this financials 
which financial year is this?   
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  This is 2014 and 2015. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair but that confirms my point.  In 
2013/20 – 2014/2015 the financials the irregular expenditure 
R100 million. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 57 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  Then what happened is that I left in July 
before the financials were drafted.  The only let us know 
Chair I will not even accept that.  I work with the office of the 
Auditor General but I go into the details of the business 
including you know getting ...[indistinct – dropping voice] at 
a later stage but it has to do, Mr Soni, with the fact that 
the Auditor General wanted to change the – what do you 
call it – accounting treatment of how treat locomotives.  So 
if PRASA paid Swifambo money and this money goes to 
Vossloh and they buy an engine from another company.   
10 
 
Now that engine is not stable but PRASA takes 
the money.  How does it sit in the books?  So there was a 
debate about the in the financials and not the regular 
expenditure or stealing of money that is being projected 
here or lack of control, Chair.  So it is not correct Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I just ask you to turn to page 38.  
This – because it basis that Mr Molefe basis that on PM2 
and I do not want you to think, Mr Montana, that I am 
trying to favour Mr Molefe’s version.  I am just trying, on 
the basis of information before us, to show you that it does 
20 
appear in the financial statements.  If you look at page 38 
which is PM2 ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   PM...  Remind you, Chair, we are using 
the numbers ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 58 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   The red numbers.  But he will not 
mention the letter and every and the zero.  He will just say 
38.  So you... 
MR MONTANA:   38. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You will see at paragraph 14, it says: 
“As disclosed in note [and that note was to be 
attached] 
in 
the 
financial 
statements, 
the 
agency incurred irregular expenditure to the 
10 
amount of R 550 million...” 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, but I am saying this financials – 
which financial year is this? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is 2014 and 2015. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair.  Ja, but that confirms my 
point.  In 2014/2015, the financials says the irregular 
expenditure is R 100 million, Chair.  Then what happened 
that, I left in July before the financials were drafted.  I will 
not even accept that.  I worked with the Office of the 
Secretary General but I go into the details of the business 
20 
including, you know, giving advices from people in the 
accounting field.  That goes to say what does that mean, 
okay?   
 
And they fought – I always fought with them.  
respecting the office but making sure that they get the right 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 59 of 335 
 
– and so these financials do not support Mr Molefe’s 
view(?).  It is supposed the fact that after I have left in 
2014 – in 2015, July.  When they finalised, they added in 
the irregular expenditure.   
 
Chair, you raised a concern.  I think when 
Minister Peters was here, you were also very strong on 
that point.  Correctly, so to say how can irregular 
expenditure increase so much to almost R 20 billion and 
nothing was being done.  Chair, at the right time I want to 
deal with it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I have also got a scientific 
answer to that particular issue.  So it is not correct. So this 
is a record after - and there have been agreements 
between in my absence.  Sp. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And Mr Montana, again, I do know – 
what, as the Commission, we have got to do is.  We have 
got to look at documents that are presented to us.  If you 
look 
at 
page 
34, 
that 
says 
that 
this 
is 
The 
Final 
Management Report on The Audit With the Year Ended 
20 
31 of March 2015.  That is the heading to this document.   
 
Now, I am only raising this in this context 
because I accept you that the financials were done after 
you left but it is still for the period while you were there 
2014/2015.  Unless you are saying to us that these 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 60 of 335 
 
financial statements misrepresent the position after you 
left.   
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I do not think - Mr Soni, we should 
be partial(?).  Let me perhaps explain it systematically 
without even diverting on other issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   There is 2014.  I am saying the financials 
– the Commission is being – or rather, the AG, the Auditor 
General’s findings for 2014/2015 was? 
CHAIRPERSON:   R 500 million. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   R 500 million for 2014/2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And if you look at Mr Molefe’s statement, 
he is definitely conflating the financials of 2014/2015.  In 
2014, what caused the delay was the accounting treatment 
and the auditors had pros(?).  In 2015, it is a different 
matter altogether, okay?  So there is nothing wrong with 
what you pointed.  There is a record.  I am not challenging 
it.  There is a letter, though, that I have written for – to 
challenge the financials.  I have written to the Speaker of 
20 
Parliament, Baleka Baleka ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mbete. 
MR MONTANA:   Mbete.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   Where I actually argued and wrote at 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 61 of 335 
 
length that the financials of PRASA is presented by the 
Board 
of 
PRASA 
actually 
are 
wrong 
and 
they 
are 
misleading both Parliament and the users of the reports.  
So I think, Mr Soni, the – when – the audit for 2014 was 
finalised which was the year.   
 
So Mr Molefe joined in August.  We had the 
delay.  So it means he would have list(?).  If he joined on 
the 1 s t of July, he would not have been part of the 2014 – 
what is it called – auditor financial statements because 
they were getting approved by the board submitted on the 
10 
21 s t of July.  But because there was a delay about the 
accounting treatment, so it then went to his board.   
 
Now the amount that we are dealing speaks to 
2015.  So this is correct.  It does not support – what is it 
called – it does not support...  It does not support the 
assertions by Mr Molefe because he is actually referring to 
the – the R 500 million speaks to the 2015 Financial Year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So let me put it in a way I understand it.  
Let us take out Mr Molefe for the time being.   
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And let me start what you said about 
2013/2014.  I understand you to say.  In respect of the 
Financial Year 2013/2014, the irregular expenditure was 
R 100 million.  Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 62 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now I understand these financial 
statements 
to 
say 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
Financial 
Year 
2014/2015, the irregular expenditure is – is it R 500 million 
or ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   R 550 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Million Rand.  And my understand of that 
is that whatever it is that had given – that gave rise to that 
irregular expenditure of R 550 million happened during the 
Financial Year of 2014/2015.  Are we on the same page on 
that? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, no, certainly we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   We are Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   So that I accept. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept, ja. 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
Except 
Chair 
that 
the 
auditors 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...made their own findings based on the 
20 
evidence that has been presented to them and that is why 
the 2015/2016 Financial Year at the - what is it called – the 
irregular expenditure by PRASA ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   ...are factually(?) challenged, Chair. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 63 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Because – you see, when the auditors 
come – and let me put it up front so that when Mr Soni 
takes me through he understands what my point is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, at the heart of my letter to the 
Parliament to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   To the Speaker. 
MR MONTANA:   My letter to the Speaker of Parliament 
which I copies to the Chair of SCOPA, Mr Themba Godi.  I 
10 
said PRASA made serious misrepresentations because 
immediately when the first R 100 million story and later 
then 
became 
R 14 billion. 
 
R 500 million, 
it 
went 
to 
R 14 billion in the next year.  I then took a report to the 
Auditor General to analyse it.  It was not a trust(?).   
 
Chair, 
I 
found 
something 
very 
shocking.  
Actually, I did the calculation.  That the twelve out of the 
R 14 billion, R 12 billion of that amount was actually with 
irregular expenditure.  The auditors mention in their report 
that the accounting authority and management failed to 
20 
provide them with records though the payment had(?) a 
contract and all of those things.   
 
They speak about the limitation of scope in their 
duties and what happened, therefore, is that – then they 
started to declare all of these things as irregular.  Now, we 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 64 of 335 
 
know these contracts are there at PRASA.  We know in the 
financial statements the payments that PRASA does.  They 
can pull out those numbers and give it to them.  Then Popo 
Molefe went out to the media, Chair.   
 
We are finding a lot of corruption.  R 14 billion.  
And 
some 
of 
that, 
by 
the 
way, 
R 4 billion 
of 
that 
R 14 billion - R 4 billion(?) of the R 4 billion(?), Chair, has 
happened in the year that he was Chair.  Number one.  
Number two.  He then went to – back to 2012, okay?  If you 
want to destroy a country and an organisation, you must do 
10 
that Chair.   
 
When we formed – when we informed PRASA in 
2008 – I had a session with the auditors, Auditor General.  
They said to us:  We do not like the way in which you treat 
some of the assets that you have.  You see, we have got 
the work in progress and everything but what we have is 
that when you guys have spent money on the refurbishing 
a train you then capitalised it in the statements as in total 
as it is.   
 
They say:  We want you to move away from that.  
20 
We want you to start to say this coach that you have 
refurbished, capitalise the money for work(?) separately.  
So the components that are in the train, you break them in 
that way.  That became the practise and the Auditor 
General had given us unqualified audit for the entire period 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 65 of 335 
 
I was there.   
 
That auditors comes – because in 2014, the 
board extends the contract of the companies involved in 
the refurbishment.  The Auditor General’s office, you 
expending this contract.  The board approved that you 
extend these contract from 2014 to 2019 whilst you are 
waiting for a delivery of new trains.  Can we see the 
contract?  Can we see the payments?   
 
The Board of PRASA under Popo Molefe, we 
have heard that information from the auditors.  And when 
10 
the auditors recap all of those things going back to 2014, 
okay.  I remember even the amount.  I wrote to the 
Speaker.  The amount we paid to this company, to the 
companies involved in the refurbishing, Mr Soni, was 
R 5.6 billion. 
 
We 
have 
refurbished 
over 
3 000 
compartments(?) between 2008 and 2014.  So that is good 
value for money.  But the auditors say:  Furnish us with the 
documents.   
 
The Board of PRASA under Mr Popo Molefe and 
the Company Secretary, Mr Lindikaya and my good friend, 
20 
Mr Nati Geldenhuys(?) here, who was the acting CEO after 
I left.  They failed to provide that to the Auditor General’s 
office.  And what did I do?  The Auditor General says:  
Even 
in 
prior 
years 
where 
we 
have 
given 
you 
an 
unqualified audit, we are then going to declare those as 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 66 of 335 
 
irregular expenditure.   
 
Then Mr Molefe jumps, goes to the court.  We 
are ...[indistinct], a lot of irregular expenditure.  Chair, I 
will never accept it.  Even this R 500 million.  It was done 
after I had left.  I said not(?) in you.  Chair, irregular 
expenditure, as I said that the – they wanted to meet 
SCOPA’s R 32 million.  In the following year we had 
R 100 million.  This R 550 million was cooped(?) as a 
justification to appoint Werksmans so that they can have 
work at PRASA and continue to do.   
10 
 
And that is why I am waiting for a day, Chair, 
where Werksmans will bring its top guns and come and be 
cross-examined because I think they have got a lot to 
explain to the country and not me Chair.  So Mr Soni, what 
I am simply saying is the Chair tried to capture, okay?  
There is nothing wrong with what you are referring to me in 
pages 32, 34.   
 
It reflects that if you do not go, you do not 
understand the story you are going to say:  Hey, indeed 
Montana was running this big...  You get the irregular 
20 
expenditure three, fourteen billion.  It is false Chair.  I 
think my letter would be part of the evidence but that 
comes here, where I said, actually Parliament was misled.  
They use us or the reports of PRASA.   
 
But both Parliament and the users having – so 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 67 of 335 
 
Chair, you can see that this is a political games that is 
being played.  He wanted to increase the irregular 
expenditure.  He even forget that some of it is incurred 
under your leadership.  And you go there but no.  We want 
to fight this corruption because corruption means irregular 
expenditure is not translated to.  Corruption.   
 
Let me finish it in this way, Mr Soni, so that I do 
not digress here. Well, let me start with poor Peters and I 
thought she talked about it.  She would all letter to 
Mr Molefe and one with them dealt with the issue of 
10 
irregular expenditure and the appointment of Werksmans.  I 
do not know, I think the legal firm they said Werksmans.  
Chairman and it is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think for quite some time now I 
have not been sure whether it is Workmans(sic) or 
Werksmans.  So but I think, you know, some people say 
Werksmans, others are Workmans(sic).  So.   
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I want to call them the way I call 
them when I speak to my people Malamute.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   But it became Werksmans the time for 
PRASA.  What is this Werksmans?  What are they doing at 
PRASA?  Mr De Voor(?) writes a letter, Chair, to Mr Molefe 
and say:  Stop this thing about Werksmans.  It is not 
budgeted for and if they expenditures are irregular.  You 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 68 of 335 
 
know, that was Mr Molefe’s response.  That it came in, 
Chair.   
 
He says, in his response to the Minister:  Well, 
R 550 million, we will pay Werksmans this amount for a 
project of this nature.  We pay companies not more than 
10% of the value of the contract.  So Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just please repeat that ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Let me repeat, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...at least I can ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Because I can see you change your face 
10 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MR MONTANA:   Again – and I like that Chair because this 
point is very important. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Well, on a lighter note.  
Somebody else is going to say I am agreeing with you.  
MR MONTANA:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR MONTANA:   I think you are in this difficult position 
Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR MONTANA:   But Chair I was watching again without 
digressing Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   I was watching a movie, this Nigerian 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 69 of 335 
 
movie.  So this chap was talking and the other chap is a 
chief.  He does not like what he is saying but this chap 
indicated the chief does not – so he changes the facial 
expression and this chap just say to him:  I do not like the 
geography(?) 
in 
your 
face. 
 
So 
Chair, 
I 
like 
the 
geography(?) in your face on this one.  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR MONTANA:   Chair, let me go back.  These facts – the 
Minister of Transport should not ask about the payments of 
Werksmans 
in 
the 
irregularity 
because 
normally 
on 
10 
contracts of this nature, we will charge 10% of the value of 
the work that they are doing.  So that it tells you Chair is 
that they do not only appoint Werksmans regularly.  And 
then in my affidavit I thoroughly demonstrated that actually 
the appointed Werksmans fraudulently.  Up to paid work for 
Werksmans, they then raised the numbers.  The higher the 
irregular expenditure and wasteful expenditure at PRASA.  
So 10% of R 100,00, Mr Soni ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Chair, it is R 10,00 or whatever if my 
20 
multiplication 
is 
right. 
 
Ten 
percent 
of 
R 14 billion 
[speaking vernacular] Chair.  So Mr Molefe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remember to translate those 
vernacular.  [laughs]   
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I will try, hey. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 70 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  But it looks like it is quite a 
trend, you know.  Today is what?  When was Mr Mantashe 
here?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I think Wednesday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the course of his evidence, at some 
stage 
also, 
he 
said 
the 
evidence 
leader 
[speaking 
vernacular] or something like that.  [laughs]  He resorted to 
his Xhosa but quite a few witnesses have done that. 
MR MONTANA:   [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Zuma also did when he 
10 
testified in 2019.  He would put in some Zulu words.   
MR MONTANA:   I do not know whether the ANC thing(?) 
Chair or ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR MONTANA:   ...we learnt(?) it from there.  But Chair 
the response is extraordinary.  Here is the Minister who is 
accountable for PRASA.  And at that time, the relationship, 
it was no longer the same Whatsapp group.  It has gone – 
then Minister Dipuo Peter then writes some very hard 
letters.  PRASA is falling apart.  The board is not focussing 
20 
on the right things.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on.  Because I seem to 
remember something.  When you talk about the relationship 
of being the same people being in the same Whatsapp 
group.  You are talking about Mr Molefe and Minister 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 71 of 335 
 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Minister Dipuo Peters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...Dipuo Peters.  But I seem to have the 
impression that you and the Minister we also, at some 
stage, getting along quite well but that had changed.  So 
that is why I wanted to know, who now are you talking 
about? 
MR MONTANA:   You know Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   ...every time I talk about the elders and I 
10 
think at some stage when we come to the meeting with the 
President because I laughed, I was told it(?) stopped for 
many hours.  The President fell asleep and everything.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   My grandmother, Nonallele(?), she would 
teach me, Chair.  If I speak to an elder in a manner where I 
do not show respect and that she has taught me the 
principle, an elder is right and if they are wrong, you are to 
accept it.  Minister Dipuo Peters, Chair, I showed her my 
support and respect.  I left the testimony here, okay. 
20 
Because she told the truth but she forgot one fundamental 
truth, Chair.  And that fundamental truth was the fact that 
her and Popo Molefe were working together... 
 
Chair, and I elaborate on this in my affidavit – 
and at that time we must look at the speeches at the AGM 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 72 of 335 
 
of PRASA immediately after I have left and a year later 
when that relationship changed.  Mr Molefe – you know, 
Chair, let me put it bluntly here.   
Popo Molefe was appointed, Chair – he was appointed 
Chair of PRASA because I and my chairman, Mr Sfiso 
Buthelezi refused to accept that I am a lawful instruction to 
cancel an award, not a contract at that time, an award of a 
contract – an award for the new trains that we build 
because our people – I always say in my affidavit, it is very 
clear.  PRASA was destroyed by greedy ANC politicians put 
10 
in light and award to a company.  Do even tenders – why 
do you appointed the French?   
 
And I said to them change the laws and tell us 
that we should not appoint imperialist or multi-national 
companies because you are part of a well-oiled trained 
organisation.  You have signed things.  I was not even 
there that you are even going to allow these companies to 
– when they win you cannot say you do not like them.  
Chair, they refused an unlawful instruction.   
 
And we were at Mujanti(?) House when the first 
20 
time the then Minister Dipuo Peters told Popo – told me 
and Mr Sfiso Buthelezi and a chap by the name of Peet(?) 
Sivula(?).  She come there – and this was the second 
meeting, we had one in Cape Town – where she says:  Ja, 
we cannot be dictated times to by the French and 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 73 of 335 
 
everything.   
 
And I said:  Minister, we are not guided by the 
French.  We are guided by the condition of Metrorail.  If 
you do not make this intervention, Metrorail will collapse 
within three years.  That is what they want.  And secondly, 
if we follow the instructions – we have obtained legal 
opinion and it is very clear that if we cancel this award to 
...[indistinct] led by ...[indistinct], we will actually be acting 
in violation of the Procurement Law.   
 
And if these guys take us to court, we are going 
10 
to pay them R 50 billion without even buying a train.  In 
that meeting, she said:  Well, I am going to change the 
board.  Yes, the Board of PRASA was due for – it was 
coming to the end of its life Chair.  They are appointed for 
three years.   
 
But Chair, I think – I am not sure if Mr Sfiso 
Buthelezi my former Chair would come.  Ask him, Chair, 
how many times he has had discussions with Minister 
Dipuo Peters.  Some of them on the phone in my presence, 
when Mr Molefe was talking to the Minister, where he was 
20 
promised here the board is empty, we are going to 
reappoint you.   
 
The next day, we are not going to appoint you 
but we were told at Mujanti House in March, I think it was 
March/April 2014 that they were going to change the board 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 74 of 335 
 
after we refused to accept this thing.  They are going to 
change the board and that he for the first time that they 
are going to bring Mr Popo Molefe.   
 
Chair, let me say and Mr Soni.  I knew I was 
going to lose my job.  I knew because I have defied very 
powerful politicians in the ANC.  I will not mention them 
today because I am waiting for us to reach consensus of 
my affidavit.  I deal with that matter in great detail, Chair.  
So they wanted to appoint their own people.  I said it is not 
going to happen.   
10 
 
You know, the ANC people, Chair, sometimes the 
ANC – the ANC is my party Chair.  I belong to the African 
National Congress.  I joined it in my teenage years as a 
student activist in ...[indistinct] and with all the things 
happening today I still remain loyal to the ANC.  But we 
were not happy - those who are fighting President Zuma, 
they are extremely happy that I went to Parliament to 
testify before the Parliamentary Inquiry at Eskom and I 
have dealt with the Gupta’s there.  They were so happy 
because this thing was going to be used against Zuma.   
20 
 
No, I am happy Chair because I said it is not 
only the Gupta’s.  The Gupta’s tried to manipulate our 
problem.  Chair, I refused.  I fought with them and I told 
them not in our name.  I told the Minister of Transport at 
that time that nothing – it is not going to happen but there 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 75 of 335 
 
is – so if the Gupta’s were the left side, the right-hand side 
– Chair, I mention them in a – Advocate Soni, you have 
read my affidavit.   
 
I mentioned all of them, Chair, in detail and 
provide the evidence.  So they wanted to do exactly what 
the Gupta’s – the Gupta’s were fighting for certain things.  
They had the right to do business with us but when they 
tried illegal things, they tried to manipulate the PRASA, the 
programme.  I told them that, no, Minister Dan Martins 
actually said – he testified in Parliament the day after 
10 
testifying, he said:  Lucky, I fought with these guys for 
more than an hour in the meeting because I said you 
cannot – money in our names in our names.  You cannot 
tell people to go out of the country that you are working for 
us and you are working for President Zuma.   
 
Tony Gupta represent Zuma.  Zuma was there.  I 
told them:  Guys, this is our President.  He must – we have 
got a duty to protect him and if you guys go out of the 
country and you want money from these companies that 
came to work for the President, I am going to fight against 
20 
that and I am going to convey that to the President.  So I 
did that Chair.  So it is detailed in my statement including 
what I said in Parliament.  But they were happy and said, 
no, focus on the Gupta’s.   
 
You know, the big – another analyst said the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 76 of 335 
 
bull-frogs(?).  The bull-frogs are here Chair.  That is why I 
became an enemy and I knew that they would fight with us.  
And I told Bishop(?) Kenite(?).  So when I told Mr Pop 
Molefe that I was going to resign, I start with Bishop 
Kellece(?) because when Minister Pravin Gordhan gazetted 
the PRASA rolling stock in 2014, he did not want to do that 
Chair.  It was a big fight. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I think, Mr Montana ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Can I just make this last point quickly and 
then I – I am sorry Mr Soni. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Because – so the point I am making is 
that I knew at that time when he had to sign, even against 
his will, that proper procurement process, he did not want 
to sign it.  And I stood up fought Chair.  When it got signed 
and gazetted, I celebrated and I said Shange(?), to Sfiso 
Buthelezi:  Shange, we have done this and no one can 
reverse the fact that our people in the next 40-years will 
have decent trains, similar equivalent to the Gautrain and 
even probably better than the Gautrain in some instances.   
20 
 
But this is going to come at a high price and that 
I am going to leave PRASA.  They persuaded me to stay.  
So when Popo Molefe came – one of the trips(?) was in 
January at the InnoTrans in 2016.  No, sorry in 2014.  So 
he came in August.  The InnoTrans, which is the biggest 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 77 of 335 
 
exhibition 
in 
railways 
where 
railway 
leaders, 
manufacturers, financials come every two years in Berlin.   
 
So we are there.  And I said to him what the 
Gupta’s with trying to do and what they did and I have also 
indicated to him that:  Look, I want to step down.  Because 
I knew Pop Molefe came to the board, Chair, precisely 
because the then Minister of Transport, okay, was unhappy 
with the fact that we refused to follow instructions.  The 
Minister of Transport, I thought, Ms Dipuo Peters would 
have told this Commission why they appointed Pop Molefe.  
10 
It is in my affidavit.   
 
Why they appointed Pop Molefe into the Board of 
PRASA because Popo Molefe was never nominated by 
anyone.  Soto Manase was never nominated by anyone.  
Willem Steenkamp was nominated but they were into the 
board of PRASA to execute a mandate.  But Chair, I 
became disciplined to work with them.   
 
So Mr Soni, I am simply saying.  We should not – 
we should be careful that these things are not manipulated.  
The 20014 financials is R 100 million.  The 2014/2015 of 
20 
the ’15 year is – but does this support Mr Molefe’s 
affidavit?  Because he is talking about when there was a 
delay and then there is a new board had to deal with the – 
approve the financials for a period that there were not 
board members, Chair, which 2014/2015.  The delay was 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 78 of 335 
 
caused by accounting treatment.   
 
R 500 million comes with the 2015 Financial 
Year and it is based on gross misrepresentation and 
holding back critical information of 2014/2015 so that we 
can increase the 10% of that amount.  The higher irregular 
expenditure, the higher the 10% - the value of 10% for that 
share, Chair, and I will elaborate on that.  Sorry, Mr Soni. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana you know, I am the 
evidence leader the Chairperson obviously rules what 
10 
happened.  You know we have got a lot to go through, this 
is what I am going to suggest and I really do not want you 
to I misunderstand.   
I want to go through them, I said to you the process 
I was using.  Everything you have said is relevant and I am 
not taking that away.  Let us put in the right place because 
there is another issue.   
As we were talking I was just thinking, how does the 
Chairperson, when he is writing his report, put the various 
parts that you are talking in a logical way because they are 
20 
all over the place, if you know what I mean. 
MR MONTANA:   Sure, sure. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So if we could just be disciplined 
about that, you can say …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   I will cooperate with you, Chair, 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 79 of 335 
 
sometimes I get – because I happen to connect so many of 
the dots and I put it together. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So feel free also to say no, let us park 
that and let us deal with what is before us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So long as we are on the same page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Also, when you are done, when Mr 
Soni is done, if there is anything that you think he did not 
touch on which you think is important, I will give you a 
10 
chance to deal with those.  So you can makes notes as we 
go along of things that you do not want to forget. 
MR MONTANA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  Then 
…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   But, Chair, can I, without interrupting you, 
can we just confirm, Chair, on what basis you are leaving 
this thing because I was trying to clarify the 2014/2015 
financial year. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, no, no, I understand. 
MR MONTANA:   They are not one and the – so this thing 
that Mr – evidence on the annual financial – audited 
financial statements, they are speaking actually to a 
different matter to what Mr Molefe is raising.  That is what 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 80 of 335 
 
I am saying, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, put it this way, certainly from my 
side I hear what you say.  It may well be that later on when 
I look at it, I might need more clarification but I have heard 
what you say and Mr Soni, if he needs clarification, he will 
ask.  If he later on thinks he needs clarification you can be 
approached to provide clarification. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, Chair, the clarification that I 
want now is this.  You have seen PM2 which says there 
was that irregular expenditure - we have been to page 38.  
10 
Now as you were talking I understood you to say but that is 
based on false information that was presented to the 
internal auditors, is that your point as well? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I am saying that when the 
financials were finalised I was – when I left, there was no 
500 on the table. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I understand. 
MR MONTANA:   So there was no 500 on the table. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just wanted to clarify. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So you say that that is false. 
MR MONTANA:   I am saying that if you look at 
2015/2016/2017 
financial 
year, 
actually 
the 
PRASA 
statements, parliament audit standing committee, should 
not have accepted those financials. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 81 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, but we have been through that, 
I do not want you to. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, ja, I am confirming that, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sure.  Then at paragraph 17 he says 
that aside from that challenge about the audit, he says that 
there 
was 
a 
concern 
that 
employees 
were 
regularly 
suspended 
or 
dismissed 
often 
in 
violation 
of 
their 
constitutionally guaranteed labour rights and he says the 
CCMA reversed many of the decisions to dismiss them.  Do 
you agree with that? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, I do not share this.  Mr 
Molefe was not at PRASA when these executives were 
fired, the only people that were either dismissed – there 
were two people that were dismissed and I think that both 
who testified before you, Chair, Mrs Martha Ngoyi well as 
Mr Fani Dingiswayo.   
Now we can see that – you know, we are mixing up 
issues here, the NTM issue – I am the Group CEO, Chair, I 
employ with the approval of the board, I appoint CEOs of 
the PRASA divisions and subsidiaries, I …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But, Mr Montana, I am sorry, I am 
going to have to limit you to answer this issue.  He is 
talking about employees, not Chairpersons of boards and 
so on. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, hear me, Mr Soni, I hear 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 82 of 335 
 
what you are saying.  I am saying he is saying here people 
who were reversed CCMA on one occasion more than 500 
members of the National Transport Movement, NTM, were 
dismissed only to be later reinstated by the Labour Court 
whether or not he was ultimate decision-maker, the CEO 
had to take ultimate responsibility.  Chair really.  Really, 
Chairperson.   
And this – and when I say subsidiary, I am not 
talking about Chairpersons, I am talking about CEOs so all 
the group executives and the CEOs were appointed in fact 
10 
by the board.  I will recommend to the board appoint these 
people.   
A person who works at a station or at the depot in 
Braamfontein does not report to the group CEO.  You know 
a person who works at the depot is a member of the 
National Transport Movement.  He works at the depot, he 
report to a depot manager of supervisor, who in turn 
reports to higher people.   
These people were not dismissed by me, the reason 
they were dismissed, I think they were correct, Chair, but 
20 
for – I think that you can see that Mr Molefe is trying to 
stretch this point where he wants the person dismissed at 
the corner there to be attributed to me personality and you 
can see that he is not even sure, he says whether he is the 
ultimate decision but he must ultimately take responsibility.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 83 of 335 
 
At what point does the CEO take responsibility?   
Chair, if I put controls, I put systems in place and 
someone violate that, I do not take control but if a driver, a 
train driver smashes a train and an investigation says but 
the CEO did not put in place the necessary controls, this 
driver said he crashed the train because he could not see 
and they realised that he did not go for a medical check-up 
to see annually and that I did not put in place a system to 
make sure that this driver goes for that. I am personally 
responsible. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the long and short of your answer is 
that he is not talking here about people that you dismissed. 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, he is talking about 500 
members.  Where are these people?  These are junior 
employees in the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   You know, some of them I have not seen 
with my own eyes, how do – who issued a letter of 
suspension or dismissal of these employees? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, I think what the Chairperson is 
20 
saying and I should not talk for him but let us get the fact.  
The fact is the employees were dismissed, they were 
reinstated by the CCMA.   
You say that is not a matter for which you should be 
held responsible because those decisions were taken by 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 84 of 335 
 
other PRASA officials, is that your answer? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I am saying probably two or 
three different things.  The first one I am saying here are 
junior employees, Mr Molefe is clutching at straws, he does 
not even know who took the position but he says Montana 
must take responsibility, Chair.  That is wrong.  So that is 
the first thing I am saying.   
 
Secondly, Mr Molefe does not state here, Chair, 
who was irregularly dismissed or suspended.  Okay?   
 
Today I am prepared to talk about two people, he 
10 
does not mention them.  Is he referring Ms Ngoyi and Mr 
Fani Dingiswayo?  He does not state here, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So Mr Montana, let me help you. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And really we must get on.  I am 
sorry, I am going to have to be firm about his. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the reason I am saying that is, it 
is quite clear, we all know that Ms Ngoyi and Mr 
Dingiswayo were dismissed in 2017.  He is talking about 
20 
2014 and 2015. 
MR MONTANA:   No, they were dismissed by me, Chair, in 
2015.  Ms Martha Ngoyi, she is here, Mr Fani Dingiswayo, 
they were fired by me in 2015. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, well he is clearly not talking 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 85 of 335 
 
about them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Who is talking about, Chair, so that we 
can be specific? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry.  Well, I am not 
sure how important this allegation is of the dismissal of 
500 members.  In the particular paragraph Mr Molefe does 
not mention the year, as I see it, in the previous 
paragraph, he is talking about the issue of the 500 million 
where he refers to 2015/2016 but as I understand it, as far 
10 
as you are concerned, nobody that – the 500 members of 
National Transport Movement Trade Union, you say those – 
the decision to dismiss them would not have been taken by 
you.  That is one of the things you say. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But, Chair, can I ask you to address for 
one minute? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, no, it is fine. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I think the State Capture 
20 
Commission, the workers that were dismissed and the 
country needs to understand what actually has happened.  
We just spoke about the 500 million, that goes to 14 
billion, to try and present the particular picture.   
Let me explain to you what happened, Chair.  The 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 86 of 335 
 
NTM members, those employees, they were dismissed by 
PRASA, number one.  They went to court, to the Labour 
Court, they lost, Chair.  That is the first issue.   
They lost.  And you know what happened?  I was 
still there and for me, as Group CEO, even though I did not 
participate in the dismissal, because here it is people that 
were on strike action, there was burning of trains and 
everything.  I had to show the court how much we have lost 
as a result of this unlawful strike where assets were 
destroyed.   PRASA one the case, Mr Soni.   
10 
 
What happened thereafter is that 15 July came, I 
leave PRASA.  The employee relations guys, they get fired 
at 
PRASA 
because 
no, 
employee 
people, 
you 
are 
Montana’s people.  They get fired.  The matter then goes – 
MTN, within its rights, correctly so, goes to the Labour 
Court, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Appeals the earlier decision of the 
Labour Court. 
MR MONTANA:   Appeals that decision by the court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, you must go and see – so they win 
that appeal because PRASA, exactly the point that Mr 
Molefe is doing, they do not then defend this matter 
properly, they actually collude with the MTN people, 
PRASA loses.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 87 of 335 
 
You know what the cost of this court judgment, 
Chair?  A billion rand for PRASA to reinstate these people.  
It is a billion rand which it does not have in its operational 
budget.   
So, Chair, here is someone who is destroying an 
entity, okay?  He is manipulating the State Capture 
Commission 
that 
people 
are 
being 
dismissed 
and 
everything.   
He does not write here that if we handled this issue 
– in fact, when I realised that PRASA is going to be in 
10 
trouble, I then put a tweet - and this will be my final point, 
Mr Soni – I put a tweet, I say if I was still CEO of PRASA 
before the matter – because I was realising I had intel on 
what is happening on this matter, I say if was PRASA, call 
back these people, reinstate them, renegotiate the time so 
that we have win-win situation and people say no, like he 
wants to rule from the grave.   
It went to the court.  PRASA failed to do its work.  
They could not even explain to the court that each of these 
employees that were part of the 500, the court was saying 
20 
we do not want a common purpose approach where you say 
there was a strike so if the train was burnt, all 500 are 
responsible.   
But PRASA did not do its proper work, Chair, 
making sure that it followed those procedures, the impact 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 88 of 335 
 
is that it has got these employees who have been 
reinstated – and understand me, Chair, I am not saying 
they must not be reinstated, but the cost to the business of 
playing political games are exactly what Mr Molefe has 
done as he done with the irregular expenditure, 500, 14 
billion and then, Chair, you were asking a month ago, how 
does it come to R20 or R21 billion?  Precisely because we 
are playing games with institutions that [indistinct], it will 
not happen when I was there, Chair.  I will never agree to 
it. 
10 
 
So this is the real story, Chair.  So this thing that 
Montana dismissed people, people who do not follow my 
instructions, people who do not do their work or people 
who find that they are – because ultimately I am charged, I 
report to a board.   
When I go to a board and they say Mr Montana – my 
board, people think they are my friends, they were taking 
me to task and my team had to raise their standards, 
Chair, and make sure that they deliver and at some stage 
Ms Ngoyi’s, for example, document, she talks about how 
20 
she was dismissed.  I think at the right time we will talk 
about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So, Chair, I am saying I do not accept 
this, 
I 
think 
that 
is 
false, 
it 
is 
actually 
a 
gross 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 89 of 335 
 
misrepresentation by Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I will just alert you to this so that we 
are not at odds, but that is more or less a finding made by 
the Public Protector as well but we will come to that 
because I am going to give you an opportunity to deal with 
it. 
MR MONTANA:   That is not correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am merely making the point, that is 
one of the reasons I raised it. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Mr Soni, but that is not correct.  
Which Public Protector report?  Are you referring to 
Derailed? 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Molefe, let me just …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   I would love to be Mr Molefe, Mr Soni. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, let me just say to you 
can we please make progress?  You are saying you want to 
assist the Commission, I have to insist that we do things in 
a structured way.  I am not stopping you but I did not want 
20 
to leave that point when I was saying to we are going to 
return to it. 
MR MONTANA:   Are we going to return to it, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We will, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Okay, no I wanted to correct to the Chair 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 90 of 335 
 
that the Public Protector …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We will deal with that then 
…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   We never dealt with it, yes.  Okay, it is 
fine, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, okay, let us continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then in paragraph 19 he says that in 
regard to the Braamfontein Depot modernisation project 
and the purchase of rails and turnouts, the board before 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Soni, maybe one of the 
things that you should do from your part to facilitate what 
you want to  - what you were talking to Mr Montana about 
is maybe do not take too big a junk to put to him. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe more manageable points and let 
him respond to those points.  Maybe it is going to be 
better. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes, as you please, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So in paragraph 18 he refers to two 
tenders, the Braamfontein Depot modernisation project and 
the purchase of rails and turnouts.  Are you aware of those 
two tenders? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, I am aware. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 91 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then he says that at a meeting it 
was said that those tenders were important – I mean, sorry, 
were urgent.  Do you agree that that is what happened? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, the meeting of the 27 November, 
this was a board – yes, those tenders were very important, 
ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, okay.  Then he says that – in 
paragraph 19 before the board approved of that, that is his 
board now, it wanted a probity report as an assurance that 
the relevant procurement prescripts and processes had 
10 
been followed.  Is that correct that he asked for a report? 
MR MONTANA:    Are you referring to paragraph 19? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Paragraph 19. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, the board never requested for this 
thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is paying dividends, smaller 
points. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But can I – there is a material point, 
Chair, I am trying to assist Mr Soni. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But you see, I do not want to us to lose 
the …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, sure. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, what has happened here, when we 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 92 of 335 
 
embarked, there were two major programmes, the buying of 
new commuter trains and the depots because when they 
were buying new trains, the depots where they were going 
to be maintained, needs to be ready.   
So we had these major programmes.  And this was 
done under times that were said by the minister – by the 
Honourable Minister of Finance at that time, Minister 
Pravin Gordhan.  
 
Now one of the things the board of PRASA, that is 
before Popo Molefe, under Mr Sfiso Buthelezi, was that 
10 
because these are big we need to appoint probity officers 
to make sure because we were going to have a big fight on 
these issues, people are going to take us to court, let us 
appoint a probity officer so that when as the board makes 
decisions, because these are not decisions by the CEO, it 
is a decision by the board, we get an assurance that the 
process has been followed.   
So that was the standard practice.  They did not 
have to ask for that.  So it started during Mr Buthelezi’s 
time.  It was a major governance control issue. 
20 
 
Now when we come to this specific meeting, Chair, 
we say that the report is not there and I am asking to 
answer it in two ways in 18 and 19 quickly.   
You know, Chair, here are major insinuations been 
made against someone that Mr Sfiso Buthelezi wanted 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 93 of 335 
 
these things to be approved before he leaves.  At that time 
he was no longer the Chair of the board, he was the Chair 
of 
the 
PRASA’s 
Finance 
Capital 
Investment 
and 
Procurement Committee which basically before you go to 
the board, they are the ones who review these things 
before they recommend them. 
 
18 is so false, it is based on insinuation where 
evidence - Mr Buthelezi never did anything of the sort, 
Chair, he never wanted to push this contract.  In fact these 
matters were dealt with.   
10 
Management 
came 
– 
not 
Lucky 
Montana, 
management, the Chief Procurement Officer and the teams 
to come and present these issues that were there.  So 18 
is false, Chair, this assertion is false and is actually trying 
to put a [indistinct] Buthelezi, insinuate that Mr Buthelezi 
had an interest in this thing on the depot modernisation 
thing.   
This depot is important precisely, Chair, because 
we knew in 2015 we will get the first train, it had to come 
there, so that is  a number – let me answer number 19 
20 
there, Chair. 
 
In 19, the reason why, Chair, there was the thing.  
At this meeting no one was aware that the contract of the 
probity officer had actually expired, Chair, and it was 
actually – it had to be renewed, to be extended and it was 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 94 of 335 
 
through that process.   
I was sitting here when I heard Mr Molefe saying 
that I promised them this report and then later it was not 
there.   
The 
meetings 
on 
this 
Braamfontein 
thing 
was 
actually held when I was on leave later and the CEO was a 
Mrs Ngoyi.  So, Chair, it is false, I do not accept it, it is 
false and the reason why there was no report, Chair, and 
the reason why there was no report, Chair, was precisely 
because myself as CEO and the board, we did not even 
10 
know that the probity officer ’s contract …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Had expired. 
MR MONTANA:   Had expired and that has not at that time 
been brought to attention.  Now this thing is being turned 
to say we are misleading the board and we were to tell 
them that it is a report.   
Mr Molefe had gone out to say there is corruption in 
this issue.  In my affidavit and evidence I provide evidence 
that actually that is false, Chair.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, can I just summarise 
20 
what you said?  Firstly you say there was no probity report 
so you and Mr Molefe had agreed with – but you say he 
never asked for a probity report. 
MR MONTANA:   No, it was a standard practice, Chair, 
with 
all 
the 
modernisation 
projects 
that 
we 
were 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 95 of 335 
 
implementing. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But was there a probity report? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, no, there was not in this 
particular meeting, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, that is the answer you and him 
agree on. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, no, Chair, no, no, Chair, he is 
saying here - the issue here, Chair, I think that if we end it 
there we would be making a serious mistake because we 
will be misleading the Chair, the issues …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but hang on, I think what Mr Soni is 
doing, he might be coming to the point that you want to 
emphasise.  He is taking various parts of your points to 
make sure that he has understood them correctly. 
MR MONTANA:   Okay, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he might be coming to the point that 
you want to emphasise. 
MR MONTANA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.  So, Mr 
20 
Montana, let me ask you this.  You have told us that the 
probity officer’s contract had expired.  That is correct?  If 
you could say yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And I do not mean it with disrespect. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 96 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   I am sorry, just uncomfortable in the 
chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now what I want to ask is, even 
though the contract had expired you say there was a report 
or there was not a report? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, in this meeting I am confirming 
there was no report. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right. 
MR MONTANA:   And at the meeting I was also not aware 
10 
the report – the contract had expired, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes ,okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay. So but the point then is that 
the real contention between you and Mr Molefe is he says 
he asked you for the probity report, you promised probity 
report, you are saying that that is false. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, it is false. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   And, by the way, Mr Soni, this report is 
not taken to the board by me.  The committee of the board, 
20 
the people – because you remember, Chair, we have a 
delegation of authority of 100 million.   
If the teams do a tender and it is 100 or below it 
will be recommended to me for approval.   
If the contract is over R100 million and here we are 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 97 of 335 
 
dealing with contract far above my delegation of authority, 
the contract would go through the board and that will go 
each subcommittee which will look at it.  So there is a 
report before the board from this committee, Chair.  
 
So I am saying at that time materially both the 
board and I did not even know that the contract – there 
was no report and in the discussion, during the discussion, 
Chair, then the issue comes up but Mr Molefe did not ask 
Mr Montana where is the probity officer?  We never had 
that, Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  So that is the only difference 
between you and him. 
MR MONTANA:   And it is a fundamental difference. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, I understand that, he is 
obviously trying to say that you were being defiant or not 
cooperative or being dishonest.  Whatever it is, we know 
what the difference …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, his reason, Mr Soni, I 
actually captured in interviews and these interviews are 
available to the commission, he says this R4 billion tender 
20 
was a corrupt tender …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
outside the Commission. 
MR MONTANA:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Now then he says soon after 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 98 of 335 
 
this you asked to be released on leave saying that you 
were suffering from fatigue, is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I went on leave and I pointed Ms 
Ngoyi to act in my position and I had indicated that look, it 
has been a busy year and I needed to take a rest. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then he says in the meantime the 
board asked for a probity assessment of the tender 
processes and he puts up the report as PM3.  I would like 
you to look at please pages 88 and 89. 
MR MONTANA:   Page 18? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, 88 and 89.  Remember we are 
looking at the top right hand red numbers. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is the report – and I just want to 
look at the last part because it is what concerns you:  It 
says: 
“Overall management in the board must take a 
decision to accept or reject the noncompliance with 
the policy for the two affected tenders reviewed.  
This recommendation has been discussed with the 
20 
Group CEO and his response and action plan is 
reflected below.” 
Is that correct that the matter was discussed with you? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair, this report was presented – 
was presented to management and I think that it is a 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 99 of 335 
 
correct reflection of what happened. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, if you look at page 89 then it 
says: 
“Management’s response and action plan.” 
And it says: 
“After due consideration of the contents of this 
report from the internal audit consortium we are of 
the view that the two tenders are noncompliant and 
will therefore be cancelled.” 
Was that your – was that management’s view? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, we took that decision on those 
particular contracts, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then in the action plan it is said: 
“We will design alternative tender procedures to 
acquire the equipment and the services required.  
Consequence 
management 
will 
be 
implemented 
accordingly.” 
And the person responsible was yourself, Mr Montana, as 
Group CEO.  Is that all correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, it is absolutely correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then let us look at what we 
…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Are we still on this point?  Are we moving 
from this point? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 100 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, we moving from it. 
MR MONTANA:   Can I make a quick point, Chair? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, no of course. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, you see – and that is why – you 
know, the way this evidence comes here is equally very 
important.   
My annexures, Mr Soni, to this matter, actually I 
present the interaction between PRASA and the what is 
called the probity officers.  Okay?  Including where some 
of the observations by the probity officers were either 
10 
incorrect or they were not right …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But sorry to interrupt you.  I 
understood you to say there were no probity officers at the 
time, 
so 
I 
am 
just 
trying 
to 
understand 
how 
your 
correspondence would be with nonexistent persons. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, I think did not understand 
me.  I said before Popo Molefe even came to PRASA we 
appointed the probity officer for the big projects that were 
there.  What I said was that when we had this specific 
meeting the probity officer’s contract had actually expired. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   So that is the point I am making.  And 
therefore there was already a process undertaken to 
ensure that the – what is it called, it is extended beyond 
that time because the services were still needed or 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 101 of 335 
 
required at that point in time. 
 
Now when the probity officers continued with their 
work and interacted, Chair, there is five other reports on 
this very matter and I would want to urge the Commission 
that do not base this thing only this report because 
actually there was even areas where there was consensus 
between management and the probity officers on what 
needs to be done, and by the way I attached this very 
report Chair and I quote – go back to page 88 Mr Soni, I 
quote, you know it says the – what do you call it, the 
10 
probity officers it is an overall, management at the board 
must take a decision to accept or reject a non-compliance 
with a policy for the two affected tender reviews. 
 
Now Chair these are professionals, if they knew 
that this tender is corrupt they will never make that 
recommendation, they will say it is a corrupt tender for 
throughout the documents that I have reviewed after Mr 
Molefe had been making assertions of corruption, none of 
the reports, Chair, on Braamfontein, on – because non-
compliance and irregularities Chair, I want to come back to 
20 
that, it’s not corruption and here are the auditors saying, 
we are picking up areas of non-compliance.  For example, 
one of the - I want to point the thing.  We advised that 
there should be a workshop for the CSFC which is a Cross 
Functional Sourcing Committee prior to the sitting for 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 102 of 335 
 
evaluation to ensure that there is guidance for them around 
the 
sourcing 
criteria 
for 
consistency. 
 
So, 
they’re 
identifying an important control issue to say that if 
members of the CSFC cannot go in a proper way and 
there’s no consistency then there’s going to be a problem 
with this tender.  They are not saying there is corruption, 
then Mr Molefe runs …[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, you must answer my 
questions, I’m sorry Mr Montana, but I’m not dealing with 
what Mr Molefe said, I’m dealing with what is in this 
10 
affidavit and that’s all I’m asking you about. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, but in this affidavit…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry what was the question Mr – 
just remind me, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The question was, does he accept 
what is reflected at pages 88 and 89 of the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he said he accepts. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He accepts it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then he says, are we finished with 
20 
this point because I want to come back to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the fact is, nowhere in any of 
this process, Chairperson, is there any allegation of 
corruption.  Now I have little – I have full sympathy for Mr 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 103 of 335 
 
Montana wanting to say, but let’s accept that even if it was 
non-compliant, it doesn’t mean it was corrupt and that must 
be placed on record, but we can’t go on revisiting 
documents that are before us Chairperson, because it will 
be an endless process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no but Mr Montana, what was 
the point you wanted to add, just let me hear what the 
point was? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think we’re missing each other.   
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
you 
may 
be, 
I 
just 
want 
10 
to…[intervenes]. 
MR MONTANA:   Let me explain Mr Soni because I don’t 
want us to fight about unnecessary things, but they are 
very important. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   You see, Mr Soni presents – here’s the 
report Chair, he’s presenting it to confirm what Mr Molefe 
presents – states in this affidavit, so these are Annexures, 
they’re not Mr Molefe’s.  Now, if you look at this pack and 
you look at both…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit. 
MR MONTANA:   Both the affidavit as well as the 
testimony, so we need to have the transcript Chair, Mr 
Molefe actually – in the transcript he goes in much greater 
detail, so it is not evidence in a newspaper or in the media, 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 104 of 335 
 
it’s what he said when he first testified, in Braamfontein 
there was corruption and everything, Chair…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that’s why you then…[intervenes]. 
MR MONTANA:   That is why Chair because you see in the 
transcript he is actually suggesting in the testimony here, 
that there was wrongdoing on the part of – and that is why 
the insinuation I dealt with, ...[Indistinct] wanted this thing 
to be dealt quickly and leave PRASA and then the spoils of 
the …[indistinct] that flow Chair, and I cannot leave that 
point because this thing here, Chair, auditors – I mean I 
10 
think that I will report them to the professional body if they 
found corruption but they still say it is the Board, the 
management that must decide whether to accept it.  They 
are talking about a compliance issue, not a corruption 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, I think that it’s a fair point for Mr 
Montana to make if he says in connection with this 
transaction, in his oral evidence Mr Molefe said this was 
corruption but when you look at the documents he relies on 
they don’t support the allegation of corruption, they just 
20 
say it’s non-compliance and you can accept, Mr Montana, 
that both Mr Soni and I understand the difference between 
something that’s irregular because sometimes it is irregular 
but there is corruption but sometimes there is no corruption 
it is just irregular. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 105 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you can accept that, that we accept 
ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes and we must accept that Mr 
Montana must place on record that what is before us now, 
there is no suggestion of corruption, it is things Mr Molefe 
indicated that there’s corruption, he denies it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no and we want to hear what you 
have to say about this thing.  So, the only difference is that 
we might just go in a certain order, but in the end where 
10 
you feel that there is a certain context that might be lost, 
ask to make the point and then if we think it should be 
made later we’ll talk but in the end you will get a full 
opportunity to make the points you want to make. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I’m smiling because you see, in the 
ANC on the ground my job was not to carry firearms, it was 
on propaganda and always say something that matters that 
materially affects the people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And I earlier on, indicated about the MTN 
20 
thing which I said was a lie.  Let me explain to you what 
this thing means, Chair so that this Commission has an 
appreciation of what it means in congruence.  Chair, when 
this thing, this tender was cancelled in Braamfontein the 
President went to Nigel in …[indistinct] where we built the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 106 of 335 
 
factory, not any other person, us okay.  This modern 
factory to build trains, the trains, Mr Soni, they start to 
come into the system.  Five years – six years after I’d left, 
Chair, despite the fact that the money was there, PRASA 
has not been able to build a single depot, okay.  Chair, 
what it means is that, as trains are chartered, they can’t 
even be deployed …[indistinct] in Soweto or Kwamashu or 
in Khayelitsha or in Bonteheuwel is actually not able to get 
the benefit of this investment because these trains can’t be 
used.  So, I think that the – when you play political games 
10 
this is the result of what you have, Chair.  Now here’s a 
report that tells us that it was within – the Board had to 
use its prerogative to proceed or not and if he says that 
the irregularity or non-compliance is material or not, they 
must make that decision, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   But five years down the line we have 
invested over R50billion to buy new trains and most of 
them come today, six years after I’ve left PRASA, they 
can’t come into the system because some report is 
20 
elevated above any – the requirements of the economy and 
ordinary people accessing job opportunities, this is what 
we have [speaking in vernacular], Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   People are going hungry that’s what I’m 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 107 of 335 
 
saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, let’s continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I can’t let this go, Chairperson, I 
don’t want to – Mr Montana the problem on that issue, and 
I don’t want to address it in your absence.  The problem 
about what you’ve just said now is, you, at pages 88 and 
89, 
concede 
that 
a 
tender 
must 
be 
reissued, 
must 
be…[indistinct – dropping voice].  So that is – you are part 
of that decision making process, it may have been a wrong 
decision and you’re entitled to raise that, but you can’t 
10 
raise it on the basis that, see, because of my absence – 
because you were part of that decision making process.  
I’m just putting that on record. 
MR MONTANA:   I don’t understand, Chair, I don’t 
understand this point being made. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
Okay, 
I’ve 
made 
my 
point…[intervenes]. 
MR MONTANA:   Not because I reject it, I’m just saying, I 
can’t follow. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   I can’t follow what Mr Soni is saying 
that’s what…[indistinct – dropping voice]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe just repeat it Mr Soni, 
because I wasn’t sure also, just repeat it? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 108 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As I understand the mask that you’ve 
seen, you said on account of this report we are losing 
billions of rand, is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   No, I’m not saying that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, okay, then I misunderstood you. 
MR MONTANA:   I’m not saying that I’m simply saying that 
here’s a report which has got a whole range of other fact 
and information to it.  A tender is cancelled, Chair, and 
somebody, of course, tells the Commission about how 
irregular, lack of controls and  all sorts of things and then 
10 
six years down the line, I’m not saying – I was part, I was 
there but when the Board took a decision on the 23 r d of 
December 2014, Chair, Martha Ngoyi was sitting in my 
position, I was not at PRASA – I was not there but I’m not 
disowning that position.  I was the CEO of PRASA, and 
you’ll see in my statement and in my affidavit that I say, I 
come before this Commission to take accountability and I 
take full responsibilities, and Chair, you know this thing, I 
happen to know it from the tip of my hands.  When 
somebody plays games, like what is happening with this 
20 
affidavit, I know I’ll be able to point it and, in this instance, 
I’m saying Chair,  I’m still repeating Mr Soni, Popo Molefe 
didn’t assist the Commission, actually was trying to drive it 
towards a particular direction and I – one of the things I’ll 
be able to – I should be able to do, to assist the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 109 of 335 
 
Commission, to get the two facts.  The Chairperson will 
assess, based on what he has said, based on what has 
been said in the evidence and come to a determination, 
Chair, I’ll respect that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that’s fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then, at paragraph 23, Mr Molefe 
says that as a result, and I know you’ve disputed the fact 
that he asked for the probity report or that Mr Buthelezi 
tried to push this, that’s the point he makes at paragraph 
21, but paragraph 23 he says, 
10 
“That he was of the view that there was too much 
power concentrated in the office of the CEO”, 
 
You don’t have to – I’m just placing that on record.  
Then he says, if you look roundabout four lines or five 
lines, 
“Accordingly, the Board withdrew from Mr Montana, 
Chairpersonship of the subsidiaries and appointed 
Chairperson’s from within respective subsidiaries to 
lead them”, 
 
Did that happen? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, when I left PRASA I was still the 
Chair of the …[indistinct – dropping voice]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Don’t speak too far away from the mic. 
MR MONTANA:   I’m sorry Chair, I’m saying when I left 
PRASA I was the Chair of the two subsidiaries, Group 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 110 of 335 
 
CEO, there’s a good reason for that Chair. So, this is the 
view that Popo Molefe is advancing.  I want to ask Mr Soni, 
you know, 23. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 23. 
MR MONTANA:   Paragraph 23 Chair, I want to make two 
points.  Is this fundamental to the collapse of PRASA today 
and I want the Chair to have an appreciation of that.  
Chair, every year, when I started at PRASA, at SRCC 
before we formed PRASA, my delegation of authority was 
10 
R20million.  When – later on the Board had increased the 
delegation to R50million and it went to R100million.  Every 
year, as a requirement Chair, we are assessed both on the 
issues of materiality’s and significant framework of the 
business, the level of spending and the level of investment 
so that you don’t want the situation where the Board comes 
everyday to the company because Management is not able 
to make decisions.  So, if you look at the R100million, 
Chair, at that time was appropriate for PRASA and this was 
approved by the Board, was reviewed annually as it were. 
20 
Now, there are two lies Chair, that are being told in this 
thing. Mr Montana was a one-man-show, he’s not using so 
many words, he didn’t consult.  Chair I think the Committee 
should summon the minutes of the PRASA Exco, the level 
of debate and discussion and you know, Chair, when the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 111 of 335 
 
Board delegate R100million to me, in turn I had to delegate 
R25million 
to 
the 
CEO’s, 
R10million 
to 
the 
Group 
Executives.  So, if we talk about PRASA, anything below 
R25million I didn’t see Chair.  Anything above R100million 
went 
to 
the 
Board. 
Now, 
let 
me 
tell 
you 
a 
story, 
Chair…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, Mr Montana, I don’t know 
whether it’s you or me.  I thought, much earlier you said 
your delegation of authority was R100million? 
MR MONTANA:   R100million Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay – oh it’s just an example when you 
made – talk about R100million and R25million, you’ve been 
talking…[intervenes]. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no sorry, Chair, I may have made a 
mistake I’m referring to R100million, it still remained 
R100million 
when 
I 
left 
but 
I’m 
simply 
saying 
that 
delegations of authority are not numbers that are thumb 
sucked they are made because you want operational 
efficiency, you want decision making but still the Board 
can’t abdicate its responsibilities.  That is why, even if a 
20 
contract is R5million they pick up that it is a problem, the 
Board says, CEO not even in your delegation of authority 
but in the delegation of authority down there something 
wrong 
is 
happening. 
 
So, 
delegation 
doesn’t 
mean 
abdication, Chair, it’s very important.  Secondly, I’m saying 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 112 of 335 
 
Chair that, I wanted to tell you a story how this issue, what 
Popo Molefe and them did at PRASA because of this thing 
in 23 and it’s part of the Annexures I’ve submitted.  One of 
the things that is vital to running trains is issues of 
maintenance and availability of components.  Maintenance, 
very vital for railways, Chair what happens that because 
there is this – this Montana is powerful the Board comes 
and cuts the delegation of authority to the CEO but 
because they want to control, also, what gets approved in 
the 
business, 
they 
then 
terminate 
the 
delegation 
of 
10 
authority to people who run trains on the ground.  I never – 
I held people accountable, Mr Soni, but I will not go there 
and say, you are buying this component, that delegation 
must be given so that we can hold people accountable.  
There’s a report of PRASA people, which is part of my 
affidavit, Chair, it actually shows that the reason why the 
number of available trains that collapsed in the country, is 
because people in the depots are not actually able to buy 
even the smallest spares because everything is approved 
at the head office.  So, it’s inappropriate, here’s a 
20 
Chairman who comes and tells this Board – so it tells this 
Commission that you know, R100million Chair, in the 
context of a company that must spend R15billion on capital 
a year is a very small amount of money but if you look at 
how 
they’ve 
destroyed 
PRASA 
because 
of 
this 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 113 of 335 
 
irresponsible thing, which is not having any scientific or 
management basis you want your people, so that when a 
train, particularly an old system like Metrorail.  Chair, 
people come from overseas to ask me, hey man, this thing 
is old but how do you keep it running  okay because I had 
to make sure that at least, out of 100 trains 85 of those 
trains run and my people if they don’t do their work at the 
depots, they’ve got delegations to get the right components 
and everything.  Popo Molefe comes, scraps this thing and 
what you have is a situation where the country today, Chair 
10 
today, the country can’t run 70% of the trains that I ran, 
okay.  I ran the number of trains, held people accountable, 
Chair, I think maybe I should request one day for you and 
Mr Soni during lunchtime, let’s go to Park Station and you 
see the disaster, in three years, what it took us to build in 
10 years, the Board of Popo Molefe destroyed in less than 
three years Chair and they are not held accountable.  Let 
me make this final point, Mr Trevor Manual was here Chair, 
when he testified, I think it was September 2018, he made 
a very profound point, he said – and I think he’s one of the 
20 
reasons why I agreed to tell you, he said, Chair, it’s very 
important that we go back and look at what happened at 
that time.  You see now people say, State Capture, 
corruption and then you get confused.  Let’s get to the 
detail, why were trains running at 84/85% when Montana 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 114 of 335 
 
was there.  Why today, we can’t even run trains at 20%, 
because they came and break this thing in the name of 
fighting State Capture and corruption.  It’s wrong Chair, 
let’s turn this thing, my statement today, is an assertion I’m 
challenging this false notion because I think we’re going to 
destroy the country and I see it happening with other State 
owned – so this 23, if this Commission were to accept 23, 
Chair, I think that this country is going to go to the dogs, 
excuse my French Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay,  I think we are at three minutes 
10 
past one, I think we should take the lunch adjournment, or 
did you have a question that you wanted to ask? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just wanted to finish this, Mr – in 
paragraph 23 all that was said was, that he had removed, 
from you, the Chairpersonships of the subsidiaries, you are 
saying that that’s false? 
MR MONTANA:   No Chair, I know that they were 
discussing the…[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I’m just asking, was it false? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair, I don’t want to use the 
20 
word, false.  Chair, the Board of Popo Molefe had said, in 
line with what they are saying here that in their view, the 
Group CEO Chairing subsidiaries, okay but I think by the 
time I left PRASA they haven’t affected that particular 
decision and Chair it’s an opinion that he has but I 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 115 of 335 
 
think…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but just at a factual level, I think 
that’s what Mr Soni’s asking for.  When they say they 
withdrew your Chairpersonship of the subsidiaries, is that 
true? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair, when I left PRASA I was 
still chairing the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Of Auto Packs and Inter Site as it 
were ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did they – but at that time were you 
Chairing the same number of Boards of subsidiaries as you 
had been Chairing when they – when Mr Molefe’s Board 
came or had the number reduced? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, there are two subsidiaries at 
PRASA, the others are divisions inside the Board, so, I was 
Chairing these 
two and there’s a particular reasons 
why…[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And that never changed until before 
you left, that did not change? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, I’m saying Chair, I’m saying that the 
Board of Popo Molefe, in their discussions, I accept that 
point, they’ve raised the issue of, if the CEO – that is why I 
say, in the Board’s view that did not make – that did not go 
well for good corporate governance. The Board of PRASA, 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 116 of 335 
 
under Popo Molefe had that discussion and I’m aware of 
that discussion…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but in terms of actually withdrawing 
or…[intervenes]. 
MR MONTANA:   No, it was never withdrawing Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That did not happen? 
MR MONTANA:   I was never withdrawn Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR MONTANA:   May in someone’s imagination but when I 
left PRASA I was – I left PRASA I was the Chair of the two 
10 
subsidiaries, Chair…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and I guess there will be minutes of 
Board meetings…[intervenes]. 
MR MONTANA:   There’ll be minutes, exactly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But, Chair, I’m saying this point at the 
bigger level, I’m saying this assertion as well it’s so wrong 
Chair.  If you want to run PRASA without running its real 
estate like many railway companies are doing then you’re 
going to destroy this company, Chair, and that’s what we 
20 
see.  You need to align what you have property – you need 
to ensure that your property division or the property 
portfolio really supports this business.  This was a 
destruction of value, so it sounds good, good corporate 
governance but in business in real terms congruently it 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 117 of 335 
 
actually has a, what is it called, a – I didn’t want to – the 
opposite effect. Whether it was intended or not, it’s 
something else Chair, I don’t want to debate that but I’m 
saying that I don’t even agree with that view but yes, Mr 
Molefe is right that his Board did say, we do not think that, 
moving forward we want to have a situation where the 
Group CEO also Chairs subsidiary Boards and maybe 
that’s what made people say that he thinks I’m a very 
powerful man. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you are saying, the Board did have 
10 
such a discussion and took that view but while you were 
there, they did not implement that decision. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair it was not implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, I think we must take the 
lunch adjournment, we are at six minutes past one, let us 
resume at ten past two. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Mr 
Montana we had stopped at paragraph 23 can I just ask you 
to look very briefly at paragraph 24 where Mr Molefe says he 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 118 of 335 
 
became aware that the Public Protector had released an 
interim report and he came – became aware of it through the 
press.  Now just to ask a couple of questions around that 
issue. 
 
When did you first become aware of the Public 
Protector’s interim report? 
MR MONTANA:  I think the report could have been shared 
with us in May 2014.  Ja I think around that time – April – 
May if I am – I cannot recall the exact date. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now the point that Mr Molefe makes in 
10 
the last paragraph of 24 that the board had not been aware 
of this, is that correct or had you informed them? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair I think the previous board was 
fully aware and mandated me Chair to deal with this matter 
and PRASA had actually responded in a number of occasions 
– in a number of – there has been lots of correspondence 
within PRASA and the Public Protector and – but also I can – 
let me indicate that this is also not correct.  Mr Molefe I do 
not know when he read the newspapers but he was informed 
by me.  I actually shared a copy of the – of the report with 
20 
him.  In fact later on I deal with the – with issues – the fights 
between myself and Mr Molefe relates to this particular 
matter.   
 
So I actually 00:02:09 in the what you call the 
provincial report of the particular 00:02:16. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 119 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He comes to that in a moment.  Let us 
deal with that because I think that is dealt with in the – in 
the next paragraph at paragraph 25 he says: 
“In March 2015 I asked Montana – Mr 
Montana if he had received the PP report.” 
Is that about the time you …? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair I think that – that happened there 
is no in March 2015. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja March I think – Chair I think he may 
10 
actually be – Mr Molefe may be right in terms of the date ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ja.  Then he says that: 
“We need not deal with that because that is a 
personal matter.” 
He says it looked like there was a bit of mistrust between the 
two of you that is his impression and I do not need you to 
comment on it unless you want to.  Then he says: 
“He then said that the Public Protector had 
issued an interim report and had posed 
several 
questions 
that 
needed 
to 
be 
20 
responded to.” 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair the – the investigation by the Public 
Protector dates back to 2012. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 120 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  And you see in 2012/2013/2014/2015 there 
has been a lot of exchanges we had – we had already 
responded to – to all the issues. We had submitted even lots 
of files of tenders, contracts to the Public Protector to have 
a – to have a review of those. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay so I am – okay so I know because 
I have read the Public Protector’s report the question I am 
asking is did you tell him that the Public Protector had posed 
questions which you had answered? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair I think – I think that we understand 
10 
these questions. When the Public Protector writes a report 
one of the things he then describe – define or describe the 
matter in detail and he depose in questions in detail so – 
so… 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry I do not want to stop you I think 
you misunderstanding my question. 
MR MONTANA:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe is saying that you told him 
that the Public Protector had posed questions which were 
being responded to that is all I am asking.  Did you tell Mr 
20 
Molefe that? 
MR MONTANA:  You know Chair I briefed him about this 
matter because it dates back to 2012.  When the new board 
came… 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no I am saying. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 121 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  I briefed him about this particular issue yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh and then he says he raised this 
issue just before the memorial service of Minister Collins 
Chabane and he says - is that correct if you look at five lines 
from the top of paragraph 25.   
“Because I raised the issue again later in 
March just before the memorial service of the 
late Minister Collins Chabane.” 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair I do not think the sequence is 
right.  The sequence is not right and I think that – no Chair I 
10 
volunteered information to Mr Molefe not what is described 
here but I think the long and short of it I shared information 
with him and we did not discuss this Public Protector matter 
in detail and he reported – he reported the matter to the 
board to say there is this issue; it is being attended to and 
that is what it was left at until of course then there was a 
major dispute and I deal with it on this particular matter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  So let us just go on with what he 
says at the rest – in the rest of paragraph 25.  He says: 
“You then handed him a file containing the 
20 
Public Protector’s I think the interim report.” 
MR MONTANA:  Ja let us call it the right word is provisional 
report. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Provisional. 
MR MONTANA:  Public Protector’s provisional report and I 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 122 of 335 
 
indicated to him that as a company’s management we are – 
we are responding to all those issues. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Now I am asking did this happen? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Did you hand him the file just before 
the memorial service for Minister Chabane? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair no I think the – the – it could have 
been around that time because I know that when we went to 
the memorial service of Minister Chabane that is when I had 
given him my letter that I will step down from my – from the 
10 
position of CO.   
 
If I recall when we had a dispute on this particular 
issue around early – early April so I think that in terms of 
time it may be more or less the same time but Chair I gave – 
I gave him the provisional report of the Public Protector.  If 
the file refers to that I confirm that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is what he is saying as I 
understand it. 
MR MONTANA:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You gave him – you gave him the report 
20 
at the same time you gave him the letter. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no, no it could have been – it could not 
have been the same time. No that came after. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.   
MR MONTANA:  The letter was just an envelope before we 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 123 of 335 
 
went to the memorial service of the late Minister and I said – 
I actually – we would not even open it.  He did not even 
know. I said Chair if you can read this – if you can have this 
as your bedtime reading. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ja he says in fact that you suggested 
you read it – he reads it when he gets home. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja, no I think we may be confusing two 
things.  I think both happened but I do not think they 
happened at the same time.  There was a time I shared a 
letter of resignation – my letter of resignation on the 15 t h of 
10 
March and then later on we had – we had for example I think 
we had the memorial service and then before we – a few 
days or a week later we went to the funeral in Limpopo and I 
think we were both at the office so those – I think it is more 
or less the same – the same time ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  They – I mean in essence we 
can say there may be a difference of a week or so but all of 
that … 
MR MONTANA:  Happened ja.  I can confirm that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then he says in the letter you indicated 
20 
that you had elected not to renew your contract when it 
expired at the end of March – no it says there 2015 that is 
obviously 2016? 
MR MONTANA:  No 2015 ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that you were resigning for 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 124 of 335 
 
personal reasons, is that what your letter said? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes that is what my letter stated ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   
“I presented the resignation he says Mr 
Molefe to the board which accepted Mr 
Montana’s 
resignation 
but 
asked 
him 
to 
continue to work while the board searched 
for a replacement.” 
And then he attaches a copy of the letter. 
MR MONTANA:  My letter of resignation? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no a copy of his reply to your letter 
of resignation.  That is what PM4 is. 
MR MONTANA:  Oh that is my – that is his letter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is his letter. 
MR MONTANA:  For me. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  To you confirming the board’s – it is 
very interesting Mr Soni that he tells us about the board’s 
response.  Did he attach my letter of resignation? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No he did not. 
MR MONTANA:  And let me – I asking that for a reason 
20 
Chair.  When I resigned from PRASA and my letter is there I 
think it is part of the record already.  Yes I think at some 
stage you asked Chair but you see the letter of resignation.  
I said my contract provides for me to – provides for a three 
months’ notice period but I said to Mr – I said in the letter to 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 125 of 335 
 
the chairman I do not want to do three months.   
I said my contract provides for that but I would asked 
the board to find a suitable replacement and I am prepared 
to spend six months so that their new CO can understand 
PRASA and what drives it, its logic and everything.   
I offered that in the letter.  So it is not – it is not the 
way he puts it.  Of course in the letter of response they did 
say the board reserves the right to say look we do not serve 
your notice period but I offered the board Chair and I 
explained to the board.  I explained to Mr Molefe. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. Now… 
MR MONTANA:  If – if in my letter that if I leave in the 
middle of all these major changes there are going to be 
difficulties. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In fairness to Mr Molefe I have got to 
place this on the record when he gave the evidence he did 
place that on record you had indicated you were prepared to 
stay for six. 
MR MONTANA:  But I offered – I offered the board yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  But can I just ask you quickly to 
20 
turn to PM4 which is on page 147?   
MR MONTANA:  147? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  147.  You will see in the – in the first 
paragraphs he acknowledges receipt of your letter in the 
second paragraph. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 126 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry do you want to first announce 
what document it is Mr Soni? 
MR MONTANA:  Oh I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja from who to whom and about what and 
what date it is? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes I will I am sorry Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja for the record. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is much easier so we identify it on the 
transcript when… 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Montana would this be correct that 
this is the letter which is dated the 1 s t of April 2015 in which 
Mr Molefe responds in – to your notice of termination? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in paragraph 2 he says that the 
board accepts your resignation and the point you made is 
that you had given them the extra time but what is significant 
here and it relates to something we talked about earlier is 
what is contained in paragraph 3 of the letter.  He says: 
“We will communicate further with you in 
20 
regard to specific measures that we would 
like to introduce concerning your authority 
during the notice period until separation.” 
Then he continues. 
“The specific aspects of your authority that we 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 127 of 335 
 
may wish to regulate for example concern 
1. Your authority to make senior executive 
appointments.  We would expect that you do 
not make any further appointment regards 
express authority of the board in the present 
circumstances and your authority to approve 
significant procurement matters as we – and 
we would similarly expect you to raise these 
with the board in each specific instance.” 
So this one time when he did curtail your powers I mean I am 
10 
just saying that that earlier you had said in relation to the 
Chairpersonship of the – of the subsidiaries that that had not 
been done. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But here it had been done. 
MR MONTANA:  Where – where are you reading Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am – the third paragraph of page 147.  
The – the response to your letter of resignation. 
MR MONTANA:  But what is your question specifically? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No I am just saying that on this 
20 
occasion there is a specific curtailment of your power.  Is 
that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I am smiling Mr Soni because Chair I 
read – I received this letter, I confirm that.  But it is a funny 
letter I must say because the letter describe or tries to 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 128 of 335 
 
curtail what has not actually not been the truth.   
Chair the – as Group CO of PRASA the delegation of 
authority was very clear from since the organisation was 
formed in fact from the days we had a South African Rail 
Commuter Corporation.  The appointment of executives is a 
responsibility of the board.  I recommend to the board.   
So I think this letter and perhaps once I – Advocate 
Soni is done here I want to go back and make the point 
because you – you will not understand my letter and this 
letter and what happened in the matter of the Public 
10 
Protector report if you do not understand the background.
 
Why I decided to resign at that point and the 
relationship and the reasons I provide and what happened 
when I met Mr Molefe in Knysna.  So – so the letter was 
served on me; it does curtail anything Chair.   
I think you know Mr Molefe he would have loved to 
have the opportunity to either fire me, dismiss me or curtail 
me and he found that it is not possible in this lifetime Chair. 
 
The issue is the executives were appointed by the 
board so you right and say there is no executive that are 
20 
appointed.  If I had interviewed people I had to interview 
them with the – what you call the board’s remuneration and 
HR committee of the board.  We interview recommend to the 
board and there are times when between us myself and the 
board we do not agree on this particular appointment and 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 129 of 335 
 
then I have to either convince the board that this is the right 
00:16:38 you win some, you lose some that is the nature of 
the 00:16:39.   
 
And then of course – the approval of the contract.  
Chair there is this thing that you can see that there is this 
thing Advocate Soni – Mr Soni that – that I was approving – 
what is the word Chair significant procurement matters. 
 
No I have said earlier on in my testimony anything 
below R25 million I did not touch.  Anything above R100 
million – 100 million at this time this was the situation.   
10 
 
So in real times the board had to say to me we are 
changing the delegation of authority you can no longer 
approve at 100 million or approve at 50 million.  It was never 
done. 
 
When I left PRASA I still had the authority to approve 
so this letter reflects rather a big fight that was brewing up 
within PRASA and I – and I want to request that I be given 
the opportunity just touch a bit on that so that we – we 
understand the context. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In fairness to – and he is not here to 
20 
defend himself but I am not defending I am just placing 
something on record.  Because you are right that the board 
could not curtail your powers so what he says here is: 
“We would expect you do not make.” 
He does not say you may not make he says:  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 130 of 335 
 
“We would expect you do not make executive 
appointments or you – you do not approve 
significant procurement matters without the 
express approval.” 
I am just placing that in context. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no I hear – I hear you and I agree fully 
there.  Here is a letter but I am simply saying that why do 
you tell me about ... 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say it did not happen? 
MR MONTANA:  We did not – because it did not happen in 
10 
real times.  I had 100 million what is significant when I still 
approve 100 million.  I did not approve – I did not appoint 
executives.  The executives are appointed by the board.  So 
this letter reflects something that I want to touch Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  To touch on sorry. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Well are you going to do that at a 
later stage? 
MR MONTANA:  Well I wanted – I thought when you are 
done with probing this matter you give me the opportunity. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  I am … 
MR MONTANA:  Unless if you want me to do it now. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ja so long as it is – it is going to be 
confined to the issue. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no I am going – it is a five days’ well 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 131 of 335 
 
and the young people like us we need to be 00:19:08 Mr 
Soni. 
 
Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  There are still no parties is it not? 
MR MONTANA:  I am exposing myself here Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair the – the – I said earlier in my 
testimony that Mr Molefe came to PRASA for a particular 
reason.  In his operation and me and him as I said we – we 
used to interact so either basements of PRASA we talk ANC 
10 
politics and everything and sometimes he will say me 
Comrade Lucky and I kept on reminding him no, no Chair I 
am going to call you Chairman call me CEO and that you are 
my senior or my leader, you are the same age as my father 
so you cannot be my comrade even if in the structures we 
want to treat people as required.  That is what I did. 
 
Now the point I want to make is that between 
November and February there was very good interaction 
including the fact and he does not say it in his affidavit Mr 
Molefe brought in a lot of business people to meet with me 
20 
the CO at the offices in the 00:20:25 because other than the 
mandate that was given when he was appointed in respect of 
the contract Mr Molefe had his own personal difficulties that 
I do not want to deal with here because that is not my 
intention.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 132 of 335 
 
 
He brought and say can we help this one, can we 
help this one and all of those things.  Chair for me I meet 
these people and I will not bring back and say he brought 
that and – no that is not the – what I will do is that when a 
leader says can you help I look at how I can help, other 
people I help, others I tell them it is not possible. 
 
But we had the February board meeting and that is 
why you need to understand these three matters.  In 
February board meeting the board of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 2015? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  2015 Chair my apologies – 2015.  Six or – 
six or six months after Mr Molefe had been in this board we 
appointed we had the meeting in the North West I think just 
closer to Sun City the board meeting for the year. 
 
It was act – it was basically the first real meeting of 
the board after it came and had to attend to the issues about 
all these – the induction but I was unhappy with that board 
meeting.  I spent a lot of time outside with the board having 
an in-committee meeting.  Okay. 
 
That is number 1. 
20 
Number 2 the board wanted to restructure somehow to 
restructured the business.  It is a prerogative of the board I 
said that but the way it is done when you restructure 
business it is very important you must have all the 
information on the table and that information is done whether 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 133 of 335 
 
you appoint a consultant outside or you ask management you 
do not just come and say now the approval for this we are 
placing there because you are running an organisation with a 
lot of interdependencies.   So it is very important to 
understand that. 
 
So I was unhappy with that.  Now when they have 
and I think Advocate – Mr Soni I want also to – to advise you 
to also look at the – some of the statements made by Mr 
Collins Letsoalo which I think are relevant to – to my 
particular matter. 
10 
 
So there was an attempt to change.  I said to Mr 
Lindikaya who was the Company Secretary at the end of that 
board meeting I said today is a day I am leaving PRASA.  I 
was not resigning in that board meeting of February but I 
have already noticed what was happening and I decided to 
leave. 
 
But I did not want to fight Chair I wanted to leave in 
peace and I – that is why my letter is crafted in the manner 
that it is crafted so that when I leave there is still unity, there 
is stability in the business.   Already I have seen our 
20 
executive management team being divided between people 
who are loyal to Popo Molefe who are loyal to me I did not 
want to do that.  I wanted to leave in peace.   
But I – I said that during the break Mr Soni to you 
that in African tradition when someone – your visitor leaves 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 134 of 335 
 
– leave your homestead you assure them that I have 
tightened my dogs, do not worry, leave in peace.  Okay.  So 
that is what I was doing and Mr Molefe said – and when I left 
approaching the gate he then unleashed this terrible dogs 
okay to come for me. 
 
So I had given him that letter.  I was unhappy and I 
then gave effect to my decision to resign.  But in my 
departure I did not want to create a fight with Mr Molefe or 
the board so that letter comes.  This letter Chair and let me 
remind you Mr Molefe had always said Mr Montana I want 
10 
you to stay for three years because you are the one who 
understands this then can help us.  Okay. 
 
Now when I resigned he goes to the thing and I speak 
to board members who 00:24:25 he was agitating that 
Montana must leave. This letter was in my view when I 
received it I laughed it was trying to effect to what the board 
could not do in February meeting which is basically to 
restructure and take over certain things.  So that is what 
they were trying to do. 
 
Now let us deal with the Public Protector matter 
20 
because it is relevant to that.  It was – Chair I was in Cape 
Town there were two people with this interim report from the 
Public Protector.  It was me and I had made a copy for Mr 
Molefe – the provisional report. 
 
Then I got a call from the – from a journalist.  There 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 135 of 335 
 
was a Cape Town jazz festival PRASA played an important 
role in that event.  The chairman and board members met in 
Cape Town and they were – so their board meeting where 
they – where they approved to accept my resignation was in 
April the 1s t of April.  I was happy with that.   
But a day later a journalist from the Business Day 
calls me and say you are leaving because of the Public 
Protector report.  I was angry I knew where it was coming 
from. 
 
She was quoting the provisional report.  I then called 
10 
Mr Molefe he was in Johannesburg I was in Cape Town.  
Chairman I need to see you.  Okay.  He says no I am not in 
Cape Town I am in Joburg but I am flying to Knysna.  I say I 
am in Cape Town I am going to drive to Knysna to come and 
see you Sir.  I went to Knysna.  I arrived the night before we 
met the following day at the – again at the golf club as it 
were.  We sat there for a very long time.   
We had a meeting I think it lasted five to seven 
hours.  And I said to Mr Molefe as I called him Dada Molefe.  
I called this meeting because I was trying to be polite and 
20 
leave in peace because I have sat in this organisation – I 
have done everything here there is nothing more to do.  I do 
not need to remain here.  But I have requested this meeting 
to tell you the truth after I got that thing from the journalist 
from the Business News. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 136 of 335 
 
 
We met.  Chair I sat with Mr Molefe and I told him all 
the things – all the wrong things that he was doing from that 
period of time which I said these are the reasons.  I did not 
want to disclose them.  But today let me tell you he even 
said to me – and I said to him you are asking me to stay for 
three years but you are sharpening your spear to stab at the 
back.  And I said to him I am not going to give you that 
privilege. 
 
He used the words he said are you accusing me of 
being involved in a low intensity warfare.  I said indeed 
10 
Chairman you are – you are launching a very serious fight 
against me.  I wanted to leave. 
 
So – so I was angry with the fact that this Public 
Protector report there was no-one who had this report except 
me and Mr Molefe.  I gave him the report and it end up with 
a journalist and you can see the campaign to start to put me 
in a bad light Chair.  It dates back including what he said in 
that committee there – the committee in Parliament of Mr 
Mashatele.   
 
So this has been an on-going systematic thing but I 
20 
said – and I told him even Chair when I left PRASA Dada 
Molefe you are going to win the battle but you are going to 
lose the war because I will continue to chase you as and I do 
not want to do that as I respect Mr Molefe. 
 
When I was here Chair even after he has attacked me 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 137 of 335 
 
on this platform I was sitting there, I was polite, I greeted 
him, I greeted him but what I know is that Mr Molefe stands 
on the other side of the river, I stand on the end – the two of 
us even if there were a bridge to be built will never connect 
– we stand on different sides there are crocodiles in that 
river we cannot even attempt to meet each other. 
 
So I have accepted that but if you do not understand 
that context you will not understand the three letters – the 
two letters – my letter to him, my letter to – his – the board’s 
letter to me and how the Public Protector matter was – was 
10 
dealt with.  So that is the real context of these letters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when exactly would you say your 
relationship changed because at a certain time or quite some 
time you – you have said that you used your fingers to say 
you were like this I think you said. 
MR MONTANA:  No him and Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh him and Minister  
MR MONTANA:  Minister Peters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you see people who have been given 
evidence here have been describing their relationships in 
20 
different ways.  Mr Koko was here and he said he and Mr 
Abram Masango were and as he put it tight you know like 
that.  He said that is a township lingo they were tight. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But then things changed.  So between you 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 138 of 335 
 
and Mr Molefe you – you were fine you had a good 
relationship I think that is what you said. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For some time. 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
Chair 
I 
think 
let 
me 
describe 
the 
relationship as – you know I respected Mr Molefe.  I think we 
had a relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Because of the way he came to PRASA, I 
knew.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   But I knew Mr Molefe, Chair.  He did not – 
he probably did not know me because I – when I met him I 
explained to him.  I said the first time I met Mr Molefe was 
when he was in – it was in court at the Delmas Prison 
Trial.  I was part of the young people who went to court to 
support our leaders at that time. 
 
When Mr Molefe and them were sentenced to 
prison, I was outside the court on that particular day.  
When they went to Robben Island and they appealed, I was 
20 
part – before they were sentenced, Chair, there was a big 
meeting at the Johannesburg Central Methodist Church in 
1988 where we had the solidarity meeting which was 
disrupted by the police.   
 
So I have seen this man, the big man that I 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 139 of 335 
 
respect as part of the leaders in the thing.  When they 
were released from prison, they still actually were wearing 
prison clothes, Jan Smuts Airport, not O.R. Thambo.  
Young kids will not know that that was the Jan Smuts 
Airport. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   We were the youth who were carrying 
them and singing and celebrating...  So when he was 
appointed as Chairman I said we are – I am happy to have 
this man but I knew that there was this other reason why 
10 
he was appointed, but I tried to work with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  By the February meeting, 2015, 
was your relationship still fine? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, it was on a descent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   We were on a downhill. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   But we were – I think the relationship was 
decent.  But after April ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   ...the relationship between myself and 
Mr Molefe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Became hostile. 
MR MONTANA:   ...became hostile. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 140 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   We were not seeing eye to eye.  We were 
not planning board meetings together. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   We were doing things together as 
required. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that meeting at Knysna was the ten 
point? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, what was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that not the meeting where you say – 
where you – I think you did not use the word but it looks 
10 
like you confronted him. 
MR MONTANA:   Well, I did not confront.  I was polite, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   But very ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Firm. 
MR MONTANA:   Very firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I made it very clear and said this is the 
situation and I want you to know that I ...[indistinct] but I 
20 
was not going to fight with him because the decision to 
leave PRASA was my decision alone and everything.  And 
he kept on saying – Hey, Chair and he - you remember they 
placed him with Minister Dipuo regarding the meeting with 
the President. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 141 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, our relationship collapsed and 
much completely now after that meeting.  It was my 
decision instructing PRASA Technical CEO that he must 
cancel the contract of South African Fence and Gate.  That 
company failed to deliver on his contractual obligation yet 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay do not go into details now. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Around ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MONTANA:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that was happening roundabout when? 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear.] 
MR MONTANA:   This was around April/May 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, I am afraid I am bringing 
this up and I really again, I do not want to say something 
when you are not here.  As I understood your answers to 
the Chairperson’s questions.  You know two points.  One is 
you worked together with him but you made the second 
20 
point that you were aware that Mr Molefe had been 
appointed to get rid of you.  Now, is – have I understood 
correctly or did that something – is that something that 
developed in his mind later? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, look, I did not use those words 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 142 of 335 
 
because I did not know whether it was explicit but I think 
the point here is that I was committed to work with him.  He 
– I think that he decided that he is going to take a different 
path(?).  There were actions.  I mean, the cancellation of 
the - what is it called – the contract on the – or rather the 
tender on the Braamfontein modernisation   
 
He had a lot of time(?).  He was actually even 
out of town when the board meeting was set, but that is not 
how you run companies because you want a CEO to do 
things in a particular manner. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no.  I am not trying to stop you.  
Do not forget my question.  My question is a slightly 
different one.  Did you have the impression, whether you 
put it in so many words or not, that one of the reasons 
Mr Molefe had accepted the appointment or was appointed 
as Chairperson of the Board of PRASA was to get rid of 
you? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair.  I would not say that, no.  I 
would not say that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   If you – I understood you to say suggest 
20 
that he was brought in to ensure that what you and your 
management were no prepared to do was done in terms of 
the, I think, cancellation of a certain contract or award? 
MR MONTANA:   The award to the Tegeta contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I understood you correctly. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 143 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, you understood me correctly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
MR MONTANA:   But whether that will mean me being fired 
or ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is something else.  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...or me leaving the company, it is 
something else, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you have already dealt with the 
Knysna meeting which is addressed at paragraph 28.  Now 
10 
he says there that in addition to make a litany of 
complaints – and you have indicated what some of those 
are – you also attacked Minister Dipuo Peters.  Is that 
correct, at that meeting? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, that is not me.  That is not me.  
I am very forthright and direct but attacking people, it is 
not me Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Now you might remember my 
question to you a couple of minutes ago.  If you look at 
paragraph 29, it is informed by the following.   
20 
MR MONTANA:   Let me go there Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraph 29. 
MR MONTANA:   29? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is 29. 
MR MONTANA:   29. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 144 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is page ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Page 9. 
MR MONTANA:   Page 9. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraph 29.   
MR MONTANA:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He says:   
“At 
this 
meeting 
in 
Knysna, 
Mr 
Montana 
accused us of conspiring [that is asking the 
board] of conspiring with Minister Peters to 
work against him...” 
10 
 
Now, obviously, you are saying that did not 
happen. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, in Knysna ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes? 
MR MONTANA:   ..that is not what we discussed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   But, yes, subsequent to that, I think that 
we did after I have met the Minister on two different 
occasions. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I understand. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But then he goes on to say: 
“In his view, the board had been appointed 
with the express purpose of getting rid of 
him...” 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 145 of 335 
 
 
Did you tell Mr Molefe this at the Knysna 
meeting? 
MR MONTANA:   Not at the Knysna meeting, Chair, no.  At 
the Knysna meeting, Chair, I spoke about our report getting 
to the journalist, the provisional report, and that he was 
telling me to stay but he was carrying a dagger. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   If that is what he was trying to describe 
than that is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Now you said that you did not 
10 
tell him this at the Knysna meeting.  Is there on any 
occasion when you told him that the board had been 
appointed with the express purpose of getting rid of you? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, we have had a lot of interactions 
including in writing, in black and white, and I cannot recall 
specifically saying that to Mr Molefe. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright. 
MR MONTANA:   But I know the situation had deteriorated 
and we were throwing – we were going at each other in a 
very big way.  Ja. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I see.  Let me ask you this.  You may 
not have said it to him but did you ever entertain that 
notion that Mr Molefe had been appointed as chairperson – 
sorry – and his board had been appointed for the express 
purpose of getting rid of you? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 146 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I was very suspicious of the 
appointed of three people...   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Because the appointed, I have regarded 
as irregular.  The entire Board of PRASA was advertised by 
Minister Dan Martins and then he was replaced as a 
Minister with the Cabinet reshuffled.  Minister Dipuo came 
in.  She took all the people that were nominated through a 
public process.  They were all nominated by members of 
the public.  There were three people that were brought to 
10 
that board, Ms Molefe, Ms Zoto Manase and Ms Willem 
Steenkamp.  And if you understand, again there is a 
context to this to understand why they were brought in but 
...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am sorry.  We will come to the 
appointment of the board on a different occasion. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am asking, slightly, a different 
question.  I am saying, did you entertain that thought in 
your mind?  Because now we have mentioned three board 
20 
members.  As I understand it, there were 11 board 
members.  Because the idea here is that the board had 
been appointed to get rid of you.  Now this is three out of 
11.   
 
I am just trying to work out because in some 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 147 of 335 
 
ways, Mr Montana, I need to be fair to you.  Is the stop-
shop-dispute(?) [Speaker moves away from microphone 
and not clear] between you and Mr Montana – I mean, 
Mr Molefe?   
 
At some stage, I will have to make submission to 
the Chairperson and the Chairperson at a later stage would 
have to make a decision.  We would have to base – I – my 
submission and the Chairperson his decision based on all 
the information that we have been able to out from the 
different witnesses.  But I just want to know in respect of 
10 
what your view is about the purpose or one of the purposes 
of the appointed or...? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, in my affidavit and in the statement 
that I presented today, I make mention of the fact that the 
Board of PRASA led by Mr Sfiso Buthelezi was – the term 
of that board was coming to an end.  So naturally there 
was going to be the appointment of a new board, whether 
Mr Buthelezi and members of – some members of his board 
will continue in that role, I think is neither here nor there.   
 
The issue is that there were an introduction of 
20 
the appointment of Mr Molefe, it had to do with – excuse 
me – with what the Minister had said to us in a meeting, 
where he said that:  I am going to bring Mr Popo Molefe.  
And tell you, Mr Buthelezi was in a meeting.  He said to 
the Minister:  I am a deployer of the ANC.  I will respect 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 148 of 335 
 
every decision of the ANC.   
 
My response was also very simple.  I am the 
CEO of PRASA.  So usually it is the prerogative of the 
Minister in Cabinet and we respect of that process but 
there is a CEO – if you facilitate a hostile takeover, you 
bring in people that I think they are now going to play a 
positive role.   
 
And this I did not bring with – I did not want to 
say to Minister Peters, I have also said it to Minister Ben 
Martins when the Gupta wanted to change the board of 
10 
PRASA.  I said if you bring people to change, to takeover, 
as the CEO I have got a right not stay and to leave.  Now, 
Chair, the two – there is a fine line between the two.   
 
So I am saying that Mr Buthelezi – and I think 
you – the Chairman of the PRASA Board will come and 
speak for himself about that process because he kept on 
briefing me on what was happening, especially between the 
– with the conversation that he had with Minister Dipuo.   
 
Now if you bring that into account, you actually 
realise that the appointment of these three specific people 
20 
and how the ...[indistinct] Chair, I try to avoid dealing with 
that issue.  In my earlier statement I said there word of 
brought-in was actually a – what is the right word for this 
abuse – this collaboration between three specific people, 
okay? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 149 of 335 
 
 
And let me mention their names so that we can 
make things much simpler.  Chair, the problems of PRASA 
starts when in February 2014 the Minister of Finance 
delivers his budget speech and casts a lot of suspicion and 
in fact suggested that the PRASA rolling stock programme 
was a corrupt programme.   
 
And that is why you will see in my affidavit, I 
take that issue at great length because we have been 
having big fights with Minister Gordhan in respect of how 
to run the new relation(?) of problems when he was still 
10 
Minister of Finance.  He tried, in my view, to control the 
programme, to take over the control and I – to take over 
the running of the programme and most importantly he 
acted in violation, in my view, of Cabinet decisions and he 
violated his powers as the Minister of Finance. 
 
In 2014, two years after we have gone now to 
the market and issued the RFP, the Minister of Finance had 
to sign in gazette this programme. Chair, for no objective 
and sound or rational reasons he was brought in that 
particular process, okay, as the Minister of Finance until, 
20 
of course, his term ended with the elections in May 2017. 
 
Then there was – then Minister Dipuo Peters was 
brought in ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is in 2014? 
MR MONTANA:   Sorry, in 2014. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 150 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So the budget speech was – but my 
letters, my annexures Chair, which is a source of debate, 
shows the ongoing fight which involved PRASA and the 
Minister of Finance and the Minister of Transport in respect 
of this particular programme.  PRASA is where – is 
precisely because of that and I detail that in my affidavit.   
 
Then there was Minister Dipuo Peters.  Then 
there was a third man, the Treasurer General of the ANC, 
...[indistinct].  Now each – these three people, Chair, they 
10 
were telling Buthelezi that the deployment of the – by the 
ANC...  No, Chair, the decision about the appointment of 
this – of these three people into the board was the 
decision of the interaction between the three people, okay?   
 
And that is why in my affidavit – in my affidavit I 
respond – I actually take up the issue of the appointment 
of Mr Molefe and say:  Tell us how you appointed?  Who 
nominated you?  How you came to the board?  Let Zoto 
Manase told us.  Let Willem Steenkamp tell us how he got 
into that board Chair and it is not because... 
20 
 
So if there is a finding that – I will suggest, 
Mr Soni, that you recommend to the Chair, is that the 
process of appointment of board members, was it managed 
in a proper way, in a transparent way?  Even if you have to 
manage 
government 
interest 
because 
there 
is 
a 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 151 of 335 
 
shareholder in that business, that has to be taken into 
account. 
 
But we are where we are because three people 
connived and they brought in people who played a leading 
role into that board and that is why we are here today 
Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, I just want to see if I 
understand you correctly.  You say - and I am not disputing 
10 
it, I am not accepted it but I am not disputing it either – 
you say Mr Molefe, Ms Manase and Mr Steenkamp were 
appointed irregularly in whatever ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   No, I am saying that Chair in no uncertain 
terms, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no I understand.  But the fact 
that they were appointed irregularly does not mean that 
they were appointed to, in a sense, to get rid of you.  That 
is – so that is what my question was directed. 
MR MONTANA:   Sure. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Not was it a properly constituted 
board. 
MR MONTANA:   Sure. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And so, I would just like again your 
answer on that.  Was, in your view, the purpose of the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 152 of 335 
 
board or some members of the board to get rid of you 
forgetting whether they were appointed properly or not? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think that is you comes after – 
you recall in my – excuse me – in my testimony early in the 
day.  I spoke about our meeting in Cape Town.  You know, 
Chair, and I described it in detail because I think Mr Soni 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let me interrupt you.  Again, in the 
spirit of making sure we can make progress.  I think what 
Mr Soni seeks to do.  I do know that you said earlier on 
10 
that Mr Molefe – I do not know if you added Ms Manase 
and Mr Steenkamp ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He did, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...was appointed with a particular 
purpose.  Mr Soni refers to their appointment being 
irregular.  So I am not sure whether you said that their 
appointment was irregular or when you said they were 
appointed or he was appointed for a specific purpose, that 
is the irregularity you were talking about? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, the Board of PRASA ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MR MONTANA:   ...the Minister ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, Mr Montana.  Could you 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Sorry, sorry.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 153 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [Indistinct] [Speaker is unclear.] 
MR MONTANA:   The Board of PRASA ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [Indistinct] [Speaker is unclear.] 
[Speakers intervening each other – unclear.] 
MR MONTANA:   Board of PRASA – I said firstly, its time 
had expired.   
CHAIRPERSON:   With the board before Mr Molefe or 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Before Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, the board before...  Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, its time had expired. 
MR MONTANA:   It was, ja.  It was coming to an end. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And you see, Chair, we are dealing with 
issues in the middle, unfortunately. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   Because of the nature of the issue there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   And that my affidavit is not on the table. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   In my affidavit I explain, in fact, what has 
happened and why I started to form certain opinions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Of course, to stop – to respond directly.  I 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 154 of 335 
 
do not know if Mr Molefe, Ms Manase or Mr Steenkamp 
were given a mandate that the Minister of Transport for 
those three or the other two people to say:  You must get 
rid of Montana.  But certain things happened afterwards 
which I think that would have given that – to made 
impression.  Let us start first with the...  I was working 
very closely with Mr Molefe but he goes to Parliament at 
the Committee on Appropriation.  I hear for the first time, 
Chair, that ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, sorry.  No, Mr Montana, I – we 
10 
heard this earlier and so I am not trying to ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   No, I want to bring some other point 
which is very important, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MR MONTANA:   Which, unfortunately, is in my affidavit.  
Let me just go straight to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   So, we heard that earlier, yes, but for the 
first time I hear that there is a – there was investigation on 
this big contract that the ministers had problem, Chair.  
20 
Then 
after 
that 
presentation 
to 
the 
Appropriation 
Committee – and I – again, I detailed this in my affidavit – 
Mr Molefe leaves with the Chair of the Portfolio Committee 
who 
had 
attended 
the 
meeting 
of 
the Appropriation 
Committee.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 155 of 335 
 
 
And Chair, they leave.  They go and have lunch 
after the – after we have been for the presentation.  I also 
go in an opposite direction.  The Chair of the Portfolio 
Committee had later that evening called me to brief me 
about what had transpired.  And this I reported – it is in my 
statement to the Parliamentary Inquiry on Governance at 
Eskom.   
 
Chair, the – Mr Molefe – that is why I thought 
Ms Magadzi, Dikeledi Magadzi, the Deputy Minister of 
Transport he would have conveyed this to the committee 
10 
during the testimony.  He said on that very ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But the point that you want to tell me 
about, Mr Montana, is the point to support what you say, 
namely, that you got an impression at some stage that they 
had been appointed to get rid of you. 
MR MONTANA:   But ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are saying it is an impression. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, but not when they arrived. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja later.  That is what I mean. 
MR MONTANA:   Over a period of time. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Then a lot of things have happened 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes, ja. 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
...including 
to 
what 
she 
told 
to 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 156 of 335 
 
Ms Magadzi ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...that Lucky is there to steal for Zuma.  
That is what they said Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  That ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   And unless – if you look at my affidavit 
where I did tell these things, you then not understand...  
So, firstly, here is the – or the board has not taken a 
decision 
that 
he 
must 
investigate 
this 
particular 
committee(?).  It is mentioned in Parliament.  I hear it for 
10 
the first time.  Three months into the term, who was 
appointed to do this investigation?  What are the terms of 
reference?  That is the first issue, Chair. 
 
Secondly, the chair of the committee comes and 
says:  Your chairman says there is going to be an 
investigation because you do work for – you are stealing – 
you are doing contracts for Zuma.  And Chair, when you 
look at the documents – on Werksmans.  Werksmans trust 
investigation.  It is on the contract.  And that is not a 
coincidence of history.  It is actually a roll-out.  
20 
 
So my impression, Chair.  I think, under the 
circumstances, are well-founded.  They are not just 
something where Mr Molefe arrive and I do not trust him.  I 
see his actions, despite the fact that I say I respect to 
work with him, I see what he is doing.  And it is reasonable 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 157 of 335 
 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  So, basically, you are 
saying.  You are not able to say definitively that the 
purpose of the appointment was to get rid of you but you 
say after some time you developed – you gained the 
impression that was the purpose? 
MR MONTANA:   That would be fair summation, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  
Mr Molefe in paragraphs 30 and 31 says, more or less, 
10 
what you said that the relationship between you and him 
started to ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   I am trying to find the page. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry.  Page 9, Mr Montana. 
MR MONTANA:   Page 9 of the ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Of the affidavit. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, okay? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraphs 30 and 31.  We can go – 
I mean, that is – it is what both of you seem to agree on.   
MR MONTANA:   Okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Then he in paragraph 32 he 
deals with the appointment of Werksmans Attorneys and 
says that that appointment was brought about because of 
certain recommendations made by the AG in his report.  
Are you aware of that, the appointment of Werksmans to 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 158 of 335 
 
conduct the investigation that the AG report has required?  
Are you aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:   Are you asking me about the appointment 
of Werksmans? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no.  I am saying that the reason 
that somebody was appointed, not Werksmans themselves, 
was because the AG had required forensic investigations.  
Are you aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair.  The only thing I know is that 
the 
report 
of 
the 
Public 
Protector, 
of 
course, 
had 
10 
recommended that contracts of R 10 million and above be 
investigated and then later the AG’s office.  Yes, I think did 
the – did make it on recommendation around that.  I 
thought Minister Peters dealt with the issue about how to 
combine these investigations and all of those things. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  So are you in a position to say 
that that is not the reason why forensic investigations – I 
am not saying Werksmans was properly – that is not my 
point.  I am just saying that the appointment of forensic 
investigators, according to Mr Molefe, is that the AG’s 
20 
report had required.   
MR MONTANA:   Chair, we are not going to go around this 
issue because I think and naturally it required in my 
affidavit because I deal with it and I have used the term 
information.  There are two things here.  The Public 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 159 of 335 
 
Protector is very specific and who should be appointed to 
look at this and this.  And secondly, we know that the 
Minister of Transport, and she said here, oppose this thing 
and said:  I met with the AG at the airport with Mr Molefe.  
The AG – we then agreed that let us consolidate this 
report, this investigation under the Treasury investigation, 
as it were.   
 
At that time, if you look at the amount that has 
been spent on investigation – actually, the amount was 
even less and then subsequently – so Chair, even if we 
10 
wanted to do that, the – I am very clear about the 
appointment of Werksmans and that is why I would love 
Werksmans to cross-examine me because of many of the 
lies that Werksmans has even told, presented for their own 
appointment in black and white.   
 
I think that – so I am inviting them to come and 
cross-examine.  I will be more than happy Chair because I 
think we will have a great day with their teams. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Let us leave because we know 
that Werksmans issue...  [Speaker is unclear.]  As the 
20 
Chairperson has said already, evidence has been led on 
that and obviously you want to lead evidence.  Can we 
leave that aside for today? 
MR MONTANA:   Today, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And deal with it whenever.  Well, 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 160 of 335 
 
certainly now.  Not for today. 
MR MONTANA:   Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  And then he points out that 
there were difficulties but let us just leave out all the 
issues raised in paragraph 32 about the appointment of 
Werksmans.  And I will make a note that this is still to be 
dealt with.  And you will get a full opportunity to present 
everything you want.   
MR MONTANA:   Can I highlight on paragraph 31? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, the statement that has been made 
– and this is important because at a later stage I want to 
deal with this matter about the Public Protector.  Mr Molefe 
says the investigations into PRASA, particularly the CEO, 
Mr Montana, I am hoping that the Commission will lead 
evidence on that because you will see that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just hold on one second.  Paragraph 31 
says: 
“Soon thereafter the Public Protector released 
her report on her investigation into complaints 
20 
made 
by 
employees 
against 
PRASA’s 
management 
in 
particular 
the 
CEO, 
Mr 
Montana...” 
 
That is what you ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   That is I say at a later stage we want to 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 161 of 335 
 
deal with the Public Protector.  It is actually in today’s 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I feel that part of the process is 
to present the Public Protector ’s report as it is about 
Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And Chair, I, in fact as a matter of fact, 
that report did not make any finding of corruption and 
actually there are very few instances where I feature.  She 
10 
deals with employees, the irregularities in the – but not – 
but if you listen, you read now this report is a damning 
report on Montana and everything and I read this, Chair, 
and say – and the media repeats these lies without reading 
and sharing the facts of the – so Chair, I would want to 
take it out at the right time when I present my own 
affidavit, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine.  But it might be 
one of those things you would note for later. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, for now so that I do not disturb the 
20 
train of thought of Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Then at paragraphs 33 the 
points are to two contracts that were reviewed and set 
aside, the Swifambo contract and the Siyangena contract.  
Now again I would ask that we just leave that because I 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 162 of 335 
 
have some specific questions based on the findings of the 
board.  Now in the last sentence of paragraph 33 he refers 
to Mr Roy Moodley and then in the next section of his 
affidavit he deals with Mr Roy Moodley.  Before we deal 
with what Mr Molefe says, let me ask you, did you know Mr 
Roy Moodley? 
MR MONTANA:   As CFO of PRASA? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, I did know him, Chair, I knew him. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   I do not know well, Chair, I know him, he 
was contracted to PRASA long before so he was one of the 
key security risk company I think Royal Security provided 
services. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, I am only going to deal with 
those matters to the extent that it involves PRASA without 
honing in on Mr Molefe because you have read he says 
that Mr Moodley tried to capture him, that is what he says 
but you are not here to defend Mr Moodley, and I would 
hope not, but the only point I am making is you cannot add 
20 
anything to it so I am going to confine my questions in 
respect of Mr Moodley who these issues, the ones at 
paragraph 34 and 35. 
MR MONTANA:   I can add, Chair.  Chair, I can add.  
Again, you know, I was taken aback when I listed to Mr 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 163 of 335 
 
Molefe talking about Mr Moodley.  Chair, it was like this 
and they even agreed to go and play golf together, they 
told.  They were like this, Chair.  These same ones are 
grouping(?) and today I said, Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on. 
MR MONTANA:   So I want to say, Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, Mr Moodley, you see, the transcript 
will not show this.  So you mean they were close, they 
were friends. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, they were told at some stage – Mr 
10 
Molefe told me that him and Mr Moodley, they are going to 
travel together to the US to play the golf event.  I do not 
play golf, I have never played golf, I was a caddy for 12 
years and it was at a time when players, white players in 
particular, would pay you based on how they played the 
game, that I really cannot pick up, I was a caddy and that 
is why I do not the way I hear my other executives they 
were going to play golf.  I take the view of a caddy, I do 
not go to – so they were flying, Chair, they wanted – they 
planned a trip whether to the UK, the US together and then 
20 
I come and sit here, I hear that Mr Moodley tried to capture 
Mr Molefe.  Very interesting.  Very interesting, Chair.  I can 
– that is the best I can say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Soni.  Well, I think Mr Molefe did 
give some evidence relating to …[intervenes] 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 164 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The US Masters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes, ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He says in the second sentence, that 
is in the middle of paragraph 34 – remember this is their 
State 
Capture 
Commission 
or 
the 
State 
Capture 
Commission and he says: 
“In my experience these captors are the decision-
makers so that they can direct contracts and 
ultimately 
money 
to 
favour 
companies 
or 
individuals.  As I detail immediately hereunder, the 
10 
conduct of Mr Moodley is a clear example of this 
method of operation.” 
That is Mr Molefe’s view.  I am not asking you to comment, 
I am just introducing Mr Moodley into this context.  He says 
at paragraph 35: 
“I did not know Mr Moodley until I was appointed to 
PRASA’s board.” 
Are you able to dispute that? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, I do not know their relationship 
before that. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So he says: 
“And soon thereafter I noted the name of Roy 
Moodley was on the lips of many at PRASA.” 
Is that an impression you got as well? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I think it is very interesting 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 165 of 335 
 
that – it is very interesting, Chair, that this point is made 
by Mr Moodley, but it is also made by Mr Fani Dingiswayo 
in his affidavit.  So it is not coincidence, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And Ms Ngoyi …[intervenes]3 
CHAIRPERSON:   You meant Mr Molefe, you said Moodley. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Mr Molefe and Mr Fani 
Dingiswayo.  They both make this point, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, no, I understand what you 
say but inadvertently you said it is funny that this point is 
made by Mr Moodley and Mr Fani Dingiswayo. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, I was meant to say Mr 
Molefe and I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is what I mean, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I was meant to say Mr – and, Chair, the 
point – I know that [indistinct] here, I do not want to 
respond to it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But both in my affidavit and in my 
statement today – you see, the proper names of state 
capture, if you look at what he says, you look at the 
20 
testimony of Minister Pravin Gordhan in October 2018, he 
makes similar points.  So this is an ideology, it is not an 
objective thing.  Mr Moodley, who did he influence because 
Mr Moodley was appointed I think in Railways in around 
1991 when I check the history of that company.  So who did 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 166 of 335 
 
he use money to pay to appoint him?  Because he was 
appointed – I was not ever probably born, I was not at 
PRASA.  There was no PRASA at that time.  MetroRail was 
not even known by its name, it was still part of Transnet.  
So I think he must come and explain.   
 
So, if you make that point, make it more concrete to 
say we think Moodley paid Montana or paid to get this 
contract but you also have told us that before Montana was 
born Moodley was at PRASA at Transnet or Railways in 
1991, not – I only joined PRASA in 2006, the South African 
10 
Rail Commuter Corporation in 2006.  Moodley was already 
having a contract for over 10 years, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  Then he 
says: 
“Some employees described Mr Moodley as the 
owner of PRASA.” 
Are you aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:   I may – if, as a CEO, I do not know that 
but the chairman, non-executive chairman, Chair, knows 
20 
that employees at PRASA – I mean, how do you measure 
that?  Which employees, in which depot, in which station 
said that? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So your answer is you do not know. 
MR MONTANA:   Well, I do not know but I am asking 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 167 of 335 
 
myself, it raises different questions that is here is a 
chairman who goes around getting to stations, asking 
employees and where did they challenge(?) this think, 
Chair?  Is this evidence, is it state capture where we are 
told rumours and hearsay because that is what he is saying 
here.  Which employees?  I think, Chair, what the 
Commission should do, should ask Mr Molefe to provide 
details and we get those employees to come and testify 
here or else it is hearsay, Chair, I cannot recall to hearsay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, I just want to point out 
10 
in law it is not whether Mr Moodley was the owner, it is 
where the people described him and told Mr Molefe.  That 
is in issue [indistinct – dropping voice].  So when you say 
it is hearsay, of course it is, but it does not mean it is 
inadmissible in law.  I am just making that point so that you 
understand the context in which Mr Molefe’s evidence on 
this issue is [indistinct – dropping voice] 
MR MONTANA:   But, Mr Soni, does it not surprise you that 
me, Lucky Montana, who was then the Group CEO of 
PRASA does not know about this issue.  It is someone who 
20 
is fulltime and then someone who is supposed to come 
there once in three months, he interacts with these 
employees, he knows it.  I mean, I just find it odd, I find it 
very strange. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, okay.  So …[intervenes] 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 168 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   So I am not saying it is false. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But I am saying I find it very odd, as a 
non-executive chairman. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were not aware of such. 
MR MONTANA:   I was not aware of that, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And that is why each time I kept 
asking you are you aware, and that is all that... Says: 
“I was told that he had several companies which 
10 
provided services to PRASA ranging from security 
in the form of Royal Security to advertising through 
a firm called Strawberry Walks.” 
Are you aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:   Of Strawberry Works? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   I am aware of them, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And Royal Security? 
MR MONTANA:   Royal Security, Chair, I am saying is 
being doing work in Railways since 1991. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But, I mean, you are aware that Mr 
Moodley is associated with them. 
MR MONTANA:   He is an associate? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I say he is associated with that 
company. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 169 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was associated with it. 
MR MONTANA:   With Royal – no, no, no, Chair, I know 
that, I am well-aware of that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    
“I would go so far as to say that if one did not know 
Mr Moodley one would easily mistake him for an 
executive manager of PRASA.  I was told that he 
would often walk around with managers in their 
work environment almost as if he were the PRASA 
manager.” 
10 
You are not aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Soni, do you believe this statement?  
And let us look at this – Chair, let us look at this 
statement. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, I am asking a different 
question.  So [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR MONTANA:   But I am – I can – Chair, I am not aware 
but I can see that is a very false statement. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   You say that maybe a contractor may 
20 
have unfair advantage but to say that going as far as 
walking in the workplace is like him serve as a manager.  I 
think, Chair, is – is this the PRASA I know?  I do not think 
we are talking about the same organisation here. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Then he says at paragraph 37: 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 170 of 335 
 
“Shortly after my appointment Mr Moodley, who 
appeared to know of my love for golf invited me to a 
golf day he had arranged and that would be 
attended by Mr Montana.  Did you attend any half 
days organised by Mr Moodley?” 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, not at all.  I do not play 
golf, I do not go to those events.  I have never been – the 
last time I was at the golf course was when I was a caddy 
at the Irene Country Club in Pretoria.  I used to get into a 
train at Eerste Fabriek and Mamelodi and then travel back, 
10 
Chair.  So this thing about golfs, Roy Moodley, they have 
got nothing to do with me, Chair, it is their discussion and I 
think the two of them must come and tell the Chair how did 
they meet, which golf, who was paying for those things.  
They have got nothing to do with me, I was never involved 
in any golf activity with Mr Moodley. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  May I ask you then to look at 
paragraph 33 where he says that Mr Moodley invited him to 
the Durban July, I think it was in 2015.  
“There was an attempt to persuade me to attend.  
20 
Mr Moodley told me that then President Zuma and 
Minister 
Jeff 
Radebe 
and 
other 
ministers 
had 
accepted the invitation and were his guests at the 
event every year.” 
Are you aware of that? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 171 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   No, not at all. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Have you ever attended any July 
event that Mr Moodley hosted? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, I have attended the 1 July.  
I was invited by Vodacom and I also had a suite there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But never by Mr Moodley? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, no, it has got nothing to do with 
Mr Moodley, this was a – probably I did not know Mr 
Moodley at that time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Mr Montana, to take the 
10 
process forward, in the rest of this section of the affidavit 
until paragraph 45 Mr Montana (sic) effectively says that 
Mr Moodley wanted to pay for his trip to a golf tournament 
called the Masters in Augusta in the United States.  I am 
just placing on record that he does make the point that Mr 
Moodley wanted to go – he did not want to go with Mr 
Moodley and then Mr Moodley dropped off and he went off 
on his own.  I am just placing that on record so that we 
know the issue you have raised here. 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I know that, I do not know the 
20 
details but Mr Molefe did tell me about the fact that they 
are talking about the US, who paid, who was going, I was 
never party to it, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   And let us look at paragraph 46 now, this 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 172 of 335 
 
is now we have finished with that section on Mr Moodley 
because it does not – it is not a matter on which it would 
be fair to ask you to comment.  So paragraph 46 he says: 
“After being appointed, the new board was serious 
about discharging its fiduciary duties.  The Public 
Protector 
in 
her 
report 
Derailed 
had 
exposed 
irregularities and malfeasance at PRASA and the 
board 
was 
determined 
to 
hold 
management 
accountable.” 
Now that is his view, I am just setting it out here.  He says: 
10 
“In my view it is this determination that led to a 
strained relationship between the board and Mr 
Montana and an inevitable fallout.” 
Now is that an impression you will share? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I do not know, it is his view, but it 
is factually incorrect, I mean the Public Protector report 
was released, Chair, in August, I had already left PRASA in 
August 2015 so how can a report that was released after I 
have left be the basis of a fallout?  It is so illogical. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   So on a factual – so whatever view he 
has that he was there to hold people – but then tell us 
about other things, not the report of the Public – because it 
was written in August, I left in July. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 173 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   And this investigation was ongoing before 
Mr Molefe became a Chairman of PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  I will just [indistinct] you 
again 
for 
the 
purposes 
of 
understanding 
what 
the 
difference between you and Mr Molefe is.  Mr Molefe says 
the fallout between you and him occurred because he tried 
to hold management – he and his board tried to hold 
management accountable.  You are saying no, it was 
because he had a predetermined agenda, if I can put it 
[indistinct – dropping voice] 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, holding management accountable, 
does 
not 
require 
someone 
special 
for 
that. 
 
The 
management …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, Mr Montana, I am sorry, I am 
asking you a different – so my question is this, he says you 
– the fallout was because he tried to hold you accountable, 
you give a different reason.  Is that a fair assessment of 
your difference? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, no.  Issue of the accountability 
does not feature.  Early in the morning Mr Soni asked a 
20 
question 
about 
this 
issue 
of 
reports, 
me 
holding 
information.  I dealt with the issue of accountability.  As a 
CEO, I am accountable to the board, it appoints me, I am 
accountable to the board.  It does not require a special 
person because that is what Mr Molefe is trying to – our 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 174 of 335 
 
disagreement, Chair, had to do with other issues that I 
have listed and I think we can evaluate the information, 
like in this paragraph, Chair, you can see that Mr Molefe in 
trying to retrofit and give the thing, he actually may give 
you – he exposes a thing that the report of the Public 
Protector – it  was released after I have left, so how did he 
know that this report that – I have left PRASA, I was not at 
PRASA when this report was released in August.  So 
factually, Chair, you can see that – he said I made a 
mistake or he just does not know what he is talking about. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Let me tell you what – and please 
listen to the question, it will make it much easier, Mr 
Montana.  You have a given a reason for the fallout.  Now 
Mr Molefe is giving a different reason.  I am just saying 
that is it fair to say that that is one of the areas of 
differences between you and Mr Molefe, what caused the 
fallout.  We know there as a fallout. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I have articulated this thing I think 
today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think you have different reasons.  
20 
You have given your reasons. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Molefe says it is because you did not 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 175 of 335 
 
want to be held accountable and you say that is not true. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I am saying it is not true, but I am 
saying 
the 
Commission 
will 
of 
course 
look 
at 
the 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A picture …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   At the sequence of events and the facts 
and all of those things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Including what is I am saying factually 
incorrect 
that 
Chairman 
is 
projecting 
himself 
as 
a 
10 
champion of accountability and then even brings a report 
that came after I have left.  So, Chair, you may chase 
Montana but… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Really, after I have even left PRASA there 
is a report that continues to cause a strain between me 
and Mr Molefe.  I mean, there you can see it in black and 
white. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   So it tells you that this is an absolute 
20 
fabrication, Chair, that Mr Molefe is busy with.  And I am 
not – I hear the point you are making.  But I am going to – 
you can see, there it is in the paragraph that here is a man 
who is trying to find reasons after the fact and he even 
forgot that this Public Protector report was issued – and I 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 176 of 335 
 
am very clear on this issue, okay?  And I have said earlier 
on, Chair, that the biggest  - what actually the final straw 
after all of those things, you asked me did the Knysna 
meeting, you know… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was a turning point. 
MR MONTANA:   Was a turning point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   I said no, the turning point was when I 
instructed PRASA not to pay, to terminate the contract with 
SA Fence and Gate and recover all the money.  After SA 
10 
Fence 
and 
Gate 
and 
Gates 
had 
received 
payments 
approved irregularly by Ms Ngoyi and then they paid into 
the foundation trust of Popo Molefe.  I have asked this 
Commission but let us subpoena the accounts of Mr Molefe 
and his foundation, Chair, you are going to see – you are 
going to see that people who come here and accuse of 
corruption are in fact the most corrupt.  I am just asking 
this Commission, go there and you will see that who is 
paying and you ask yourself, Chairman, come back here 
and explain to us how is it possible that companies 
20 
contracted to PRASA are paying into your foundation?  And 
most of in my evidence – in my affidavit, Chair, you know 
what happens after they paid?  The value of the contracts 
goes up.  So the more you pay – it is a very systematic 
scheme that Mr Molefe ran at PRASA.  It is a corrupt 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 177 of 335 
 
scheme, Chair, it is in violation – I even say in my affidavit, 
it is actually, if you talk about the prevention – the 
PRECCA Act.  
 
If you look at the Popo Molefe Development 
Foundation you will find the evidence of gratification and 
all of – it is there in the evidence.  And this Commission, I 
will ask, Chair, the investigators, they go and take 22 page 
reports written by Paul O’Sullivan and that, they do not 
investigate 
because 
they 
are 
chasing 
us 
but 
really 
investigations are to be undertaken.  Like in this instance, 
10 
the Commission – I was told the Commission will subpoena 
my accounts which were already close by ABSA but it 
cannot get where money flows, Chair. 
 
So, Mr Soni, the reason that he is – he is trying to 
create as if, you know, out there in public we should 
believe that no, they are just disagreements between Mr 
Molefe and the things on matters about – no, you had a 
man – Chair, I am a very straight man and you have got 
someone who was involved in schemes and you will see it 
is in black and what where both Minister Dipuo Peters, Mr 
20 
Willem Steenkamp with – and Popo Molefe were trying to 
force me to pay a company that failed to deliver on its 
project and that goes – so it goes and make donations and 
then they come back and say increase the value and when 
do they increase the value and when do they increase the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 178 of 335 
 
value of this contract?  Not when I was there, I go on 
leave, Martha Ngoyi, when she was here, Chair, she told 
you about everything, but she did not tell you about her 
role in this particular matter and why I had to take action 
against her.  So it is not true, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I understand. 
MR MONTANA:   I want to be very firm and will become 
very clear because the Commission is going to right 
sweetheart(?) report that no, we think there was a fallout, 
Mr Montana was going left.  No.  There were wrong things 
10 
that were being done, Chair, and some of them I – I put my 
foot down and say they will never happen and SA Fence 
and Gates, I did not only cancel, I instructed the CEO I 
want us to recover the money that was paid irregularly to 
this company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Last time, Mr Soni, when Mr Molefe was 
here, there was arrangement in terms of which he was to 
file a further affidavit dealing with certain matters. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has that been filed? 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That has been filed, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But it did not deal with this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 179 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Will obviously have to deal with it 
once Mr Montana’s affidavit has [indistinct – dropping 
voice] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay, alright. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, he must deal with it.  I know I do 
not have the authority, Chair, it is your authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But he must deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I do not know how he is going to explain 
10 
companies contracted to PRASA – not only at PRASA, 
Chair, the recent one has been in parliament where 
Minister Gordhan was answering a question from the EFF, 
why companies contracted to Transnet, M & S, paid in 
excess of a million to the Foundation Trust.  Here is a 
Chairman of a company, he told you, Chair, he was a 
paragon of truth, of good governance when he was sitting 
there, he was telling you and, Chair, you even said the 
country needs a man like you and I said my time is coming, 
I want to tell DCJ about direct corrupt activities.  We are – 
20 
there is the insinuation Montana did this and that, there is 
money in his account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Yes, continue, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 180 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, Mr Montana, just to get this 
point, we know that there was a fallout.  In paragraphs 47 
and  - what 47 really gives details, Mr Molefe details 
different aspects of that fallout.  We need not deal with 
that because we know you have different views on it and 
for present purposes we do not need to work out whether 
what he says in the rest of paragraph 47 is correct or not. 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, it is absolutely – what he is 
saying is absolutely correct.  The only thing that is 
incorrect there, it is when he says: 
10 
“Mr Montana appeared to have sold a narrative to 
the media which portrayed the board.” 
The issue is that I did interviews at that time, the 
relationship had deteriorated.  I did not have views which – 
I think that Mr Molefe and the board, did not take – but I 
did not sell anything, so I know what he says, he is 
referring to.  So it is correct, Chair, it is correct that the 
relationship had deteriorated and when I did the interview, 
I was no longer holding back, I was telling the truth that I 
never sold a narrative that this board was bad and all of 
20 
those things but he is not an anticorruption buster or does 
not change, it is not true, that is what he is trying to do in 
his affidavit, he is misleading this Commission and that 
view I will challenge, Chair, day and night.  False. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, now that we have finished 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 181 of 335 
 
with 47 can I ask you to turn to page 15, paragraph 48? 
MR MONTANA:   Page 15? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Page 15, paragraph 48. 
MR MONTANA:   48, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So he deals now in the rest of this 
part with why he thinks you were able to protect your 
position at PRASA.  I am just giving his version and asking 
you to respond.  He says: 
“An issue that has always intrigued me is how Mr 
Montana had been getting away with what he had 
10 
done at PRASA such as corruption in procurement 
and abuse of power as found by the courts and the 
Public Protector.  I am respectively of the view that 
I consider the matter, the following provides a 
possible explanation.” 
Let us just look at the matters that he deals with.  In 
paragraph 49 he says: 
“In the late 1990’s and early 2020’s Mr Montana and 
Mr Makhensa Mabunda worked together at the 
Department of Public Enterprises under Minister 
20 
Radebe.” 
That is correct, is it not?    
MR MONTANA:   That I worked under Minister Radebe, 
Public Enterprise? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 182 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And Mr Mabunda. 
MR MONTANA:   He worked there, Chair, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
“Mr Montana was the director in the office and 
worked directly with Minister Radebe.  Mr Mabunda 
was appointed as a director in one of the divisions 
reporting to the Department of Public Enterprises.” 
Is that correct? 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
Let 
us 
say 
you 
are 
reading 
a 
10 
…[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am reading paragraph 49. 
MR MONTANA:   49? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, 49, the last sentence.  Well, there 
are only two sentences in the paragraph. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, no, can I respond? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I think that is where we have a 
20 
[indistinct] but let me deal with where this thing comes 
from and that 
is why, Chair, the problem 
with the 
Commission, okay?  That is why I stated in my statement, 
when you read Werksmans’ reports, they are saying these 
things. Mr Molefe brings it there as a fact in his affidavit.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 183 of 335 
 
Okay?  That is the first issue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, it is an allegation, it is not fact. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, it is an allegation. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair but there people are describing – I 
thought people would say Mr Mabunda and Mr Montana did 
these things, it was a corrupt deal and all of those things.  
I was working in the office of the Minister of Public 
Enterprises, nè, did not know Mr Mabunda from a bar of 
soap.  The Ministry which is not the same as the 
department, only later get appointed in the Department of 
10 
Public Enterprises, it deals with issues I think about 
financial analysis of State Owned Enterprises and all of 
those things. 
 
Now this thing that I – so this person was in the 
Department of Transport, sort of Public Enterprises were 
now closed Chair, surely ...[indistinct] Mr Montana knows 
someone 
in 
Durban 
and 
therefore 
there 
should 
be 
something between him and Mr Soni.  I mean is that the 
evidence?   This allegation Chair it doesn’t make sense to 
me, it seems I am being crucified for the fact that Mr 
20 
Mabunda came to work in the Department of Public 
Enterprises when I was in the office of the Minister of 
Public Enterprises.  I did not employ him, I did not even 
know him from a bar of soap, why is that an issue?     
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We will deal with that in a moment, 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 184 of 335 
 
let us deal with the facts, is it correct that you worked 
under Minister Radebe? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right, and is it correct that Mr 
Mabunda was a director in one of the divisions reporting to 
the Department of Public Enterprises? 
MR MONTANA:   No, not in a division Chair, he was part of 
the Department of Public Enterprises. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay so factually that is correct, you 
are saying don’t read into those two independent facts a 
10 
relationship between me and Mr Mabunda, is that your 
point? 
MR MONTANA:   It doesn’t make sense to me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the answer is that is your point, 
because I think what you are saying is – I think you used 
at 
some 
stage 
the 
word 
manipulation, 
you 
know 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said what is happening here is facts 
which have – which don’t create a relationship are put 
20 
together as if there was a relationship between yourself 
and Mabunda at that time? 
MR MONTANA:   No Chair there was none. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you say at that time you didn’t know 
him, you were working in the office of the Minister, he 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 185 of 335 
 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   He was appointed to the Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was appointed to the Department but 
you say you did not know him at that time? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then he says at paragraph 50: 
“After the 2004 elections Minister Radebe was 
appointed to the Department of Transport.” 
That is correct isn’t it? 
MR MONTANA:   Sorry, ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was appointed to the Department of 
Transport? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is correct ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, okay. 
“Mr Montana soon followed him to the Department 
of Transport where he took up the position of 
Deputy Director General for Public Transport.” 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct.   
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then he says: 
“The Department of Transport later launched the 
multi ... [and he corrected himself] Billion Rand taxi 
recapitalisation programme during the tenure of Mr 
Radebe.” 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 186 of 335 
 
Is that correct?  
MR MONTANA:     Yes sir, that is correct, it was not 
launched by Minister Radebe, it was – the paragraph there, 
the game, the manipulation of facts Mr Montana soon 
followed him, Chair I didn’t follow, I applied for a position 
advertised, 
interviewed 
by 
cabinet 
ministers 
and 
my 
appointment as Deputy Director General was a cabinet 
decision, that is the first thing that we must – so this thing 
that I followed Mr Radebe, was doing – done favours and 
that, it is something that must – Molefe had said that no it 
10 
is because of his relationship, I applied so Minister Radebe 
manipulated other cabinet ministers to say no appoint my 
boy here.    
 
You know it is things like this Chair, and the second 
Chair the taxi recap programme we recall it was launched 
during the time of the Late Minister, Minister Daloma.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I just raise something with you 
Mr Montana, it is important.   You keep saying what the 
Commission, the Commission, so let me tell what our role 
is.  Our role is we get allegations by members of the public 
20 
by ...[indistinct], we put those allegations down, we put it 
to implicated persons.   Now we don’t put this as a fact, 
this is not a Commission of Finding, this is an allegation 
made very much like in a court of law.    
 
Now you have a different set of facts, put them on 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 187 of 335 
 
the table but don’t make accusations about why these are 
being put over there.   Let’s just get to the facts, whether 
Mr Molefe did it deliberately or not we need to understand 
what it is.   So all you want to say in regard to this, and I 
hope it is going to be the rest of your testimony as well, to 
say look it is correct that I was appointed Deputy Director, 
but I didn’t follow Mr Radebe, I applied for a job and it was 
a cabinet decision.   It just removes all the unnecessary 
aspects so we can deal with the facts. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair can I beg to differ.   I know Mr 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think I understand what you are 
thinking, you want to make sure a certain perspective is 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:    Chair can I raise you on this one? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I think – I think that Mr Soni – 
Mr Soni is making a statement that I am not agreeing with 
20 
Chair, not because I have got a different view, or a 
different perspective.  Let me – I just want to give it two 
instances which I am going to deal with I think later in the 
day, but let me just address the first point.    
 
You 
know 
my 
accusations 
Chair 
against 
the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 188 of 335 
 
Commission 
are 
not 
accusations, 
I 
am 
not 
making 
accusations, I have raised specific issues which the 
Commission has actually conducted itself in a manner that 
I said violate the very terms of this Commission.    
 
Mr Soni this Commission, and I know that when I 
say 
this 
Commission 
we 
include 
the 
Chair, 
the 
investigators, 
the 
legal 
team 
and 
everybody, 
and 
it 
becomes unfair because if you’ve got Ms Rangakata which 
was 
not 
involved 
but 
she 
is 
an 
employee 
of 
the 
Commission, she is part of the Commission, Chair this 
10 
Commission has been very selective in their application, 
okay.   I will tell you that when I was accused, when the 
accusation or the allegation about my properties I was 
here.  Mr Soni and the Chair making certain type of 
statements, but not only that Chair.   You invited everyone 
who accused me, there was someone who actually put an 
affidavit that says I am a businessman, I have done a 
property 
deal 
with 
Mr 
Montana, 
I 
don’t 
work 
for 
government, I have got nothing to do with PRASA.   What 
did this Commission do, they kept him aside not to come 
20 
here Chair, to hear a different view. 
 
The affidavit that has been served on me, Mr Andre 
Wagner.   Okay, so that is the Commission having Chair no 
this one we want, this one we do not want.   Okay Chair, I 
have mentioned the other instances of this.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 189 of 335 
 
 
Let me give you another example Chair, Mr – you 
asked Ms Singole the Chair was there, about Siyangena, 
but I am told that you are going back to it, let me use a 
different one of the Public Protector.   You know Mr Soni 
must – should look at his comments in respect of the 
matter of the Public Protector.   Chair not a witness out 
there, this Commission, the Evidence Leader, was telling 
the Chair that one, there is only report of the Public 
Protector, and Mr Montana didn’t challenge this particular 
report, and Chair I don’t know if – I don’t even know that 
10 
you know that the report of the Public Protector only 
address about 60% of the issues what you call derailed.   
The other issues were addressed by Advocate Ncubani.  
When you put the two reports, you have got this extreme 
report that I was taking on review, it is only 50%, there is 
another report by Advocate Ncubani, and I was sitting 
there hoping that the Evidence Leader would then say to 
the Chair, Chair we have got this report and we have got 
this report, and we still have to ascertain whether Mr – no 
there were time to say that to drive the – not anybody, the 
20 
Commission itself, the Evidence Leader, to say this 
damning report because 
you are trying to create a 
particular – so I have got instances Chair where this 
Commission has selected information that it puts as 
evidence and kept others outside. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 190 of 335 
 
 
The reason why in my affidavit Chair is actually not 
admitted.   In October, 7 t h of October 2019 ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana I am sorry ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Can I finish just, no can I finish this 
point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let him finish Mr Soni. 
MR MONTANA:   7 t h October Chair 2019 after I submitted 
my draft the Commission wrote to me and told me that my 
affidavit, my evidence ...[indistinct] it is outside the terms 
of reference of this Commission and I said I would rather 
10 
not testify if the Commission is actually playing a role of 
hiding the truth. 
 
So 
Chair 
with 
respect 
I 
think 
that 
Mr 
Soni 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, I ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   But when he makes a statement like that I 
will not accept it because I have seen this Commission 
acting actually in a manner that I would say violates its 
very terms. 
 
Now you gave me some assurances in the morning 
20 
Chair, and I accepted that, I said let us move, but when 
there are assertions made when I know the facts are 
different ... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, you see Mr Montana I have no 
problem that as long as you have concerns you articulate 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 191 of 335 
 
that because where you have concerns that need to be 
looked 
at, 
subject 
to 
our 
time 
constraints 
as 
the 
Commission, we must examine them and where they merit 
being looked into further they should be looked into 
further.   If there are good reasons where or why they 
cannot be looked into further then you can be told this is 
the situation, so I am going to give, I think Mr Soni wants 
to say something, but I must also say that well I am told I 
have – I have seen more than I think 380 witnesses over 
the past three years who has come and gone here, so I 
10 
cannot 
remember 
everyone, 
so 
you 
mentioned 
a 
businessman whose affidavit you say was obtained I think 
but he was not called or something, so but Mr Soni might 
or might not know about that, but I – this is what I can tell 
you that the concerns that you have mentioned I want them 
to be looked at on their merits and where we don’t agree 
with you we will say no we don’t think this needs to be – 
you will be told, where we say no this should be looked at 
it, it will be looked at. 
 
I told you in the morning the issue of Werksmans is 
20 
now before the Commission and you had been raising this 
so – and we although we are nearing the end, we should 
have finished with oral evidence by end of March we are 
where we are, we are trying to wrap up, certain things 
might need to be looked at but each one must be 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 192 of 335 
 
considered on its merits. 
MR MONTANA:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chair.   Mr Montana let 
me just give you this as well, that it is always difficult when 
you have got person A making accusations against person 
B and then person B making accusations against person A, 
and they are like two different versions, but even within 
that context you can get a set of facts that are common to 
both and that is all I was saying, so if you feel that I was 
10 
suggesting something untoward I was not.  I was merely 
saying I understand you say that I did not follow you, but 
what we do know is you were appointed as Deputy 
Director.  We now know that it was a cabinet appointment.   
All I was saying is in response it just has to facilitate the 
facts so we concentrate on that and say he says this, but 
this is the facts, and then we move on, as to whether he 
tried to mislead or whatever is an entirely separate thing, 
but I just want us to get the facts and that is all I am trying 
to do. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think – I think let us do a ...[indistinct] 
because I can understand why sometimes even though you 
don’t dispute a particular fact that is being mentioned by 
Mr Molefe you might want to say something about it, about 
what he says, because from your perspective maybe it 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 193 of 335 
 
connects with something else, but let us try I think from Mr 
Soni’s side he is trying to make sure that as we move on 
he is clear which allegations of fact are accepted, which 
are not accepted, but I think let us just try with a little bit – 
with some flexibility and see how it goes. 
 
So you – we will see as we go along, let us try and 
accommodate each other, I think we will be fine. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair I accept your guidance, I would live 
with that, I am saying – you see for me Chair I don’t worry 
what Mr Molefe, Ms Ngoyi say about me, but when the 
10 
Commission says certain things or deliberately omits 
certain evidence then I take exception, but sir you have 
given guidance, let us take that and move forward ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine.   We are at four 
o’clock, we normally take a ten minutes break at four but 
we also talk about the way forward so that we are all on 
the same page about how far we go into the evening.  We 
have been going into the evening for quite some time, 
evenings for quite some time to try and finalise. 
 
I am happy that we go on even up to seven, maybe 
20 
beyond, what is your situation Mr Montana? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair I am here Chair, I will only 
ask that perhaps we – request that we take a comfort break 
now, but I will be guided by you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Mr Soni how is your 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 194 of 335 
 
situation? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, no, no, I am fine. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay, 
I 
hope 
the 
staff 
and 
the 
technicians they always understand and they accommodate 
me, but if there is a problem they will let me know.   Thank 
you very much. 
 
I think we have been doing quite well, we might not 
have been as fast as we would have liked but I think it is 
fine.    
 
Okay, let us take a ten minute adjournment, we 
10 
adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Okay, 
let 
us 
continue. 
 
Will 
the 
technicians switch this one off please?  It distracts this 
particular screen.  It distracts my attention.  Yes, okay.  
But we can continue in the meantime.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, as you please Chairperson.  Mr 
Montana, so let us just finish with paragraph 50.  On the 
20 
facts you do not have a problem, you just are unhappy 
about the fact that it made it sound as if you were simply 
following minister Radebe when in fact it was a government 
appointment.  Would that be correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I am saying it was a government 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 195 of 335 
 
appointment number one, and number two I am saying you 
can 
see 
that 
this 
entire 
paragraph 
is 
riddled 
with 
insinuations but some of the facts are correct.  I do not 
want to debate that.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And please, I skinned this invitation 
and reiterate what the Chairperson said.  Where ever that 
is so, let us just clear that up and then but we know what 
the facts are.  Now I need to say this to you because you 
have probably read the affidavit or the further affidavit.  
 
You know that once the issues is that Mr Mabunda’s 
10 
firm, Siyaya, the S group received preferential treatment at 
PRASA.  So that is the basis on which this factually, the 
factual matrix that we are dealing with is important.  Now 
we know that the taxi recapitalisation program was headed 
by yourself.  
 
Then Mr Radebe says: 
 
“Mr Mabunda left the Department of Transport 
to pursue ...” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Molefe says.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said Mr Radebe.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  “Mr Molefe says Mr Mabunda left the 
Department of Transport to pursue private 
business interest and received one of the ...” 
Well firstly, is that correct that Mr Mabunda left the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 196 of 335 
 
Department 
of 
Transport 
to 
pursue 
private 
business 
interest?   
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I think Mr Mabunda was never at 
the Department of Transport.  I think probably there was an 
error there.  I will say the Department of Public Enterprise.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh, I see.  So you are saying he left 
the Department of Public Enterprise? 
MR MONTANA:  Ja, it cannot be transport.  He never 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Earlier ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MONTANA:  Ja.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Earlier Mr Molefe said he was, he joined, 
Mr Mabunda joined the Department of Public Enterprises 
when you were in the office of the Minister.   
MR MONTANA:  Minister, indeed so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of public enterprises. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, okay I think you are right,   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  So we now know that Mr 
Mabunda was never in the Department of Transport.  
20 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And his, Mr Molefe says he received 
one of the tenders for the taxi recapitalisation program.  Is 
that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 197 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I just ask you on that, did you 
know Mr Mabunda?  I am talking around the time that he 
received the taxi ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I have now I knew him from the 
Department of Public Enterprises.  So by the time I was at 
transport, I had already met him.  I knew him from there.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  How close were you and he at the 
Department of Public Enterprise? 
MR MONTANA:  No, we were never close Chair.  We were 
employees.  Of course the nature of the Department of 
10 
Public Enterprises was at that time, I do not know today, a 
very small department.  So the ministry and the department 
were almost operating from same floors.  
 
So it was very small, because it was actually an 
office before it became a department.  So we knew each 
other Chair, but we were not what you call friends, no.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then at paragraph 51 Mr Molefe says: 
 
“A few months later Mr Radebe appoint ...” 
 
Sorry, the one I forgot is that you resigned from the 
Department of Transport in 2006.  Is that correct?   
20 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright.  
CHAIRPERSON:  That must be the Department of Public 
Enterprises or not? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no.  For me it is the Department of 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 198 of 335 
 
Transport Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, because you have moved?   
MR MONTANA:  Ja, I had moved to the Department of 
Transport.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  The Department of Transport.  Chair, can I 
just ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Just a factual issue.  Where it says that 
he left.  We corrected that, that Mr Mabunda left the 
10 
Department 
of 
Public 
Enterprises 
to 
pursue 
private 
business interest, and then but as far as I know, he 
actually went to join the provincial Department of Economic 
Development under Minister Tjabane in Limpopo before he 
went to private business. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay, no sure.  
MR MONTANA:  Ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right.  If we said later that that 
should I mean the, I understand you were trying to show 
20 
that there is no link between the leaving and the private 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  Interest ja, no I think that should have 
happened at a later stage.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Then at paragraph 51, Mr 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 199 of 335 
 
Molefe says: 
 
“A few months later Minister Radebe appointed 
Mr Montana as CEO of the South African Rail 
Commuter Corporation.” 
 
Is that correct?   
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  How much, how long after you left the 
Department of Transport? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I actually never left.  As deputy 
director general I was responsible for a number of 
10 
functions, RE busses and taxis.  When I was doing the taxi 
recap, I of course I had attacks on me.  With my house 
being attacked by some taxi war lords or whatever, and of 
course the state hesitated to provide security for me.  
 
I then resigned.  Of course I was overseeing the 
very process of the consolidation of passenger rail entities 
and I was serving on the board of the SRCC as well, being 
DDG.  So I left Chair.  I then resigned and I said I am 
resigning with immediate effect.  
 
So I then sent, actually I did not even sent a letter.  
20 
I think I sent an SMS to say my house was attacked by 
guys with AK47’s and everything.  I am no longer coming 
because the minister had instructed that I be protected but 
that protection is not forthcoming.  
 
So I am leaving.  It was during his budget vote of 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 200 of 335 
 
transport.  I did not even go to Cape Town.  I just decided 
that, but a few ... a month later Chair, the minister said to 
me but we have not accepted your resignation.  You are a 
member of the board.  
 
Of SRCC and the board had asked that whilst they 
are busy searching for a CEO, you come and help us for a 
period of 18 months.  So they asked me to do three things 
in three months.  Complete the consolidation of rail, of rail 
entities.  
 
That is why we form PRASA Chair.  Prepare for the 
10 
2010 FIFA World Cup and to save Metro Rail from collapse.  
That is what I was asked to do.  They say instead of you 
leaving, help the board with this task, but of course later I 
became, it was then taken to cabinet that I stayed there 
and I stayed there for another seven years.  
 
So I spent nine and a half years in the rail spacing.  
So I never left, actually despite the fact that I have 
resigned because of the violence that was happening at 
that time.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But were you paid for the month that you 
20 
were not working, thinking you had resigned and then they 
told you, and they did not accept your resignation? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I think ... I am not sure, but I need 
to check especially considering the tax implications of your 
question Chair.  Chair, I think ...[intervenes]  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 201 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You want to exercise your right to remain 
silent? 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair, on this particular one Chair.  
I did not declare it upfront.  Chair, I cannot recall exactly 
the details, but I had resigned, but I ended up not leaving 
because of the situation and then I was tasked.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, well I was just raising it.  You know 
one can look at it at different levels, you say you resigned 
but you did not leave.  I understood you to be in effect 
saying after you sent that SMS of resignation you actually 
10 
did not go to work? 
MR MONTANA:  I did not go to work for ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  For a month or so. 
MR MONTANA:  Well, I do not think that it was a full month 
Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, more or less. 
MR MONTANA:  For about two, three weeks and I was told 
that we have never accepted your resignation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  We think you must, you serve on the 
20 
board, so go and help the board on this task. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, well so maybe there was no 
resignation but they applied the principle of no work, no 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 202 of 335 
 
pay.  
MR MONTANA:  Chair, even in that one I will be forced to 
pay back if I was paid, so I am very careful now, to agree 
with that response.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay, alright.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  May I just ask you, who was your 
predecessor at the SARC? 
MR MONTANA:  It was Mr Eddie Lekota, but at that time 
Chair he had left and we had a lady called, acting in the 
position called Ms Nellie Thlaba.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The reason I am asking is you might, 
you seem to have followed this when the speakers was 
here.  One of the questions was that the Chairperson, I 
mean the CEO of PRASA has to be approved by cabinet.  
Were you approved during the period when you were first 
appointed to PRASA or was it Minister Radebe’s decision? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, it was a cabinet decision, 
because I acted and in October 2007, then cabinet 
approved my appointment.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So your first appointment was an 
20 
acting ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  It was an elected position, ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just remember not to speak too far away 
from the mic.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please, sorry Chair.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 203 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then Mr Molefe says Mr Mabunda 
appears to have emerged as a service provider who was 
awarded contracts in around 2010 providing signal services 
and advice to PRASA.  Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  No, that is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then in the next sentence he 
says: 
 
“Mr Mabunda became a key role player in the 
multi-billion rand PRASA signalling program, 
10 
being appointed transaction advisor with Ms 
Brenda Marongeti through Siyaya Engineering 
Consultants.” 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair, I think this matter is in the 
public protector report as well, where the Mr Mabunda or 
him working with a German company called the German 
Rail Operators, Ditshabana, had tendered and won the 
tender and there was a complaint that they got the tender 
improperly and one of the things, positive things about the 
rail, it actually dismissed that part of the thing, saying that 
20 
allegation is not substantiated.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I wanted to say Mr Soni read that 
sentence of page 51.  You said that is true, but I wanted to 
check whether the part also that says appears to have 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 204 of 335 
 
emerged as a service provider.  You say it is also true or 
are you just talking about the fact that later he was 
awarded contracts in 2010? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair, the first one as I say was a 
signalling.  There was a transaction advisor for signalling. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  And let me explain, I do not know Chair if 
you will allow me to because we are going to deal with 
these things.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  But our relationship with Mr Mabunda 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, ja no that is fine.  You made 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  Because I think it is helpful for the 
commission and the questions that will come.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  Chair, the ... they tendered.  They won 
this thing.  We took a decision which was done by myself 
and the board at that time the Chair of the committee of 
20 
the board on this was Ms Bridgette Gasa.  We decided to 
say we have interacted with all these companies all over 
the world.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Which committee of the board was 
...[intervenes]  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 205 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  That is the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  The tender ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  No, the finance capital investment and 
procurement.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  Committee.  That what we need to do, we 
need to approach the Germans.  There was a letter that 
Siyaya had written to the then Minister of Transport, 
Minister Sibunda Bele at that time.  The letter was then 
forwarded to us at PRASA. 
10 
 
Where the Germans indicated to us what they have 
and that they have partnered with this company.  So I say 
no, that is good, but we want to see the Germans.  I 
travelled with Ms Gasa from the board.  We went then to 
see, we then took certain decisions in our discussions with 
the group. 
 
We say look, we are commencing with and I will 
explain at the end why I am explaining this to the 
commission.  We said PRASA is implementing a very 
complex modernisation program, yet it does not have the 
20 
skills to do so.  
 
Can we sign an agreement, and we signed a 
memorandum of agreement with the German.  On signalling 
of course they won a tender, so it was not an issue, but 
where you see them, and I think the other tenders you ask 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 206 of 335 
 
about Chair, is in respect of the what is it called? 
 
Of the depot modernisation program.  Where we are 
preparing for new trains.  The German support to us was 
invaluable Chair.  They help us with all the designs.  In 
PRASA, when we started PRASA, there were not even 
drawings, technical drawings for most of these facilities.  
 
[indistinct] Siyaba DB, had actually put a tender for 
the Braamfontein, after we signed an agreement they have 
also put the bid for the Braamfontein facility.  The 
Braamfontein depot. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Modernisation. 
MR MONTANA:  Which it is modernisation, which we 
discussed earlier on.  Now Chair, the CEO of PRASA 
technically comes and briefs me about the tenders that 
they were running.  I said but we have got a problem, 
because what you are giving us is not a railway solution, it 
is a construction.  
 
A depot looks, it looks like it is outside the railway, 
but it is an integral part of railway operations, including 
safety and operations.  So it tells us that in South Africa, 
20 
after we have done this bid, we actually do not have that 
company, the companies that understand that.  
 
That 
instead 
of 
appointing 
GB 
to 
build 
Braamfontein, are you also going to appoint them to build 
Durban, Salt River and Cape Town as well as Wolmerton in 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 207 of 335 
 
Pretoria?  We have got a memorandum with them.  Let us 
agree that they then provide us with the engineers to do 
the drawings for us so that when you go out on tender, so 
the relationship Chair has to do with that.  
 
Of course, people have tried to link it and say no, 
Mabunda and Montana public enterprises and all of those 
things.  So we live in a world where we are no longer 
supposed to know people Chair or that should not have 
been employed.  
 
So Siyaya DB, what has happened I said in my 
10 
statement Mr Soni that six years after I have left, there is 
no depot that has been built, and Chair you heard the 
testimony of Judge Makubela here.  Remember the issue 
had to do with the payment of Siyaya and that dispute.  
 
The reality of the matter Chair, because of what we 
are doing to ourselves as a country, we have a situation 
where PRASA and Siyaya are in dispute, that all the 
drawings, the technical drawings and the plans, are sitting 
with people and they say okay, we have done this work, we 
have not been paid.  
20 
 
We are keeping these things, because you do not 
appreciate the work.  The essence of that is that PRASA 
today is actually left with the situation because you say 
everything is irregular, everything is corrupt.  So here is a 
young organisation.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 208 of 335 
 
 
It cannot implement anything today Chair, because 
for I think the dispute that this commission was discussing 
was about 80 million, 80 86 million.  Yet we cannot rule out 
infrastructure 
worth 
billions, 
precisely 
because 
the 
technical, and that is the reason why we needed that 
partnership with the Germans.  
 
There is collapse, PRASA will not be able to 
implement anything Chair, unless if they knew its board 
and management, it does not have to be with Siyaya.  They 
need to appoint a strategic partner that would assist them 
10 
in doing that technical work, even before they go out on 
tender. 
 
Because if you go out on tender, you do not have 
this detailed work.  you do not have the bill of quantities, 
you do not have the technical drawings.  You then have a 
lot of variations, because you cannot even control the cost 
in this process Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  So you, the point you are 
making is that is how you got to know Mr Mabunda more? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair.  I am saying when he was 
20 
employed at public enterprises ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  I came to know him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  And he left, he disappeared.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 209 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  And I think that is when he was working in 
Limpopo for Minister Tjabane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  And then he came back.  Of course he was 
part of, it was not his company but another company he 
was part of, called I cannot recall the scrapping agencies 
of all taxis, and then of course the tenders that were 
processed.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Soni? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What was his skills training, was he 
an engineer? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no.  He was not an engineer.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, and his position at Siyaya?   
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I think my understanding, he is the 
founder of Siyaya.  Which was I think that is training based 
on what he was doing at the Department of Transport.  He 
was dealing with the financials of state owned enterprises.  
He belonged to a division called entity over sight where 
entities reporting to the public enterprises, Eskom ... so 
20 
those would be the teams that analyses the balance sheet, 
what level of recapital ... so I think it comes more on the 
finance side than on the engineering side.  
 
But he had, Siyaya had a lot of engineers from 
South 
Africa, 
and 
they 
partnered 
with 
the 
German 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 210 of 335 
 
company.  The German railway, the PRASA or Transnet 
version on the German side.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And, but the company was called 
according to what Mr Molefe reflects, it was called Siyaya 
Engineering Consultancy. 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, I think there are different 
companies.  There is Siyaya Engineering, I think that they 
have got the Siyaya Group.  I think they call it S Group. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  S Group, yes.  
MR MONTANA:  But they had in a relationship with PRASA 
10 
they were primarily in the partnership between Siyaya DB, 
which was a specific partnership that they had Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And his position in the company was 
CEO? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I do not know exactly.  I cannot 
confirm that but I know he is a founder.  He was the 
founder.  Whether he was Chairman or President or CEO, I 
cannot confirm that.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then Mr Molefe says: 
 
“Such services included signalling, fuel supply 
20 
and other engineering services through the 
PRASA 
technical 
division 
and 
then 
Mthimkhulu.” 
 
Now is that correct, that the services included 
signalling, fuel supply and other engineering services? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 211 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, yes I can confirm with signalling, I 
spoke about it, there was a tender and they got the tender.  
With fuel, Siyaya got the tender and with other engineering 
services 
and 
Daniel 
Mthimkhulu 
Chair, 
our 
technical 
division Chair was the one doing most of that work.  
 
So I do not have each and every detail on some of 
the projects they were doing there.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But would Mr Mthimkhulu be the 
person in charge of the technical division?  
MR MONTANA:  No Chair.  You see, that is why this thing 
10 
of Mthimkhulu, the way it is written in this page, I do not 
know.  Can I have one minute to just explain? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  No, no, no please and it is going 
to come up as you will know in the Swifambo matter, so 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  In the Swifambo matter.  No Chair, then I 
think perhaps let us leave it at that Chair.  I will come back 
to it and deal with ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  I will deal with it at that time, yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, that is fine.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He says: 
 
“Between 2012 and 2015 through consultancy 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 212 of 335 
 
services and fuel, Mr Mabunda’s Siyaya Group 
earned approximately 900 million rand from 
PRASA.” 
 
Is that about right? 
MR MONTANA:  Ja Chair, I think so. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And I am just saying this, I know a 
figure of a billion rand also has been given by I think Mr 
Dingiswayo in his affidavit.  
MR MONTANA:  Is that the value of contracts or the actual 
payment? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, it is the payments made to 
Siyaya, because you would see here there is, he says 
earned approximately 900 ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  Yes.  I think Chair, if we sign the 
document, if I remember very well, because I participated 
in the liquidation hearing of Swifambo was called as a 
witness there, the amount of ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well, of Siyaya. 
MR MONTANA:  No, Siyaya, sorry.  Of Siyaya.  My 
apologies Chair.  Of Siyaya.  The amount was in the order 
20 
of about 850 million.  So I think maybe Mr Molefe is not 
far, far from the point in terms of the amount.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Alright.  Then he makes the 
point which I think 
you would sympathise, well not 
sympathise, but you would accept that he was ahead of the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 213 of 335 
 
struggle and he was not being ostracised.  I mean I know 
he gives a different reason, but is that about right?   
 
That, no. 
MR MONTANA:  Mr Molefe was never ostracised.  He did 
wrong things and that is why he created many enemies as 
well.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. But for that, was he ostracised or 
you say that did not happen? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, he was not ostracises.  I think a 
lot of, I think there was a lot Chair, where people realised 
10 
that Mr Molefe was actually how would I say Chair?  He 
basically led a double life for lack of a better word.  On the 
one hand ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But I see here Mr Montana that he says 
he was ostracised by his own comrades and I am 
wondering whether you know all his comrades and you 
know that they did not ostracise him.  
MR MONTANA:  Chair, maybe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You might not know.  Ja, you might not 
know.  
20 
MR MONTANA:  Exactly Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It would be different if he was saying he 
was ostracised at PRASA or maybe in circles that you 
know, that you ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  But he mentioned to be specific Chair, in 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 214 of 335 
 
his testimony firstly he says parliament did nothing.  He 
then said he briefed the AND national executive, I do not 
know of course about, I was not part of that briefing and 
thirdly Chair, he mentioned Minister [indistinct] and I think 
both the minister, the former minister and the deputy 
minister came, and actually refuted the case that he made.  
 
So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  So I do not think so Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, my understanding in regard to 
10 
parliament and Minister Phitso, was not that he was 
accusing parliament or Minister Phitso of ostracising him, I 
think my understanding was that in regard to parliament or 
the relevant portfolio committee his complaint was were 
they interested in the fight against corruption that the 
board was doing, and even when he appealed to them, to 
intervene and do their job, they were not doing their job.  I 
think that was, so maybe ostricization relates to outside of 
those institutions.   
MR MONTANA:  Chair, can I give you a good example, so 
20 
to understand Popo Molefe? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Let me put it in Phedi and I put it in, you 
know there are times when you say in your father ’s kraal 
you have got sheep, and then every day you come and 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 215 of 335 
 
check your sheep, you find that one sheep is missing and 
you take the dogs, you go around the forest to check, there 
should be something eating my sheep.   
 
You go out there Chair, you do not look here inside.  
Okay.  [Vernacular – 00:35:00].   
CHAIRPERSON:  But you must remember to say that in 
English. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair, let me say it in English.  That 
when you look after your father ’s ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I also do not understand that.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, so when you look at the case of 
Popo Molefe, I am saying Mr Soni, it is a situation where 
you have got sheep at home, at your father ’s homestead.  
Every morning you wake up, there is one sheep missing 
and then you take the dogs and the boys, you go out.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no I heard that part because you said 
it in English. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  There was the other part, or was or you 
already translated? 
20 
MR MONTANA:  I am trans, yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no, no, no.  I think  ...[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:  But then one day you discover but I do not 
see even trail of blood, of anything dragging these sheep 
and then one day you pull off the wool from one of the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 216 of 335 
 
sheeps only to find that you have got a wolf in your 
father ’s kraal.   
 
So he is eating the sheep Chair.  Lots of people 
have been able to see through Mr Molefe and I think that 
for someone who has made such a huge contribution, I 
think that he needs to reflect himself.  He cannot fight 
corruption and still have, receiving money from, through 
his foundations.  
 
Those things do not go hand in hand Chair.  So he 
would be ostracised.  I do not doubt about it Chair.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, as you please Chairperson.  Mr 
Montana, in paragraph 55 and 56 the dealings, or he 
indicates that he is now going to deal with the Swifambo 
contract which he starts off with at paragraph 57 on page 
17.  Are you there? 
MR MONTANA:  Paragraph 57? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Page, paragraph 57 yes sorry. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja, I am there.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ja.  
20 
MR MONTANA:  Page 17. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So I will just read to you and you tell 
me whether you agree with his summary.  He says: 
 
“I set out the extent of the maladministration 
as found by the courts in respect of the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 217 of 335 
 
contract that PRASA concluded with Swifambo.  
The position in respect of this contract may be 
summarised as follows.  First one, the board 
applied to the High Court to declare the 
contract invalid and set it aside on account on 
onerous irregularities, primarily the honest and 
corrupt conduct of PRASA officials.” 
 
You have read the papers.  You have read the 
papers because you applied to be an amicus in the High 
Court, is that correct? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair.  Indeed.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now is that a correct summary of what 
he says the case was about? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I think in the application by PRASA 
signed by Mr Molefe, that is what they set out.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  And I tried Chair to apply as a friend of 
the Court but my application was not accepted and I think 
Chair it is very unfortunate.  It is ...[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry, I did not hear you? 
20 
MR MONTANA:  I say it was very unfortunate.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Because having the court dealt with the 
matter where there were huge misrepresentation, all the 
facts were not placed before the courts, but we respect 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 218 of 335 
 
judgment by all courts Chair, but the judgment in my 
affidavit, I go into detail about this particular judgment 
Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I then say, but okay.  So I mean 
that is more or less what PRASA, the new board of PRASA 
argued and alleged in the Swifambo affidavit.  
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then he says: 
 
“Francis J set aside the contract.” 
 
That is correct as well? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then he says: 
 
“Swifambo appealed to the Supreme Court of 
Appeal which dismissed the appeal.” 
 
That is correct, is it not? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then he says: 
 
“The Constitutional Court refused to grand 
Swifambo leave to appeal.” 
 
That too is correct? 
20 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then he says: 
 
“Both the High Courts and the SCA were highly 
critical of the conduct of PRASA officials, 
especially Mr Montana.” 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 219 of 335 
 
 
Now I just want to say to you that this is what has 
been, oh sorry you wanted to comment? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, proceed.  I want to make a 
comment on the two judgments and ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  So I will tell you what the 
affidavit does or what has been done in the affidavit.  Mr 
Molefe has extracted findings of manually the Supreme 
Court of Appeal and set them out in his affidavit.  
MR MONTANA:  Ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Virtually word for word as to what the 
10 
findings are.  
MR MONTANA:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what I want to do is deal with 
each of those findings as made by the SCA.  So can I say, 
and if we want to look at the judgments, they are available, 
but for present purposes there is no need to.  You may 
obviously refer to any other parts of the judgment, or 
outside the judgments that you want.  
 
But can I say, this is what he says at paragraph 59.  
He says: 
20 
 
“It is not necessary for me to repeat what was 
said by those courts, except to refer this 
commission to some of the factors that led the 
High Court and the Supreme Court of Appeal 
to conclude that the award of the tender was 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 220 of 335 
 
corrupt.” 
 
Now in the High Court matter which is not referred 
to here, in paragraph 3 of his judgment, Justice Francis 
says that you had applied to be an amicus but he 
dismissed the application.  That is in his main judgment, 
the one that went ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  No, no that is correct Chair.  I agree with 
that, ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I just want to ask you one question on 
that.  He dismissed your application to be an amicus.  Did 
10 
you take that decision on appeal or did you apply for leave 
to appeal? 
MR MONTANA:  I applied for leave, which he also 
dismissed Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Did you apply to the Supreme Court of 
Appeal for leave to appeal? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I need, I did appeal the decision but 
let me just, because ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no, no I understand.  
MR MONTANA:  I did appeal the decision. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, okay and I mean that clearly 
shows that you did not agree with what he said and you 
wanted a higher court to make the deformation. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am talking about the amicus 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 221 of 335 
 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  No, no, no both the two judgments Chair 
...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  I did not agree with them, I still reject 
them and actually in my affidavit I deal with them.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, sure.  
MR MONTANA:  But I do not know whether you want me to 
deal with them now.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well, let us place on record what the 
10 
Court found.  
MR MONTANA:  Found, ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then we can ... you will have your 
chance and but before you do that, I will want to point out 
some parameters that we would have to set for that.  Now 
in paragraph 59.1 he says that: 
 
“At paragraph 10 ...” 
 
Because he puts right at the end the paragraphs, at 
paragraph 59.1 he says: 
 
“Swifambo, the Supreme Court of Appeal found 
20 
that Swifambo’s bid did not comply with the 
requirements of the RFP in several respects 
that is not having a tax clearance certificate or 
a VAT number.” 
 
Now that is a finding, I am just placing that on 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 222 of 335 
 
record.  You have read the judgment or can I just say that 
these are the, I can say to you I checked what is contained 
in the affidavit against what the Supreme Court judgment 
says.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Soni, in so far as these are 
findings that are in the judgments ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You can just ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Read them.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, because ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Obviously he is not going to say those 
are not findings.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  He will deal with them when he comments 
on the judgment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But he will indicate I think when you have 
read, I think it is about what, three or four more?  Three, 
four more under that paragraph 59? 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And then he can indicate, he can confirm 
that he is aware that it, they are findings that were made in 
the judgment.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 223 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So that is the first finding.  The 
second finding is that Swifambo did not submit their 
BBBEE plan for goods and services it would procure for the 
duration of the contract.  The third finding is or what, the 
third finding that Mr Molefe refers to is: 
 
“Swifambo 
did 
not 
comply 
with 
the 
local 
content requirement as the locomotives were 
to be designed and manufactured in Spain and 
he 
did 
not 
provide 
evidence 
of 
previous 
10 
experience in the rail industry.” 
 
Then the next matter he refers to which is at 
paragraph 12 of the judgment: 
 
“Swifambo 
did 
not 
demonstrate 
it 
had 
experience in the supply of locomotives which 
capacity to manage a project of the size put 
out to tender.” 
 
Now can I just ask you this Mr Montana, is it correct 
that Swifambo had been formed a few months prior to the 
RFP being issued, or around that period?  Is that correct? 
20 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, I do not know when Swifambo 
was formed, the date or the period before that, but with 
bids of this nature, that is what happened because if a 
company bids, either an established company or people 
who form either JV’s, it happens.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 224 of 335 
 
 
It is not unusual.  Actually that is what happens.  If 
you look at what Gabela is.  Gabela is an [indistinct].  But 
it then say we want to bid, let us form a company.  This is 
a special purpose vehicle.  To bid for that project.  
 
Okay.  You then assess the capacity of that.  you 
for example in the Gabela case you will ask for what we 
call parent company guarantees, to say but this is a 
special purpose vehicle, if we want guarantees, who is 
going to stand for this guarantee? 
 
So Chair, it has happened.  In fact, it actually 
10 
shows lack of understanding of what he has been saying 
about this and the drama that has been created, but I will 
comment more on it when I give my overall comment to 
assist the commission to have an appreciation of what is 
happening here.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright.  Then at paragraph 60 he 
says that at paragraph ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni, I take it Mr Montana you accept 
20 
that the, that 59.1 to 59.4 are findings or conclusions made 
in the judgment? 
MR MONTANA:  59.1? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, to 59.4. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja no Chair, I accept that.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 225 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes ja. 
MR MONTANA:  I do not agree with them, but I accept it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no I accept that you do not agree.  
Just to know that you know that they are made.  
MR MONTANA:  I have read the judgment Chair, I have 
seen that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then he says again in respect of 
what he said at paragraph 13: 
 
“Despite 
the 
[indistinct] 
and 
other 
10 
irregularities, PRASA’s BEC recommended that 
the BAC, to the BAC that the bid be awarded 
to Swifambo and at its meeting of the 24 t h of 
March 2012, the board approved Swifambo as 
the preferred bidder.” 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now the contract between PRASA and 
Swifambo was concluded on the 25 t h of March 2013 and the 
relevance of the dates I can just point out is this, that the 
recommendation to the BAC is made on the 24 t h of March 
20 
2012.  It is a year and a day later that the contract 
between PRASA and Swifambo was complete.  
 
You accept that? 
MR MONTANA:  I accept that Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, and then it was only on the 4 t h of 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 226 of 335 
 
July 2013 that a contract for the supply of locomotives was 
concluded between Swifambo and Vossloh.  Now Vossloh 
as I understand it was the Spanish company that would 
manufacture the locomotives? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then at paragraph 61 Ms Molefe says: 
 
“In its judgment ...” 
 
And this is in respect of paragraphs 4 and 5 of the 
judgment: 
 
“The 
SCA 
noted 
the 
role 
of 
Mr 
Daniel 
10 
Mthimkhulu, 
the 
executive 
manager 
engineering services as follows.  In July 2011 
he recommended to Mr Montana that the then 
board, sorry and the then board that PRASA 
sources a 100 locomotives to replace its 
outdated fleet at a cost of five billion rand over 
a period of six years.” 
 
Now that is the finding of the board.  He says: 
 
“A RFP was then published in November 2011 
to 
purchase 
some 
88 
locomotives. 
 
The 
20 
specifications 
of 
the 
locomotives 
to 
be 
supplied were drawn up by Mr Mthimkhulu.” 
 
Then at paragraph 62 Mr Montana, I mean Mr 
Molefe points out: 
 
“Of Mr Mthimkhulu the Supreme Court of 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 227 of 335 
 
Appeal 
said 
the 
following. 
 
He 
had 
no 
experience 
in 
the 
subject. 
 
It 
had 
been 
appointed to the position in PRASA by Mr 
Montana in 2010 and had a meteoric rise 
through the ranks with a meteoric salary hike 
to match it.  Mr Mthimkhulu claimed to have 
diplomas in engineering and later a doctorate.  
In fact, he had no qualification at all.” 
 
That is word for word what the Supreme Court of 
Appeal said in its judgment.  At paragraph 63 Mr Molefe 
10 
points out: 
 
“The SCA then note ...” 
 
And that is at paragraph 7: 
 
“That 
the 
specifications 
drawn 
up 
by 
Mr 
Mthimkhulu contravene various requirements 
of PRASA’s procurement policy.  They matched 
those of the locomotives manufactured by a 
Spanish company, Vossloh es Spana, SAU 
which in May 2011 had met recommendations 
on PRASA’s needs.” 
20 
 
Then the paragraph 63 goes on: 
 
“The SCA agreed with Francis J that Mr 
Mthimkhulu had tailored the specifications to 
include 
several 
features 
that 
were 
of 
no 
relevance to PRASA’s needs, so as to benefit 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 228 of 335 
 
Vossloh and thus Swifambo.  Accordingly the 
tender process was corrupt ...” 
 
And 
that 
finding 
was 
made 
at 
paragraph 
24.  
Francis J had, Mr Molefe goes on at paragraph 64: 
 
“Francis J had found that Mr Mthimkhulu had 
behaved dishonestly.  In the appeal before the 
SCA, even Swifambo did not deny this.” 
 
This is what the SCA says in its judgment.  The SCA 
also found that Mr Montana had been a party to Mr 
Mthimkulo’s conduct.  That finding is made at paragraph 8 
10 
of its judgment.  In addition, at paragraph 30, it says: 
 
“Like Francis J did earlier, that Swifambo was 
party to a fronting practice.” 
 
Then at paragraph 65: 
 
“In 2000 ...” 
 
Sorry.  That is the extent to which he deals Mr 
Molefe deals with the Swifambo judgment.  Now you can 
accept and I think you do, that those were the findings but 
you want to comment on those findings.  Is that correct?  
MR MONTANA:  Chair, listening to the reading of the 
20 
findings by the Court, it gets so scary and if you do not 
know the facts of this matter, and that is why Chair when 
PRASA went, and Chair I accept that I am not here to 
review this matter.  
 
I will just state the facts that, because I think the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 229 of 335 
 
Courts got it wrong.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  And Chair, I am going to say something 
which, and say it with a level of seriousness, because it is 
in my affidavit.  Both Courts ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Just repeat what you said? 
MR MONTANA:  I am saying that I am going to say 
something 
on 
this 
issue, 
more 
specifically 
the 
two 
judgments.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  Which I think that, is something that I take 
seriously.  But if I could be allowed some time to deal with 
this issue and assist this commission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni, you had come to a point where 
he can deal with, comment on the judgments.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, except that Mr Montana this is a 
commission of inquiry.  It is bound by judgments of Courts.  
Now you may have a criticism of the judgment, but we, I 
just want to point out so we are not going to go into areas 
that are not going to be, because I will say immediately to 
20 
the Chairperson, who is of course the Deputy Chief 
Justice, and he knows the law better than I do. 
 
I will say to him that we are bound in terms of the 
constitution to accept what the Court says.  You may 
comment on it, but I am posing that very important 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 230 of 335 
 
guideline for two reasons.  One is as a commission, we 
owe a duty to our courts to respect the constitution and 
therefore their judgment.  
 
I just want to point this out to you.  Our greatest 
president ever, President Mandela, when he was faced with 
a judgment adverse to him, he said I will comply, even if it 
means I will go and have to testify when all his lawyers 
said he should not.  
 
Now 
that 
is 
the 
respect 
that 
the 
constitution 
demands, and I am just placing that on record, so I am not 
10 
going to continually interrupt you.  I have that duty to the 
commission, to the constitution and to the country and of 
course to the judiciary.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You may comment, ja? 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed, indeed.  Thanks very much for 
that.  You see, you are making life difficult for me.  
Because all the things I am about to say Chair, I do not 
want it to be viewed as if I do not respect the judicial, I do 
not respect the Courts and all of those things.  
 
Chair, when PRASA went to Court, and again I 
20 
accept the fact that we are not here to review the this 
particular, the Court judgments and all of those things, and 
I take into account that these are civil matters.  So the 
Courts 
also 
took 
decisions 
based 
on 
balance 
of 
probabilities.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 231 of 335 
 
 
Chair, when PRASA went to Court, I read the paper.  
The PRASA paper.  I was shocked with these papers, the 
amount if misrepresentation and I went to Court.  I said 
look, as a former CEO of PRASA all these findings that 
they, because they emerge from the, what is it called? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavits.  
MR MONTANA:  The affidavit that was signed by Mr Molefe 
on behalf of, anonymously denying the Courts of material 
fact which if they were placed before the Court, I am 
convinced Chair, that this judgment we would not have.  
10 
That is the first issue Chair I want to say.  
 
I said as a former CEO of PRASA, I think I know the 
ins and outs of this matter.  I want to assist the Court.  I do 
not want to support this side or that side, but some of the 
things, and I said if indeed some of the allegations that are 
being made against me are true, then I should actually 
have been joined as a respondent and I was not.  
 
I think it was, I felt terrible when I was denied the 
opportunity to assist the Court in that matter.  Chair, there 
are certain things that are just not true, which the Court 
20 
has accepted and hopefully that when they are pursued 
probably by other agencies, I mean the first issue about, 
we know that there is a general use of the word corruption 
in the Francis J matter, judgment.  
 
I say Francis J when he dealt with the issue about, 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 232 of 335 
 
and I think Mr Soni touched on it, about the issue of 
admissibility of hearsay under what circumstances, I look 
at that Chair.  It was a serious error in my view, and I have 
consulted other people and asked, because it gave rise to 
this.  
 
Secondly, the issues about Daniel Mthimkhulu, 
firstly Daniel Mthimkhulu was an executive manager in the 
PRASA rail division.  But so much power has been given to 
this man Chair, as if he was so powerful.  He reported to a 
CEO of the rail division. 
10 
 
People will tell you that there was this powerful guy 
reporting to Montana, even had found its way through the 
judgment.  Chair, let me just highlight three things from the 
Francis J judgment.  The first, and I will tell you what other 
additional issue.  
 
The reason for excluding me from that matter, I do 
not think, I have gone out to check, I am not sure that they 
are being sound.  Some of the things that have been 
accepted by the Courts, could actually could have been 
tested.  
20 
 
For example, it is being alleged that Mr Molefe said 
that PRASA at that time changes procurement strategy so 
that Swifambo can represent an outright purchase.  Chair, 
we know even from the bidding process that that is 
factually incorrect.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 233 of 335 
 
 
In fact other companies, General Electric is another 
bidder that was participating in that process.  He submitted 
an outright purchase that is there, and I put it in my 
affidavit so that I can assist the Court.  So I was dismissed 
and that fact, left out.  
 
So the Court is left with one version on which to 
make its decision, that only Swifambo was given, was 
treated fairly, what is it called?  Was given the privilege to 
... it is not correct Chair.  The, I presented facts for 
example on the bid, on the briefing, compulsory briefing 
10 
session. 
 
It actually shows that all bidders, including those 
that did not bid, were given the opportunity to do all of 
those things that were there.  Again, if that fact is not 
before the Court, the Court will work on the basis that is 
before it.  
 
So I am trying to Mr Soni, to go around so that I am 
not seen to be attacking the judiciary, to take a more light 
approach to this issue.  Thirdly Chair, it is not true that 
Daniel Mthimkhulu wrote this specification.  PRASA had a 
20 
committee. 
 
 
Daniel Mthimkhulu was the head of executive, he 
was the head engineering services in our range division.  
So this team PRASA had engineering functions in its 
different divisions.  On the technical side, in the rail side 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 234 of 335 
 
as well as in its property side.  
 
So Daniel was a Chair of this particular committee, 
but he did not draft the specifications.  We actually had 
engineers who specialises in locomotives and everything 
involved in that process and in my affidavit I provide the 
names of that. 
 
So the Court had put a lot of emphasis.  Mr Molefe 
says in his affidavit the Court says Daniel was dishonest 
and, was dishonest and Swifambo did not oppose, but 
Chair, Swifambo cannot oppose something about PRASA.  
10 
The internal matters of PRASA because they know nothing 
about that.  
 
So I think it is unfair in fact to expect Swifambo to 
talk about internal PRASA matters.  Let me add Chair, two 
important matters.  You know we are making a mistake 
Chair.  If you cancel Swifambo, I think you must cancel 
Gabela.  
 
Because we are dealing right in our, and I took the 
legal advice.  It was written by Mazwai, Dolah Mazwai and 
I attached it as part of the thing there.  It actually says that 
20 
most of the issues that are regarded as irregularities, 
actually PRASA did not ask for them and you can see that 
some of the things that Mr Molefe is talking about, were 
actually afterthoughts Chair.  
 
Because at the time you would recall that even the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 235 of 335 
 
PPPFA was not applicable to PRASA, because PRASA and 
other state owned enterprises were exempt from this 
particular issue.  When Swifambo Chair put a bid, I hear 
that there was no capacity.  
 
The head of Swifambo is an engineer.  Oswald 
Mashabo is an engineer.  There were four other entities 
other than what is it called?  Oswald Swifambo, Oswald 
Mashaba.  Other entities which are doing work in the rail 
space Chair, and they have never been mentioned because 
it disprove the notion that you have an entity that did not 
10 
have capacity.  
 
Chair, the most important thing that South Africa 
had to decide on, with regard to this locomotive, PRASA I 
think it was buying these locomotives for its long distance, 
88 locomotives.  Where should it build these locomotives?  
Did it have the quantities to build a factory? 
 
For example to build this locomotive.  The big 
answer is no, PRASA could not have done that.  The other 
company 
that 
uses 
locomotives, 
PRASA 
requires 
locomotives for 8% of its business.  Transnet requires 
20 
locomotives for 100% of its business.  
 
So 
we 
can 
see 
that 
Transnet 
would 
buy 
locomotives, or even build the platform, but PRASA and 
Transnet are not using same locomotives.  A passenger 
locomotive and a frail locomotive are not one and the same 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 236 of 335 
 
thing.  
 
So when PRASA went on tender for 88, it ended up 
contracting on 70.  70 locomotives cannot sustain Chair, 
even a factory.  So we did not specify Chair, in the bid and 
when I say we I am referring to at the time I was at 
PRASA.  I am referring to our procurement teams, not me 
personally. 
 
They did not specify in the RFP the fact that you 
have to structure your relationship.  The bid provide us 
with a solution.  So the company structured it themselves 
10 
in many different ways and I just find it odd that you then 
take and punish them for the manner that we have, but 
what is interesting Chair, is that in this submission by Mr 
Molefe, he talks about the bid adjudication committee.  
 
We have heard that the Courts talks about Montana.  
If there is one bid where I never even played a part, it is 
this bid Chair, because it was over three billion rand, over 
my delegation.  It went to the board, to the bid evaluation 
committee. 
 
It then went to the bid adjudication committee who 
20 
was Chaired by Mr Phiro Holero who came here and never 
shared with this commission the fact that he was the Chair 
and had recommended to the board.  Ms Matangoya was 
part of the bid adjudication committee, who was here.  
 
So, and this adjudication committee, one of its 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 237 of 335 
 
major issues before they recommend to the board is to 
advise the board why, for example to say we have picked 
up certain, either non-compliance or irregular issues.  We 
think you must approve subject to the following conditions 
or we have disqualified these people because ... they did 
not do that Chair.  
 
[indistinct] Matango and others, they recommended 
to the board.  When the board of PRASA decided on this, 
none of these issues were there Chair.  Now Mr Molefe 
write about these issues, as if he only learnt about it after.  
10 
 
Chair, Mr Molefe in 2014 in September, travelled to 
Spain.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I do not want, remember we are 
dealing with the judgment here, dealing with Mr Molefe. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja, no, no it is true sir, I hear that, but I 
am just illustrating a point here.  He said to the Court when 
he 
went 
to 
Spain 
and 
he 
delivered 
speeches 
on 
locomotives, he said certain things Chair which even 
contradict to what he presented. 
 
So the Francis J judgment, which were I think that 
20 
even from the beginning the judge defined himself that the 
Court has got the responsibility to fight corruption.  Which 
I think is very important Chair, that the Court has got a 
duty to fight corruption where evidence suggest that.  
 
In the Swifambo matter, I want to argue Chair and I 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 238 of 335 
 
will still argue to, till things change.  In the Swifambo 
matter, you may have identified those issues, but I think 
the Court went beyond his duties when he declared the 
Court, that contract to be corrupt.  
 
Chair, and I am saying that after I have now had at 
the benefit of even seeing the evidence that was presented 
before this commission, by the liquidators of Swifambo.  I 
think Chair, mister ... was it Sacks?   
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
Mr 
Sacks 
was 
the 
forensic 
investigator.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  The forensic investigation, and Mr Mula I 
think. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Mula was the ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  Indeed, they came and presented Chair 
and they gave the numbers.  Those numbers, they tell us 
two important things Chair.  That none of that money that 
you have seen flowing, number one has flown to PRASA 
people.  
 
That is the first issue and it is very interesting that 
in corruption because who is supposed to be paid?  Is the 
20 
one who award the contract, who does not exist.  That is 
the first issue.  The second thing Chair, I think you made 
the point to say there is this 3.5 billion rand contract, okay.  
 
Chair, PRASA spent on only 2.6 billion rand and 
when you analyse the numbers Chair, out of those numbers 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 239 of 335 
 
1.9 
billion 
are 
used. 
 
I 
use 
approximate 
numbers.  
Approximately 1.9 billion of that amount went to buy the 
transition components and everything.  300 million went on 
tax.  
 
Another 100 million goes onto issues of custom and 
the transportation of these locomotives.  We are sitting in 
the situation where the country makes noise about 2.6 
billion rand corruption when in fact the money that went to 
the directors of Swifambo, it is quite clear that we talk in 
the region of about 2.8, 280 million rand Chair that is 
10 
there.  
 
The big question is are the directors of Swifambo, 
because remember Swifambo had delivered already 13 
trains Chair.  They have built another seven that is on its 
way and they were in the process of building seven.  It is 
not a contract, I have heard this commission dealing with 
contracts where people took money and disappeared.  
 
Not in this particular one Chair.  There was no 
corruption in this particular issue and when I read the 
judgment, I expected Francis J Chair, to say we think that 
20 
Mr Montana, Mr Mthimkhulu ... Mr Mthimkhulu Chair was 
one player.  
 
There was one engineer called Mr Ingwa Sekula 
who actually drafted the first RFI in this particular matter.  
Not Mr Mthimkhulu.  Now you can see that the Courts, 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 240 of 335 
 
because they have been presented ... if your own father 
say my son it is very bad, he comes to Court and say my 
son is very bad.  
 
Why would the Court not believe the father, and this 
is what has happened Chair.  In my affidavit, I raise a 
matter Chair about what I found when I went to apply, 
which I regarded as improper conduct on the part of 
Francis J Chair, I raise it in my thing, that Judge Francis J 
met with Mr Molefe during the hearing of the matter.  
 
I was there with my legal team and I have said in 
10 
my affidavit that the conduct was improper and that I am 
considering actually taking the matter with a judicial 
service 
committee, 
with 
rather 
the 
judicial 
conduct 
committee, so that they deal with this matter because I 
think his conduct Chair, in the middle of this issue, he has 
met in the morning the legal teams of the respective 
parties.  
 
Then when we took a break, Mr Molefe joined the 
process.  He met them in the Court.  So Chair, I am not 
surprised when I see a judge, when a judgment is written 
20 
in that way, but let me tell you something more Chair that 
will probably shock you. 
 
Mr Soni relies so much on the SCA judgment.  Let 
me tell you what the first, I was not even part of this.  The 
first, the first three paragraphs Chair, written by the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 241 of 335 
 
judges, the five judges, the full bench of five judges, they 
write a damning thing and they attack me Chair.  
 
I said well, I was the CEO of PRASA.  The judges 
maybe take it as it is not factual, it is what Mr Molefe said 
to the Court in the application.  Chair, when I prepared for 
my affidavit here, and it is in one of the letters I wrote to 
the secretary of the commission. 
 
The first three paragraphs of the SCA judgment, it 
comes from a report that is written by Basilius Consolium 
Professional Services, one of the companies contracted to 
10 
Werksmans.  It was not the judgment first, it was this 
report.  
 
Word for word Chair, in fact I intended that when I 
come to testify, I want to read to you this judgment and 
read to you this report.  I asked in my letter to the 
secretary, who wrote this report Chair.  How is it that the 
judges of the Supreme Court, five judges can actually write 
in exactly word by word, comma full stop everything.  
 
Chair, there are many other factual inaccuracies.  
You know what the judges in the SCA say Chair, they say 
20 
the PRASA locomotives have never even moved.  When 
this locomotives Chair were stopped and they have done 
76000 kilometres, the judges made a number of other 
things Chair and I do not want to pursue them.  
 
So I am saying that we have to respect the Courts.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 242 of 335 
 
But I see a judge in the middle of an important hearing, 
meet with one of the parties on the side.  I then have 
judges who write the judgment and is taking them from a 
report which actually is not a report that was tabled during, 
was presented as evidence.  
 
No, it is actually an intelligence report given by 
Basilius Consolium Professional Services.  I want anyone 
to tell me Chair.  So yes, we respect the Courts, but here 
we are seeing disgraceful conduct in my view.  We are 
seeing conduct that is inappropriate and we are seeing 
10 
judgments, and Chair I think that I am prepared there, it is 
in my affidavit.  
 
It is Annexure, one of the key annexures that I was 
submitting here.  Where I say look at these judges.  Look 
at the judgment.  We are being asked as a country if you 
have got evidence of improper conduct on the part of 
judges, present it to us.  
 
I included that report Chair and I included the 
judgment and you will see Chair, that this judgment, I 
reject it Chair and you know when the Constitutional Court 
20 
said it does not have a prospect of success because when 
it was looking at what happened with the judgment of 
Francis J ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  And depending on when it was, I might 
have been ...[intervenes] 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 243 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  Absolutely Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  On the panel. 
MR MONTANA:  Exactly.  Chair, I am not criticising the 
panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am just saying, I am not saying do 
not say what you want to say, I am just saying depending 
on which year it was, I may have been on the panel, ja.  
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair.  No, no but even with that 
Chair, I do not think the Constitutional Court would have 
looked at the two judgments and said there is nothing new 
10 
that will come out of this thing.  I respect that.  But what I 
am simply saying, I think it will be irresponsible of me, as 
a South African, not to tell this commission that or not to 
go to the judicial conduct committee of the JSC and say 
here is a judge who met with one party on the side.  
 
That is irregular and that here are five judges who 
take, who attacks the BCPS report attacks me.  They say 
PRASA was controlled by one Mr Lucky Montana, and with 
his officials appointed what is it called?  Here are the facts 
Chair.  
20 
 
The board appointed Swifambo, not Lucky Montana.  
The officials who adjudicated on this committee Chair, is 
not my officials.  Are actually officials who came to this 
commission to accuse me of all sorts of wrongdoings.  
Molele, Matangoye.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 244 of 335 
 
 
They were there to do all of those things.  So Chair, 
I am asking myself how to deal with this issue, but I see ... 
I think that we must protect and defend the judiciary, but 
you must defend the right things.  We cannot defend 
something that is so obvious that the judges have taken 
Chair.  
 
It is my evidence, and that is why I think the sooner 
my affidavit is presented there so that we can deal with 
what I call disgraceful conduct by the judges in this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you lodged any complaint with the 
10 
judicial conduct committee over the years or not? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, not on these issues.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  Because I have decided that I want to deal 
with this, I do not want to pursue Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  But the cost for me, the cost of these 
court applications have been huge on me.  I have taken a 
strategic approach. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 
MR MONTANA:  Go to the commission and put them there.  
What happens, the country will know the truth.  But Chair, 
it would have been the right forum for me to do that, but I 
do not have the capacity.  But I am saying Chair,  here is 
direct evidence and that is what I want to ask Werksmans 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 245 of 335 
 
when they come to cross-examine me, to say you wrote 
this paragraph with your people.  
 
How did it find itself into the judgment as the first 
three paragraphs of this judgment?  It is so wrong.  It is so 
disgraceful Chair, and I think we should when we criticise, 
we should be very specific and Mr Soni, that is why I say 
that I need to be careful so that I do not even want to 
undermine what the former, the late President Mandela had 
said about the Courts.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  As if now I am challenging the authority of 
our international icon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, that is fine.  We in the judiciary 
always say that we have never said that the judiciary 
should not criticise but we say it should be fair criticism, it 
should be well informed you know, be based on facts and 
not just generalisations and so on.  
 
But you have given us your comments on the two 
judgments.  Mr Soni, do you ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson, I am constrained to 
raise a number of issues.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Montana, your allegation deal with 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 246 of 335 
 
one issue first.  Your allegation against Judge Francis was 
put to Judge Francis and he submitted an affidavit.  I do 
not have it in front of me, but I will tell you what he says.  
Firstly, before I do that.  
 
As I understand it you say on the day, on the first 
day of the hearing, that is the day when your application 
be admitted as an amicus was dismissed.  Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He says, sorry.  You say on that day 
you saw Mr Molefe come out of Judge Francis’s chambers.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  Correct.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As I understand it, the hearing was on 
the ninth floor of the High Court building.  
MR MONTANA:  I cannot remember the floor.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Remember to speak close to the mic. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja, I cannot recall but it was in the 
Johannesburg High Court. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But whatever floor it was, you say 
that Judge, you saw Mr Molefe come out of Judge Francis’s 
chambers.  Well, Judge Francis said ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That answer will not be captured.  
MR MONTANA:  Oh, it will not be recorded.  Yes, indeed 
Chair I can confirm that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Judge Francis says in his affidavit, 
that at that time he was based on the fifth floor and the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 247 of 335 
 
hearing as I understand it, was on the ninth floor.  So you 
could not have seen him, you could not have seen Mr 
Molefe come out of Judge Francis’s chambers.  You are 
smoking Mr Montana. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I am saying I do not know.  Do you 
want to deal with it?  I was asked Chair to respond to this 
judgment and then ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, what Mr Soni is doing in fairness to 
Judge Francis who was asked to comment on your 
allegations and supplied an affidavit, he is putting to you 
10 
Judge Francis’s version, which is what he is saying.  
MR MONTANA:  Okay Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You might react, you might want to 
respond to that or he, but he is saying this is the version 
that the commission has obtained.  
MR MONTANA:  No, no I am glad that the commission has 
followed that Chair.  I have not seen the response and I 
think at the right time I will deal with that, including the 
witnesses that I was with and that is why I put it that 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  The conduct in that way.  So I am happy.  I 
will not respond now, because I did not even know where 
his office is.  I said I saw him and I think that was the ... 
that is where in fact from my legal representative, the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 248 of 335 
 
Honourable Judge in the morning even met with the 
different legal teams before the start of the case.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Were you part of that meeting with 
Judge Francis? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no I was outside.  I arrived early when 
they were still meeting.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So when you say you were outside, 
outside where?  
MR MONTANA:  Outside, outside.  Outside the Court.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Outside the Court.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  When they were meeting in one of the 
rooms.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  At the Judge’s chambers.  That 
is where they normally meet.  
MR MONTANA:  Can I suggest that I see the response of 
the judge, so that by the time we deal with it, because 
remember 
it 
is 
not 
on 
this 
specific 
matter, 
it 
is 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you not been given a copy of the 
affidavit? 
20 
MR MONTANA:  Of his response? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  And I look at that and say, and decide 
whether I even stand by that, and the witnesses.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 249 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:  Because I think that I was reacting to the 
judgment and I made this point, and it is there in my 
affidavit Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am told that the affidavit was served 
on you. 
MR MONTANA:  No.  I have not seen it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  So let me not say no, but I have not seen 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  All the affidavits that I was informed that 
people wanted to challenge including Werksmans, Judge 
Francis J as well as ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Minister Peters 
MR MONTANA:  As well as, I think there was a third one or 
Mr Pollow Sullivan.  So I was informed, but I never saw the 
actual papers.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You were told, but you were not given the 
actual affidavits? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no I did not see them Chair.  No, I was 
20 
... at that, I was ja.  So Chair, I will double check 
...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will get an opportunity. 
MR MONTANA:  And then when we deal with my affidavit, 
we can deal with those in much greater detail Chair.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 250 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But you know Mr Montana, and please 
you must accept that I cannot stand here and allow an 
allegation, a serious allegation to be made against a judge 
of this country and when I know what his version is not put 
it to you.  
 
You may respond on a different time ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no you can ... you can certainly put 
it.  All he is saying is he is not able to respond.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I understand.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But definitely ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is only fair that the public who have 
heard him ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Heard him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hear what the other side of the story is.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So go ahead.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But I am going to raise a slightly 
different issue.  That is the day on which he dismissed 
your application to be admitted as an amicus.  Is that 
20 
right? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now I understand that you were 
separately represented in that application.  In other words 
you had an attorney at least when you brought the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 251 of 335 
 
application to be admitted as an amicus.  
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, I had an attorney and there was 
a counsel who argued the matter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Now you saw Mr Molefe leave 
Judge Francis’s chambers on your version. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja, I saw him even arrive in Court, Mr 
Molefe and then I saw him when he came from the very 
same room that I mentioned.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So your answer is yes? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes, the answer is yes.  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Did you tell your attorney and your 
counsel? 
MR MONTANA:  I did tell my attorney.  I was with my 
...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Your counsel? 
MR MONTANA:  I tell my attorney Chair, no I did not 
discuss with the counsel because he was appointed of 
course by the attorney but I was with my attorney Chair 
and we spoke to Mr Molefe in fact on that day. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We are not talking about your 
20 
speaking to Mr Molefe.  I want us to deal with the 
questions I am asking Mr Montana. 
MR MONTANA:  But Chair, I have confirmed that.  I have 
confirmed that Mr ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 252 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright.  So did your, what was your 
attorney’s reaction to that?  I mean this is as outrageous 
and a commitment to judicial duties as one would find.  
MR MONTANA:  No, no, no.  Chair, I think I must take 
exception to this.  You see Chair, now I hope that Mr Soni 
will have the same energy when we also deal with the next, 
with the other matter phrased.  You said and I think you 
have guided us.  
 
You said Chair, that it is good that Mr Soni had put 
forward the version.  He is proceeding to argue on behalf 
10 
of the Honourable Judge.  Let me be served with the 
documents, take advice on the issues and reply. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  I think that is the correct way Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Because if we do that, then let us argue 
and I bring the two reports.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  And read it out to you and then I do not 
know what Mr Soni ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  I thought your guidance was that Chair 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  You have said criticism of the judiciary, 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 253 of 335 
 
where there is a sound basis.  You know, when Mr Molefe 
came out of that room Chair, when I was with my legal 
team, the attorney, okay.  He came, we even spoke to him.  
he was hugely embarrassed Chair, but I am suggesting 
Chair that instead of Mr Soni taking the judge as, he can 
come and put his version here and say Montana is wrong.  
 
I see the affidavit but he is arguing on this 
particular issue.  I have then been given the benefit of 
even what the judge has said.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  So if I have to come back and answer to 
it, I will do exactly that Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no I think what should happen Mr 
Soni is state what the judge’s version is to the extent that 
Mr Montana says he has not been given a copy of the 
affidavit.  Let him be given a copy of the affidavit and he 
will let us have his reaction to it, and then let us take it 
from there, but it is important that because he has put his 
version about the matter, Judge Francis’s version we also 
know. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  And Chair, by the way I have put my 
version about the five judges of the SCA as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  This happened, this incident of Judge 
Francis, you are saying this happened in July 2017.  Is that 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 254 of 335 
 
correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I do not have the actual dates. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Had you made a complaint to the 
Judicial Conduct Commission? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair, I did not make but I made 
reference to that, that I am considering laying a formal 
complaint.  I mention that in my affidavit, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now when did you first see PRASA’s 
10 
status in the Swifambo...? 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair it was ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But was it – it had to be before your 
application to join this ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Indeed Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right.  Now, on your version, that 
contained not only misrepresentations, it contained... by 
PRASA’s version.  PRASA’s version before court.  Is that 
correct? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you tell you – this was a 
R 3.5 billion contract.  Did you tell Swifambo’s legal 
representatives:  Look, you are asking for this.  Now you 
are resisting the setting aside of this contract.  I have 
information that I can give you and I do not mind deposing 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 255 of 335 
 
to an affidavit deposing that application but it is based on 
false? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair.  No, no Chair.  Chair, I have 
never told.  We know, here in this Commission as we sit 
here, we know that I made a choice, taking my legal advice 
that I should do it in that way because at that time we were 
careful not to be seen to be supporting one party over the 
other but I knew for a matter of fact.. 
 
And you know Chair the one thing I do, I write 
my own affidavit and I then sent them to the legal – I write 
10 
the facts, I write the story and say tell me what I am 
getting wrong, correct it and all of those things.   
 
The affidavit on Swifambo, I think it is 76-pages, 
where I detail all of those things.  And I say in that in fact 
PRASA, which means Mr Molefe and Werksmans have 
withheld valuable information ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But Mr Montana, my question is a 
different question.  You knew that they have would have 
information? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, and I exercised my right...  You are 
20 
asking me why did not I do something as I did not elect to 
do it at time.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   How does it help state capture, Chair, 
that I decided to be – to make a different application and 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 256 of 335 
 
not help?  I choice not to work with Swifambo.  I wanted to 
go and assist the court so that the court can see the truth 
on this issue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I ask you?  Did you know Mr 
Auswell Mashaba at that time? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mister...? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Auswell Mashaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Auswell Mashaba? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chair. 
MR MONTANA:   At that time you are referring to? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The time of the court case. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no.  At time, Chair, I knew him. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You knew him? 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When did you meet – when did you 
first get to know him? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think I have first met him after 
PRASA in my contract. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is Swifambo contract? 
MR MONTANA:   The Swifambo contract, yes.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Montana ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   I think that is in ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...so that I can hear you or closer to the 
mic. 
MR MONTANA:   Oh, sorry Chair. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 257 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think it should have been 2012, 
ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   When I first met Auswell Mashaba 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...and his entirety Swifambo Team, it was 
in 2012 after they were awarded the contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now once the review application had 
been brought, you were aware that if the contract was set 
aside, Auswell Mashaba stood to suffer severe loss.   
MR MONTANA:   Swifambo, Chair, with all his parties in it, 
yes, they would suffer, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Did you tell Mr Mashaba:  Look, 
this is what has happened.  I have seen this.  This is a 
matter that you can take up.  That PRASA’s – the 
Chairperson of PRASA’s board, the deponent to its affidavit 
had just come out of the judge’s chambers.   
20 
MR MONTANA:   But Chair, again, I deposed to an 
affidavit, a 76-page affidavit.  I put all the issues of why I 
thought the court – because ultimately it is the court that 
set aside the contract, not PRASA.  I put an affidavit.  I put 
the reasons and the facts and a lot of supporting affidavits.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 258 of 335 
 
 
For example, I put in documents that shows that 
not only Swifambo but PE hindered.  I have also a report, 
for example, done by the GM, Treasury at PRASA that 
makes a comparison of the different bids.  I put that in my 
evidence to show that the story that, for example, only 
Swifambo was given an opportunity, that is false.  So 
before ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You have gone through that 
Mr Montana.  So ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   No, no.  But can you give me – can you 
10 
please allow me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on.  Let Mr Montana finish his 
point. 
MR MONTANA:   Exactly, Chair.  So I am saying Chair that 
– Mr Soni says to me, after I have applied to court, that 
why did I not discuss the matter with the Swifambo?  I did 
not have any obligation to discuss with Swifambo.  I did 
not have to go to Swifambo.  If he claims that I was not 
happy and at that time Chair you will recall maybe you 
want to deal with the Serega(?) matter.  PRASA had 
20 
adopted a strategy, this litigation strategy.  They were 
doing that and they were using my name.  I was being 
dragged and – but I was not.  Being called to respond, it is 
before myself, okay? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 259 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   In this particular – you know, when you 
look at the Swifambo matter, the initial assertion by the – 
on the PRASA papers, was that the Swifambo matter was 
approved by Lucky Montana.  Now we know legally they 
want to change the papers because they realise that that 
was false.  It was a false assertion ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but your answer is, as you say, you 
did not because you had no obligation. 
MR MONTANA:   I did not have an obligation Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
10 
MR MONTANA:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You see, we are talking about a 
slightly different issue here.  When you found your 
application to be an...  You have not seen Mr Molefe, on 
your version, leave Judge Francis’ chambers but after that 
you became, on what you have said today, that this 
judgment was made after an irregular communication 
between Mr Molefe and Judge Francis. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I do not think Mr Soni ...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni, I think this issue of his 
allegation about the judge’s, let us deal with it once he has 
a look at Judge Francis’ affidavit to be – and let him react 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 260 of 335 
 
in terms of an affidavit in response if he wants to. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then if – then we can look at how it 
should be dealt with.  There is a question of the Judicial 
Committee but there is the question – the issue that it has 
not been – a no complaint that has been lodged over a 
certain time but I think let us get that sorted out and then 
let us then look at it.  But the Judge Francis’ version, I 
would like you to put its essence or the role of it publicly 
as well. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that it is heard. 
MR MONTANA:   So Chair, without – will I also be send the 
responses of the five judges of the SCA on that judgment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not know if there are any 
affidavits from those – from ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   But Chair I have raise(?) proper conduct 
about the five judges. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And nothing, but the Commission should 
20 
also do the same, not on judge.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Soni has told – has mentioned 
about Judge Francis.  Mr Soni, you want to say anything 
about the SCA judges? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Perhaps this is the right time to say 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 261 of 335 
 
it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We have submitted what Mr Montana 
said about in court, the Supreme Court of Appeal judges 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...to the President of the Supreme 
Court ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...by the Supreme Court of Appeal. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And we indicate that should they wish 
to say anything, we would place that on record.  We have 
not received a response from the... of the SCA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, that is fine.  So, 
Judge Francis’ affidavit that the Commission has, the Legal 
Team will make it available to you and then – to the extent 
that you reacts to it once – reacts in terms of an affidavit, 
responding and we will take it from there.  In terms of 
...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MONTANA:   Can I ask another question?  I am sorry, 
Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MR MONTANA:   I do not want to delay the proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 262 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   Is it – we are all accountable.  I am here 
because of accountability.  To come and answer on certain 
allegations made against me.  I am making allegations 
against 
the 
judge. 
 And 
I 
thought 
that, 
Chair, 
the 
stronghold would be that you are raising a serious 
allegation within that – the Supreme Court of Appeal 
because it goes to assure even us.   
 
If they say:  No, you are wrong.  We got this 
thing in this way.  That is something else Chair.  But I am 
not sure if I want to leave it at that with that – I am 
10 
assuming that he says that they had responded or are you 
saying we are leaving the matter because they did not 
respond?  Because I think from an accountability point of 
view ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   ...it is not the right thing to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me say this Mr Montana.  As 
you would know by now, the Commission has got a Rule 
3.3. Notice process.  That is, if there is some submitted an 
affidavit or statement that implicates you or may been seen 
20 
as implicating you, you are given a copy thereof and you 
are given an opportunity to respond or apply for leave to 
cross-examine that person and so on.   
 
That is an election.  You are not obliged to do 
so.  So I have a suspicion that that is what have may have 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 263 of 335 
 
happened with the SCA judges but it might also be that it 
was not given as a Rule 3.3. Notice and maybe it was 
simply given as affording them an opportunity to know that 
there is somebody who has some allegations or criticisms 
about their judgment and do they want to say something.   
 
There are, of course, as you know, situations 
where even if somebody who has been given a Rule 3.3. 
Notice has chosen not to respond, where the Commission 
can 
– 
the 
Chairperson 
can 
compare 
and 
there 
are 
situations where people can be issued with summons and 
10 
so on.  So it depends on a lot of things.  So I think that is 
the explanation.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, I should just point out.  
In fairness to the judges concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
The 
allegations 
made 
in 
Mr Montana’s 
affidavit 
in 
respect 
of 
Judge 
Francis 
contained this allegation that he had seen Mr Molefe leave 
Judge Francis’ chamber.  Now that, obviously, is an 
allegation that needed to be confronted head on where the 
20 
judge says either I did it, I did not do it, it could not have 
happened because of whatever.  So that is the one issue.   
 
In regard to the judges of the Supreme Court of 
Appeal.  The allegations were of a general(?) nature.  The 
allegation – and I listened very carefully to the allegation 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 264 of 335 
 
today that the first three paragraphs of the judgment of the 
SCA replicates what had been said in some report.  Now I 
do not think – and it has been a bit of time since I read 
Mr Montana’s affidavit – I do not think that that is what was 
said in so many words in that affidavit.   
 
The crux of the allegations were that those 
judges are corrupt because they misapplied the law.  Now 
in fairness to the judges concerned.  What do they say?  
Judges speak through their judgments.  There is nothing in 
Mr Montana’s affidavit that deals with that issue.  So I just 
10 
wanted to place that on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So the public out there does not think 
that 
there 
are 
judges 
who 
regard 
themselves 
as 
unaccountable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m, h’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I have little doubt that – they all 
know that they are accountable and they do regard 
themselves as accountable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But in these circumstances, it would 
be unfortunate to create the impression that there is even 
– well, not only an obligation – even a judicial duty for 
them to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 265 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Because when one looks at the 
affidavit, there is not anything specific against any of the 
judges.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   But Chair can I really object to this?  
Because I thought ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What would you like to say? 
MR MONTANA:   Because I thought you guided us, Chair, 
to take a more balanced approach. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   That there are no counts Chair.  You 
know, my criticism – and I do go into detail – not on this 
specific matter Chair.  I never accused the judges of 
corruption.  I did not do that in my affidavit.  And I think 
that we should not go to that.  I spoke about improper 
conduct, Chair, in my thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   If I leave this matter, there are eight other 
matters where I said the judges made the – make errors.  
give only one example where they said the trains arrived 
20 
and they have never moved.  It is a factual issue.  The 
trains have done 76 000 km’s but I make the point...  You 
see, Chair.  I am trying to be balanced here.  I am trying to 
here And make sure that I do not throw stones.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 266 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   The truth of the matter is.  I am saying 
And it is a serious issue Chair because if I judge writes a 
report Or a judgement Which is. - I respect that.  I have no 
question with that.  But here is a judgement And this 
judgement - the attorneys at. Werksmans are fighting this 
issue on behalf of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but hang on Mr Montana.  You are 
just saying earlier on:  I gave guidance.  The only reason 
why Mr Soni Was speaking about the SCA judges Is 
because they have not filed an affidavit And you raised the 
10 
issue Are they not accountable?  He was explaining that, 
but in terms of The way forward, I think we maybe we are 
done in terms of ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   For the record Chair.  I had never 
accused judges of corruption.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   That I must say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   We did not deal with it in that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But also, I must just say.  one of 
20 
the things that one has got to think about in the context of 
the issues you raise about the High Court judgement and 
the High Court judge and the SCA judges is that - is the 
question of to what extent are they all those issues.  Would 
all 
of 
those 
issues 
be 
properly 
dealt 
with 
by 
the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 267 of 335 
 
Commission as opposed to going to the Judicial Conduct 
Commission if we just specifically established to deal with 
complaints against judges.   
 
So then that is something also that we will have 
to think about.  Ja.  Okay alright.  we are at two minutes to 
six.  We normally take a 10 minutes break every two hours.  
so let us take a 10 minutes break and then we will 
continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you wish.  
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn.  
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS: 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will see at seven.  We will see once 
we are at seven o'clock and talk about whether we 
continue or not but let us continue for now.  Ja.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson , I need to place on 
record that I have looked now again at Mr Montana's 
affidavit and in fairness to Mr Montana, he did not accuse 
any of the judges of being corrupt.  What ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   He did not accuse any of the charges of 
20 
corruption? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Judges are being corrupt. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   but what he did say is that the judges 
of the SCA had deliberately lied and eat considered the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 268 of 335 
 
conduct to be disgraceful but it is, as I say, in general 
terms but I - in fairness to Mr Montana I do not want it to 
be said that I looked and didn't correct the record.  it is 
correct that Mr Montana didn't make that accusations.   
And it came about, Chairperson, because I haven't looked 
at his affidavit... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But it needs to be placed on record.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, you have suggested in 
10 
regard to the Mr Montana's allegations against Judge 
Francis and obviously against the SCA at one would look at 
it again after Mr Montana has been given judge Francis’ 
affidavit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Affidavit, yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...which I understand he has been 
given but I accept he - it may not have reached him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But we will hopefully obviously have 
to deal more carefully with that because reputations are at 
20 
stake.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And given what has happened today, 
the SCA might take a slightly different approach.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no that is fine.  And 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 269 of 335 
 
Mr Montana’s clarification that he has not and is not 
accusing any judge of corruption might be an important 
factor in considering weather - to the extent that he may 
wish to ventilate those issues that may be his concerns 
might be beta dealt with in the judicial conduct committee 
...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...because from the commission's side 
we have to always keep our eyes on the terms of 
reference, you know. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So - but let us look at it once he has had 
a chance to look at Judge Francis’ affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, as it has been said that he must 
keep in our lane.  [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we must keep in our lane.  Ja, ja.  
Okay alright.  Let us continue.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  I just want to - now I have 
finished, Mr Montana, with the rest of what Mr Molefe says 
in his effort over.  It is at page - in regard to Swifambo - it 
20 
is at page - paragraph 65, page 19.  He says: 
“in 2015 the new board instituted disciplinary 
proceedings 
against 
Mr Mthimkhulu 
but 
he 
resigned before any hearing could be heard. 
Significantly, 
the 
SCA 
had 
found 
that 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 270 of 335 
 
Mr Montana 
had 
been 
a 
party 
to 
Mr Mthimkhulu’s conduct...” 
 
So let us leave out the finding of the SCA 
because that we have been through.  May I just ask you in 
relation Mr Mthimkhulu?  Are you aware about the prospect 
of a disciplinary hearing and he's resigning unaccounted 
that?  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, Chair.   
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then Mr Molefe says that of you – 
10 
that is Mr Montana – the SCA said the following: 
“He controlled PRASA and its staff, he was 
obstructive and attempted to cover up his role 
in various corrupt transactions including the 
award of the tender to Swifambo. 
The Public Protector had experienced similar 
obstruction in her investigation...” 
 
Now 
that 
is 
the 
finding 
and 
I 
know 
it 
is 
something that you disagree with.   
MR MONTANA:   This, actually Chair, is the summary of 
20 
what I said comes from another report but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you have ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   ... made the point Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he has made his point, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Now, then having seen that 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 271 of 335 
 
the SCA in the Swifambo matter made reference to what 
the Public Protector found.  Mr Montana, Mr Molefe deals 
with her report.  And can we do it in the same way we have 
done the SCA report? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He says at paragraph 68: 
“Among the findings that the Public Protector 
made in her report... that in a number of cases 
PRASA extended the scope of tenders which 
constituted 
maladministration 
and 
improper 
10 
conduct. 
In one case, a tender for two train stations was 
later 
extended 
to 
seven 
stations 
given 
the 
contract a value of some R 1.95 billion...” 
 
Mr Montana, just so that you know that it is in 
the report.  Chairperson, it is at the – in the file containing 
the Public Protector ’s report at pages 358 and 359.  I am 
just placing ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just to say where it is, to be found. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And of PRASA’s and 
20 
Mr Montana’s approach, the Public Protector said: 
“It was difficult to get information from PRASA 
with this being a main cause or factor behind the 
delay in finalising this investigation which was 
lodged in 2012. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 272 of 335 
 
Promises for documents were not kept and even 
a request for assistance from the old board 
yielded very few source documents...” 
 
Now – then she continues the – the report 
continues and I have indicated it is at page 64, paragraph 
3.5 of the report. 
“It was also discomforting that Mr Montana 
boasted about the failure of compliance to 
provide 
documentary 
evidence 
on 
some 
allegations and asked that I adjudicate those 
10 
matters in his favour when he failed to provide 
legitimately requested documents...” 
 
And then she – Mr Molefe says: 
“The PP also found that the CEO suspended 
the 
employees 
without 
following 
proper 
disciplinary processes...” 
 
And although there is a page reference to 375, 
on mine it is 379. 
“And that the conduct of habitually suspending 
employees contravenes PRASA’s disciplinary 
20 
code and constitutes maladministration and 
improper conduct...” 
 
Then at paragraph 70, Mr Molefe says: 
“The Public Protector also noted that there 
was a culture of poor information management 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 273 of 335 
 
or hiding of information that could provide 
evidence of maladministration...” 
 
And at paragraph 71, Molefe quotes this from the 
report is: 
“Amongst them, immediate action, the Public 
Protector 
said, 
should 
be 
taken 
as 
the 
following: 
- The board must take cognisance of the 
findings of maladministration and improper 
conduct 
by 
Mr 
Montana 
and 
other 
10 
functionaries. 
- It must report to the National Treasury and 
the 
Auditor 
General 
particulars 
of 
the 
alleged financial misconduct and the steps 
it took. 
-  And support National Treasury in conducting 
a forensic investigation into all PRASA 
contracts above R 10 million from 2012 and 
then take appropriate measures to address 
the findings...” 
20 
 
And the reference in the report is there.  He 
says: 
“Given all these concerns which had been add 
the public space, one would have expected 
that 
the 
board’s 
decision 
to 
accept 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 274 of 335 
 
Mr Montana’s 
resignation 
would 
receive 
support from those who cared about PRASA, 
its employees, the commuters it serves and 
the public good...” 
 
Then at paragraph 73, he says: 
“Sadly, as I note in the rest of the affidavit, not 
only was there no support for the board when 
it began its clean-up but in fact it was verified 
and effectively disbanded...” 
 
Leaving out the other matters, going to be the 
10 
Public Protector ’s report, Mr Montana, is there something 
you want to say? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair.  Just briefly, Chair.  Firstly, of 
course, we know that I have challenged the report.  
Instituted the review application in this particular matter, 
Chair.  And dealt with the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, Mr Montana.  Just lower the mic. 
MR MONTANA:   Sorry, Chair.  My apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think – I put the review 
20 
application 
in 
Pretoria, 
challenging 
the 
– 
I 
put 
an 
application I think a few days after the PP released the 
report.  And by the way, let me again repeat.  When the 
report was issued, Chair, I was not at PRASA.  And I think, 
I find it very strange that particularly in paragraph 72 that 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 275 of 335 
 
Mr Molefe could use the Public Protector ’s report as they 
were dealing with my – I have left PRASA.  I was not there.  
I do not know if you see that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am looking at 72.   
MR MONTANA:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
“Given all these concerns which had been add 
the public space, one would have expected 
that 
the 
board’s 
decision 
to 
accept 
Mr Montana’s 
resignation 
would 
receive 
10 
support from those who cared about PRASA, 
its employees, the commuters it serves and 
the public good...” 
 
I understand that to mean that given what the 
Public Protector recorded as having found in the previous 
paragraphs, the fact that they accepted your resignation 
should have got support from others that – those who care 
about PRASA.  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I am simply saying there is no 
relationship 
between 
my 
resignation 
and 
the 
Public 
20 
Protector ’s report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
I 
resigned 
in 
March 
2015.  
15 March 2015.  I left PRASA on the 15 t h of July 2015.  The 
Public Protector ’s report was in August.  So it has got no 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 276 of 335 
 
bearing on all of the things that Mr Molefe is dealing with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   But Chair let me raise ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But before you do that.  Let me tell you 
what my understanding is.  My understanding of what 
Mr Molefe is saying here is that although the – I am now 
putting it in my own words – although the report of the 
Public Protector may have come after you had left, it 
related to things that happened while you were Group CEO 
of PRASA and therefore anyone who becomes aware of 
10 
these findings by the Public Protector and thinking about 
the fact that they accepted your resignation, if they care 
about 
PRASA, 
they 
should 
accept. 
 That 
is 
how 
I 
understand that. 
MR MONTANA:   No, I accept that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   So let me raise just a few issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Because I have put – I said I have put in 
a review application ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...in August 2015.  The first part of my 
review application, I dealt with the errors of law that the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 277 of 335 
 
Public Protector had committed in the PRASA investigation.  
One of the things I raised Chair is the fact that the Public 
Protector, for example, applied Section 38 of the PFMA 
which actually does not apply to PRASA.  Even some parts 
of the contract and all.  So I have detailed those.  No, I will 
not repeat. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I will not repeat that here Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But Chair let me – and then, of course, in 
10 
February of 2016, I then moved the legal constitutional 
issues.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   To then pick each and every allegation 
and a finding on that report.  I did that Chair.  Of course, 
the Public Protector had promised that she will publish 
volume 2 because she has only dealt with 50% of this, 
Chair.  She published volume 2 of her report in six months 
before she left, before she leaves office.  She left office 
without publishing that report which had an impact, of 
20 
course, on the ability of our review application without all 
those issues not being – because we could not challenge 
half the report that is there, Chair. 
 
Now, 
Chair, 
if 
you 
look 
at 
paragraph 
68 
…[intervenes] 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 278 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you do so, can I just establish 
where that review application is in terms of it being 
pursued?  It seems a long time. 
MR MONTANA:   It took almost three years for the PP 
office to actually finalise, after Advocate – I think she left 
in 20... 
CHAIRPERSON:   2016, Adv Madonsela. 
MR MONTANA:   2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And I think that the other report was only 
10 
finalised – was it last year, volume 2, which are two 
reports that actually do not actually speak the same 
language, as it were.  Chair, I have written to the office of 
the Public Protector, that is Advocate …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you continue, why should – well, 
I understand you to be saying to the extent that your 
review application might not have been finalised, it was 
because there was the second phase, as it were, of the 
Public 
Protector ’s 
investigation. 
 
Now 
you 
were 
not 
satisfied with certain findings or things about the first 
20 
Public Protector ’s report.  Why could that not be dealt with 
on its own? 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, that was the – the advice I 
got was that it is proper to deal with the report in its total 
because at that time …[intervenes] 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 279 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because, as I understand it, the first one 
was viewed as final in regard to the matters that it was 
dealing with and then – or that is the impression I had. 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, she postponed a lot of matters 
to volume 2 of her report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Which she did not then do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which she could not do. 
MR MONTANA:   Which she could not do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because her term expired. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, she said within six months.  
At that time she left, so the deadline she set herself, she 
could not honour, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But I followed that with the office of the 
Public Protector until they have course produced volume 2 
of the report.  Volume 2 of the report, not the same line, 
Chair, 
that 
has 
been 
taken 
in 
Derailed, 
completely 
different.  I think that in all the matters it actually 
dismissed all the matters but one where it deals with the 
20 
issues of the sale of a property between Transnet and 
PRASA and she say they should have followed a tender 
process, as it were. 
 
Now there was another court challenge to volume 2, 
Chair, which came from one of the organisations in Cape 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 280 of 335 
 
Town to say she did not do a proper investigation and all of 
those things.   
 
So there have been a number of issues but, Chair, 
if I could just highlight a few things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   That I have raised, without taking the 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   You know, Chair, the heart of the Public 
Protector report and the finding quoted by Mr Molefe is in 
10 
paragraph 68 and that speaks to Siyagena.  When you say 
the report of the Public Protector – of course I said in my 
first – the review application, I dealt with the errors of law, 
I have dealt with the Public Protector, Adv Madonsela.  
Actually not even understanding PRASA, applying even 
legal prescripts that were not applicable to PRASA.  I think 
I have attached again in my affidavit, I have attached both 
my review application as well as a supplementary affidavit.  
In that supplementary affidavit, Chair, I deal with then the 
actual details.  Now one of them is actually in 68.  This is 
20 
about Siyangena, Chair. 
 
Chair, the Derailed, Adv Madonsela said – stated 
there, Chair, that there were two stations that were 
extended to seven stations giving the contract a value of 
some 1.95 billion.  That is not correct, Chair.  Before 20 – 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 281 of 335 
 
in the period leading up to 2010 there were two stations 
that were modernised and Chair, let me clarify it because, 
by the way, before I go into that, you asked a question to 
Ms Ngoyi during the evidence to say were companies that 
were appointed pushed aside and Siyangena was put in 
there?  She confirmed, Chair.   
Now I want to – and I said when I am here I need to 
clarify.  It is not correct, Chair.  Companies were appointed 
to 
modernise 
and 
build 
stations. 
 
They 
continued.  
Siyagena was dealing with the installation of systems into 
10 
those stations, so there were no companies that were 
pushed aside and Siyangena pushed in them.   
Chair, here in 68 we are dealing with 2009.  
Intersite, a division of PRASA appoints Siyagena as what 
we 
call 
a 
nominated 
or 
a 
preferred 
or 
nominated 
subcontractor.  So they appoint them through a process, a 
competitive process and say when we appoint people to 
work on these stations, their people are going to install 
these systems, access controls and everything, it is going 
to be Siyangena.  So Siyangena is appointed in that way. 
20 
Now there is another project, Chair, awarded to 
Siemens.  Siemens is doing the rest of the network.  Now 
these were 2010 project.  In 2010, Sir, in January 2010, 
just a few months before the World Cup Siemens had then 
withdrawn from a number of PRASA stations because there 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 282 of 335 
 
was disagreement about monies, how much should be the 
value of some of the stations, so they pulled out of that.  
PRASA had four months to prepare the stations for 2010. 
Intersite with PRASA then decided that no, we have 
got a company that has been properly appointed to do this 
work, it is on site, we are not talking about building of 
stations, it is not the change, it is using the very same 
company to extend because it has been appointed for that. 
So it is two stations and the stations affected, 
Chair, were seven.  Public Protector, the value of the 
10 
contract, Chair, you will not believe it, R68.4 million for all 
those service stations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   68? 
MR MONTANA:   68.4, not billion, millions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Million, ja, millions. 
MR MONTANA:   Now that 68, Chair, there is the drama in 
that report the first thing, other than applying wrong 
reports and prescripts of the law, despite having all 
evidence before her including completion certificates of 
this project, she made three findings.  The first one is 
20 
about the fact that these projects cost R1.9 billion rands.  
In submissions I deal with this issue, Chair.  R68.4 million 
and not R1.9 billion.  So her findings is incorrect.  Then 
she went to create drama about this maladministration 
based on something that is factually incorrect. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 283 of 335 
 
 
She then also says, Chair, she makes another 
finding in relation to paragraph 68, she says PRASA 
awarded work, for Siyangena to do this work under the 
pretext that this is 2010 work but this work was only done 
in 2011.  Chair, it is incorrect.  We have provided the 
Public 
Protector 
during 
investigation 
both 
completion 
certificates, the launches, these stations were launched 
around the country by even Minister S’bu Ndebele in the 
period leading up to 2010.  The last station was actually 
completed on the 8 June, just three days before the 2010 
10 
World Cup.  The Public Protector made serious errors, 
Chair, in this report. 
 
Thirdly, the Public Protector, Chair, when she says 
– she talks about me, she says Montana went to Park 
station and fired companies there, Chair.  Okay?  And it is 
true, I went to Park station.  When I get there the station is 
filthy, we have got seven state companies that are involved 
in cleaning the stations, they are being paid and I said to 
my team, I do not fight, I said to my team if you do not deal 
with these companies then I am going to fire you guys 
20 
because here is a station, the second biggest station in the 
continent.  I say if the President come here and find the 
terrible 
conditions, 
yet 
we 
are 
paying 
people 
for 
maintenance and cleaning, we have got to take action.  
Those companies were then subsequently dismissed and 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 284 of 335 
 
the PRASA Cres, which is our property side, which was the 
PRASA’s property section then put alternative measures for 
these stations to be cleaned.  No, Chair, the report comes 
Montana irregularly fires companies, Chair.  Those are the 
findings. 
 
I can go on and on, Chair, but I am saying that the 
report of the Public Protector falls(?) because of both the 
legal as well as the massive factual inaccuracies, I – you 
know, this report does not speak about me, Chair, and I 
think it is very important.  Out there people think the Public 
10 
Protector is about Montana and number two, it is about 
corruption.  I think we have read all the findings of the 
Public Protector.  She talks about maladministration, power 
and all of those things, Sir, about the employees that were 
suspended without following of procedures.  She never 
mentioned a single finding in Derailed.  In Derailed, not in 
the second volume of even this corruption that we hear.  
When you hear people – a Public Protector, some of them 
even feel very strongly, has made serious finding of 
corruption, none, Chair.  I was the only person, you know, 
20 
Chair, who challenged this report despite the fact that it 
made a number of findings because I became the face of 
this report and it was so unfair, Chair, I mean, one of the 
clauses of the PRASA SCM policy says when employees of 
PRASA or any business of PRASA wants to use a service 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 285 of 335 
 
without got through a competitive process, where it is an 
emergency and so on, they need to motivate and get the 
approval of the Group CEO. 
 
Chair, there is one finding in Tshwane where the 
Public Protector says a chap by the name of – an employee 
by the name of Buthelezi approved the extension of a 
security 
contract 
without 
following 
what 
the 
policy 
provides, that you must motivate and get the approval of 
the Group CEO before you could do that.  So she is right.  
But comes the next one where employees, not that are 
10 
initiate, a business of PRASA would motivate in line with 
that clause.  It is there in the policy.  I approve.  That 
constitute maladministration.  When it is not done, he did 
not follow policy, when it is done, it is maladministration, 
that is [speaking in the vernacular] which means whether 
you are – you are damned whether you do it or you are – I 
do 
not 
know, 
something 
like 
damned 
if 
you 
do 
it…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you follow the law you …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Exactly, Chair.  So this report, Chair, and 
20 
that is why I challenge, but I am glad Adv Mkhwebane, had 
actually produced a report, no drama, very factual, Chair.  
This other report where even people can even say 
these 
stations 
were 
completed 
in 
2011. 
 
When 
we 
launched, we have got pictures, we have got ministers 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 286 of 335 
 
there, the stations were used for 2010 and the Public 
Protector said no, they were only completed – it is the 
same finding that we are discussing on the SCA that we 
had trains that never moved when they have done 76 000 
kilometres.  So this thing is about, Chair, representation of 
facts.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   You know, if there is one person, Chair, 
finally, who cooperated with the Public Protector, it is me 
and Chair I think that to prove that I have cooperated and 
10 
that some of her issues and findings about information 
were really uncalled for.  I asked for the record when I – 
before I – when I did the review application.  Can you give 
me the record?  The Public Protector could not even give 
me documents that I had given to her yet she makes 
findings about PRASA not keeping proper records and all 
of those things.  But, Chair, for me, I will decide whether I 
want to take it or not.   
The recommendation that Treasury runs a forensic 
investigation, the forensic investigations have been done.  
20 
I have seen and read the reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but you have said you have got your 
review application. 
MR MONTANA:   I have got my review application, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you intending to pursue it? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 287 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, I will decide in the light of all 
of that and… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   A of – I think five years has intervened 
since that time, I need to ask myself what value I get in 
going to court and spending thousands of rands.  But, 
Chair, I did challenge it and say it is wrong and factually I 
did put in those details, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.  Mr Montana, I 
10 
need – and I say this with the utmost respect to you, you 
have criticised the judgments, the Swifambo matter, you 
have made allegations about all the judgments.  You have 
criticised the judgment [indistinct – dropping voice] but this 
Commission, because it is, subject to the constitution, has 
to accept the findings of courts of law and until they are 
set aside on appeal those findings stand and in respect of 
the Public Protector you know that the Constitutional Court 
has said until a court has reviewed and set aside those 
findings, those findings stand.  I am placing this on record 
20 
because I have heard everything you say, it is on record 
but in fairness to you I need to say that at the end of the 
day 
those 
are 
the 
submissions 
I 
will 
make 
to 
the 
Chairperson.  I do not want to say it in your absence.  We 
do not have to deal with it today, I have little doubt that 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 288 of 335 
 
you will come back but I just placed that on record so you 
know what my approach to what you have said in respect of 
those judgments and this report. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Mr Soni, I respect I respect that, 
Chair.  I am not going to challenge – you see, for me, I am 
also not here, Chair, to get a favourable response, I want 
to put the facts on record, the Commission will write its 
report but I think, for example, most of these things that do 
not have any basis whatsoever and that is why I came to 
deal with them.  Once I have dealt with them in the 
10 
Commission I do not need to go and spend money in a 
court and get what is it called, a hollow victory.  I do not 
need to be cleared by anyone, Chair, I live my life, I do not 
need any court to clear me, I do not need to be cleared, I 
know the truth and this is the truth that I am sharing.  But 
Mr Soni, I respect what you are saying, the Commission 
will have to do what it has got to do as long as it satisfied 
that factually those matters it deals with have got a sound 
foundation.  My affidavit will show you that most of those, 
in fact they are not worth the paper that they are written 
20 
on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us continue, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please.  Then, Mr Montana, 
you might remember in paragraph 72 and 73 Mr Molefe 
says that given the Public Protector ’s report he would have 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 289 of 335 
 
expected support for the board’s resignation.  Now in the 
next section he deals with former President Zuma’s attempt 
to intervene and you know what it is, it was intervene in 
your leaving PRASA.  I will just read to you – I want to say 
this to you that there are parts of his affidavit which do not 
concern you because they happened between Ministers 
Radebe, Peters and President Zuma and Mr Molefe before 
you came on, so I am not going to put all those matters to 
you, I am just going to deal with – and I am not being 
selective, I am just saying that those are the matters you 
10 
can deal with and I would like your comment on it. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, sure. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So he says at paragraph 74: 
“After 
the 
board 
that 
accepted 
Mr 
Montana’s 
resignation 
he 
publicly 
announced 
that 
if 
the 
Minister and the board wanted him back he would 
be available to resume his responsibilities as CEO.” 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair.  No, Chair, what is true is that 
I was addressing – we were launching the specifications 
20 
for the new trains, not the specifications but – I think the 
specifications in Sandton.   A journalist asked – at that 
time the relationship, Chair, had fallen apart and the 
journalist asked will you go to PRASA and I was blunt and 
say no, I actually – I think it was a point, if I remember 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 290 of 335 
 
well, where I mentioned that I will not even go to PRASA 
with this current board as it is.  And, Chair, there had been 
unions, there had been people who lobbied and say – even 
members of parliament who said we do not think that he 
should be leaving PRASA at this point in time. 
 
So I have heard the testimony of Mr Molefe as well 
as the response by former Minister Dipuo Peters.  No, 
Chair, but I think that is a recollection, I respect that, 
Chair, but I had no interest to go back, I had resigned out 
of my volition, why would I want to go back to PRASA?  I 
10 
resigned. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But can I just ask you because it will 
come up again.  Your state of mind at the time that you 
handed in your letter of resignation and then when the 
board accepted it with that letter that we have read with 
those 
conditions 
which 
you 
point 
out 
were 
really 
meaningless, in regard to your state of mind, you had 
determined you wanted nothing more to do with PRASA 
with this qualification, while Mr Molefe’s board was in 
place. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, I think that let us put it 
properly for what it is.  I was done, I had resigned, Chair, 
from PRASA, I explained the circumstances earlier on.  I 
was done.  A journalist asked me in the thing – I am not 
sure if my response was correct and that was later taken 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 291 of 335 
 
by the board and I heard Minister Dipuo Peters saying 
maybe like he wanted to come back and all of those things.  
Chair, you know, I left PRASA in 2015, I have never been 
to any government office except always I state when I go to 
pay my municipal rates and taxes.   I have never been to 
any minister ’s office to ask for deployment or favours 
because that is not me, I do not do things like that.  I had 
left but there was war and this war was happening inside 
PRASA and outside of PRASA.  And if you speak, for 
example, to a number of unions they said look, we think 
10 
you are leaving at this point, even March, and said I must 
accept publicly that I will not step down and all of those 
things and maybe when I dealt with that issue, I may not 
have put it outright but my state of mind was very clear, I 
am done, I am moving on, but I was concerned that 
PRASA, if it does not manage a transition, it is going to 
find itself in serious trouble and unfortunately, my worst 
fears, Chair, three years down the line were proven correct 
because the train system had collapsed effectively. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  So I just want to be clear, 
20 
your answer is, my state of mind was that I am not going to 
go back to PRASA. 
MR MONTANA:   At that stage I was very clear. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And it was unequivocal, in other 
words there was no doubt in your mind. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 292 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, there was no doubt in my mind, but 
let us not forget, Chair, we live in a world of politics.  I had 
wanted to leave, I had a dream that I wanted to create a 
property fund of some kind and get involved in that 
business but there were political pressures, parliament, 
within government, within political structures that we think 
a resignation is a mistake and – but maybe I may not have 
given them a very clear answer, so I am responding to you, 
making them believe that I was keen.  And when I left, by 
the way, on the 15  July, remember – and this will bring us 
10 
to the meeting that [indistinct – dropping voice].  Chair, 
there is a procedure in the way companies deal with 
matters 
including 
preparing 
agendas 
and 
directors, 
including 
myself 
as 
an 
executive 
director, 
would 
be 
informed in – for example, when there is an issue that they 
had a board resolution on, the issue of me leaving on the 
15 July was not on the agenda, was not discussed even 
with me, Chair, I happened to leave and let me – and this 
is what saddens me, Mr Soni, I got to a board meeting, we 
discussed matters, we fight first about the Mthimkulu 
20 
matter in the board.  Then in the afternoon, Chair, before 
we finished the meeting I get a call from home, your uncle 
is sick, he is very ill, come home.  I said no, I am in a 
board meeting, they said no, we do not think – it is very 
bad, you must come home.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 293 of 335 
 
 
So I then go to Mr Molefe, even though there was 
this war, but we could still speak as we continue to do to 
this very day, I said to him, Mr Molefe, ay, my uncle is not 
well, I need to rush home and then he says to me, no it is 
fine, when you leave, after we have dealt with the matters, 
there will be one issue on the agenda, which at that time 
was a standing item on the agenda, the contract of 
employment of the Group CEO and why it is on there, it is 
a standing item, it is because I have resigned and the 
board and its governance committed even that it is minuted 
10 
where they say like he must help us, must work with us so 
that we find a suitable CEO and all of those things.   
 
As I was sitting in the meeting, I get the call that 
my uncle had passed on.  I go back to Mr Molefe.  Mr 
Molefe, it is too late now, my uncle is – I have got to run to 
hospital in Pretoria, the meeting is in Johannesburg.  I run 
to Pretoria, do whatever I have to do in relation with the 
family.  After 12 midnight I go back home, Chair, that is 
when I find a letter where the board says after you have 
left, we – because we took a break and then after lunch 
20 
they met and they say we took a decision that no - I was 
already two months into my notice period, Chair – we felt 
you should no longer service your notice period.  That is 
what happened, Chair. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 294 of 335 
 
 
So that created a big fight because I then said but 
none of the board members, even you, that is the direction 
that you – but when I stood up and left the meeting, what 
was effectively, Chair, a cowardly act.  A cowardly act, 
something that you view as a comrade and a leader - even 
if they have come to that determination, they would have 
waited, Chair, and said look, like he is got his own issues 
with the family, let me wait for him to come back after he 
has dealt with this and then we convey this thing to him. 
 
So I come from home, my uncle’s house, I go to the 
10 
office.  So these are the kind of people that you deal with, 
Chair.  And when I took it up they said no, like he wants to 
remain a CEO of PRASA.  No, Chair, I have resigned.  Mr 
Molefe said we want you to stay for three years(?). I said 
no, I am going, I can only assist you.  Two months into the 
notice period they say no, do not serve the other remaining 
four months, we will pay you being at home.  Who would 
not want to be paid sitting at home doing nothing, Chair?  
So I was paid four months not doing anything at PRASA but 
I left PRASA without doing a handover, Chair, and that is 
20 
why you see the chaos because I was at the hub of the 
strategy, I put together everything about the modernization 
of PRASA. 
So if I want to go back or did I want to go back?  
The big answer is no.  But Chair, I think that the – if you 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 295 of 335 
 
just imagine, you come back home, your uncle has just 
passed on and you expect people to be your own comrades 
and they do something so inhuman, so cruel. 
 
So – but am I angry with him?  No, I do not, but I 
thought in an African way, they would have dealt with it, 
but legally, the matter was not on the agenda.  When I 
went to that meeting and when I left, I did not know that 
the matter of the contract of employment of the CEO was 
about discussing that we can – the board had the 
prerogative to take that decision that, hey, you have 
10 
resigned, we want another person.  But, Chair, then still 
you have to deal with it properly, not when you come and I 
leave the meeting and then they start to say no, he left to 
attend to his uncle, he should not come back.  That is how 
cruel, Chair.  That is the cruelty, that is the kind of – how 
people lose their own humanity because of power.  They 
want to control this thing and they even forget that this 
man is grieving for his uncle.  That is what happened, 
Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, let us get back to the 
20 
affidavit now because that does not concern – and I am not 
being unsympathetic. 
MR MONTANA:   Sure. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I can understand your anger, I just 
want us to stick in our lane, if I can put it that way. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 296 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Sir. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right, then in paragraph 75 he says: 
“Then quite unexpectedly in early August 2015, then 
President Zuma and Minister Radebe, who was then 
the minister in the presidency responsible for 
planning, 
monitoring 
and 
evaluation 
called 
a 
meeting at the presidential guesthouse in Pretoria.” 
That is correct, is it not? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then: 
10 
“Minister Peters was invited to the meeting along 
with Mr Montana and me.” 
That is correct, is it not? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    
“The meeting took place on the 20 August 2000.” 
And that is correct, is it? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   “It was initially …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni, are you scared that if you 
20 
summarised the gist of the matters or version relating to 
the meeting you might lose some important things? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, this is an important 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 297 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And my worry is that we gloss over 
something and then it comes back to haunt us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   By the – it will not – I do not intend 
going over everything, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine, that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So he says: 
“It was initially meant to commence at three in the 
afternoon but it only started at six.” 
Is that correct? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, I do not know the time if he 
was given but I was told the meeting would start at six. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Then in paragraph 76 he says: 
“Just before the minister and I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe, Mr Soni, before you proceed.  
Briefly, Mr Montana, before Mr Soni proceeds, how did you 
come to know about the meeting?  Were you invited?  Who 
invited you?  What time were you told the meeting would 
start? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I was invited by the office of 
20 
Minister Jeff Radebe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   The minister and the presidency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay.  And what did you – do 
your remember the time that you were told the meeting 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 298 of 335 
 
would start? 
MR MONTANA:   No, it was six p.m. Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was 6 p.m.  That is the time you were 
told. 
MR MONTANA:   I was there around quarter to six at the 
venue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  How long ahead of the day of 
the meeting or time of the meeting were you invited.  Do 
you remember?  A day or two or a week or…? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I think it was a day or two, 
10 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   About a day or two. 
MR MONTANA:   But, Chair, the meeting was meant in fact 
to take place in Cape Town. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And I flew down to Cape Town.  You must 
recall during – when this meeting took place, I had left 
PRASA, 
I 
was 
not 
longer 
in 
PRASA 
working 
for 
government.  But I flew down to Cape Town.  And the 
meeting was cancelled.  I came back – of course I 
20 
complained that you cancelled the meeting, I am using my 
own personal resources and then the meeting of course 
that is described here took place in …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In Pretoria. 
MR MONTANA:   In Pretoria.  At Mahlamba Ndlopfu, not at 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 299 of 335 
 
the presidential guesthouse, Chair, as stated by Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So were you invited in writing or was 
it an oral communication to you? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I got the call – I think I got the call 
from the office of the minister, I do not remember receiving 
an email.  I may be wrong, but I do not remember an email. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what did he tell you the purpose 
of the meeting? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, if you go back, when I left PRASA, 
I left on the 15 t h. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Of July. 
MR MONTANA:   Of July 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this was August. 
MR MONTANA:   This was August. 
CHAIRPERSON:   22, I think. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The 20 t h. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes but the week – the circumstances of 
my departure, Chair, there was a big fight in the media.  
20 
There was a big fight in the media.  Now I was meant to 
address a press conference to give my side of the story 
and everything.  I got a call from Minister Dipuo Peters 
who asked me and say like we think you should not 
proceed with the press conference, we will have a meeting 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 300 of 335 
 
within government, we will discuss this issue, we do not 
want this public space and everything.  Then I rejected 
what the minister said.  I said but, Minister, I have met with 
you on two occasions, I have raised the issues, now it is 
very important that I put my side of the story to the public. 
 
So I went to – so before I started the press 
conference I then got a call from Minister Radebe who says 
he had a call from Minister Dipuo Peters and that I have 
rejected cancelling.  So the minister spoke to me at great 
length and said look, we have a meeting in government to 
10 
discuss what is happening around PRASA but we do not 
want …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The minister who spoke to you at great 
length would be Minister Radebe? 
MR MONTANA:   Radebe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes.  So he spoke to me persuading me 
not to – I said look, I have a press conference, I have 
journalists there at the hired – packed, and I cannot just 
cancel.  I then said look, it is fine, I will not go into the 
20 
details, I will talk about other things in respect – I said I 
will respect what the leadership says and then at whatever 
time we have that meeting.  So this meeting, Chair, is in 
fact – did not come out of the blue.  PRASA itself had its 
own press conference planned, so mine was going to be on 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 301 of 335 
 
Monday, the PRASA press conference was going to be on 
Tuesday.  We were both ordered by government, both 
Minister Peters and Minister Radebe, to call off those 
press conferences and that this matter must be discussed 
internally.   Even in this meeting – now I heard, Chair, that 
no out of the blue the President – no, Chair, there is a 
background to this meeting because the government and 
the President explained in that meeting we do not want, as 
the ANC, the public spat that is happening amongst 
yourselves as ANC, as ANC comrades, and that is basically 
10 
what transpired, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Let us get back to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni, we are at two minutes past 
seven.  You have been on your feet for the whole day, you 
have been facing questions the whole day, we have been 
seated.  I am quite happy to proceed for another hour but I 
am sensitive to particularly your situations.  How do you 
feel, Mr Montana? 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, I still have …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are still strong. 
MR MONTANA:   I still I have the energy but again I will be 
guided by you and… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I do not mind, can continue, Chair. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 302 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not mind.  Okay, let us go for 
another hour and see how it goes.  Okay.  Yes, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then at paragraph 76 Mr Molefe 
says: 
“Just before the minister and I were called into the 
meeting room, I was informed by one of the security 
officials that Mr Montana and Mr Roy Moodley had 
just left the meeting room from the opposite side.” 
Is – well, not did he receive the report but did you and Mr 
Moodley meet President Zuma? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, I do not know what that is all 
about.  I have never met the President on that day, I never 
met Mr Moodley.  I went to a meeting at the – I arrived at 
Mahlamba Ndlopfu at around five to – quarter to six and 
then I think the meeting started more or less at around that 
time.  So I do not know which security official, I know 
nothing about that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  But certainly Mr Moodley 
was not at any meeting on that day that you went there. 
MR MONTANA:   I would not know, Chair, I would not know. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no, I am asking a different – 
you would know.  If Mr Moodley was at a meeting you 
would know, I am asking at any meeting that you were. 
MR MONTANA:   No, on that day, Chair.  No, not at all. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now thereafter, from paragraph 76 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 303 of 335 
 
onwards, Mr Molefe described what happened in your 
absence and we can leave that out.  That is up to 
paragraph 86.  That is on page 23.  He says: 
“They 
had 
various 
discussions 
about 
different 
matters.” 
Then he says at paragraph 86, he says: 
 “I was shocked when the President said I have 
invited that boy Lucky Montana.  He then asked 
Minister Radebe to call Montana into the meeting.” 
Now of course you will not know what President Zuma said. 
10 
MR MONTANA:    I would not know, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Yes but is it correct that Mr 
Radebe called you into the meeting? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, my recollection of that meeting is 
that we started the meeting all of us at the same time.  I 
did see Minister Peters in one of the waiting rooms there.  
We greeted and everything and then the meeting started 
when the President arrived which I think was about 15, 20 
minutes later.  I do not recall that but I do not know about 
that experience, whether there was – I do not work – I was 
20 
no longer in government, I did not have a right to ask who 
was here before, I just went to a meeting and I attended 
the meeting, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But you cannot dispute and I am just 
– so that we need not deal with it, you cannot dispute that 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 304 of 335 
 
there was a meeting between Mr Radebe, Minister Peters, 
President Zuma and Mr Molefe before you were called into 
the meeting. 
MR MONTANA:   No, I do not know, Chair.  Maybe the 
meeting was meant to start at three, I was meant to join at 
six, but I was only told be here at six and that is what I 
did, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You see …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry I think, Mr Montana, Mr Soni asked 
you a question sometime earlier and I am not sure if I 
10 
heard the answer, I want to ask the question again.  What 
had you been told was the purpose of the meeting? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, the meeting was told it is a follow 
up, you will recall I mentioned on that the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The press conference, yes, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The press conference, we were told there 
will be an internal discussion and I was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Connected with the fights. 
MR MONTANA:   Connected with the public spats and 
everything. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Public spats, oh. 
MR MONTANA:   That is – the meeting was all about, 
Chair, was about that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, that is fine.  Okay, continue 
Mr Soni. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 305 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You of course would not know what 
Mr Molefe was told about the meeting and so on. 
MR MONTANA:   No, I would not know, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Or what Ms Peters had been told is 
the purpose of the meeting. 
MR MONTANA:   No, I would not know, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now can I just ask you this.  On what 
Mr Molefe is saying, they were already in the room when 
you were called in.  Can you recall if that happened? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, my recollection is that we were 
10 
all there.  I have seen Ministers Dipuo Peters in the thing 
but this was 2015, I may have – there may be a bit of 
detail that I may have missed but my recollection is that 
no, we started the meeting at six together.  Now it could be 
– it is possible that they may have been there earlier and 
had the meeting, I was asked to join when I was thinking 
that I am coming – I am very important, I am coming to be 
part of this meeting, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, so this is now what Mr Radebe 
says happened at the meeting.  I would just like you to 
20 
confirm …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Molefe. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry, Mr Molefe says that it is – 
it is ten hours later, Chairperson, so I apologise for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 306 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He says that: 
“President Zuma said that while he was on a state 
visit to the People’s Republic he had read about the 
public spat between Montana and I and he said that 
it was embarrassing to the ANC especially since 
both Mr Montana and I were members of the ANC.” 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   I think something to that effect, Chair, 
yes, that is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He says that: 
10 
“Mr Zuma also said that Mr Montana was very 
knowledgeable about commuter rail transportation 
and he should not be lost to the country.” 
Do you recall him saying that? 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, the President never said that, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did not? 
MR MONTANA:   Not at all, Chair.  In fact if I were to 
explain a bit, I know that the people said the President had 
asked everyone to speak at the meeting, starting with the 
Minister, with the Chairman of the Board and then it was 
20 
my turn to speak.  Now when I started, Chair, to speak, I 
said look, I am not going to get – I do not want – I said, Mr 
President, these are my leaders, I do not want to go into 
details and find a respect dispute, the only thing I can do 
is to indicate what PRASA has done so that we can protect 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 307 of 335 
 
what 
we 
have 
achieved 
as 
a 
country. 
 
And 
then 
…[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, Mr Montana, I just want us to 
get through this and you can give your version. 
MR MONTANA:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Otherwise we are going to be all over 
the place. 
MR MONTANA:   No, fair enough.  Thank you, Chair.  The 
President – so the point is, the President never said it in 
fact there.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I understand that. 
MR MONTANA:   If there was one person who said it, it 
was Mr Molefe telling the President that Mr Montana is 
knowledgeable and that is why I wanted him to stay for 
three years, not the President. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, did he say that? 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Molefe, yes.  Yes, it was in 
…[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At that meeting? 
MR MONTANA:   At that meeting, Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  So I am just going to say this 
to you, you know because you have followed this, neither 
Mr Molefe nor Minister Dipuo Peters recalls that it was Mr 
Molefe who said it. 
MR MONTANA:   Ms Peters actually said he told the 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 308 of 335 
 
President, Chair, I think on two – on the two days that she 
was there.  The first one she said I told the President that 
Mr Montana is knowledgeable, he knows about transport 
and that the President could use him as an adviser in 
Africa or that I could use – I, as Dipuo Peters, the Minister, 
could use Mr Montana as my special adviser.  Those are 
the words that she used here, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ja, I am challenging …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think, if I am not mistaken, the 
occasion when she spoke along those lines, if I recall 
10 
correctly, she said it was prior to that meeting, I do not 
know whether to say much earlier. 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And my recollection is that as far as the 
meeting is concerned, he may have confirmed that Mr 
Zuma spoke along these lines, I am not sure. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I seem to think she was saying – he 
was connecting this statement by Mr Zuma to what she had 
told the President on an earlier occasion about people like 
20 
you and others that she thought had skills that should not 
be lost to the country. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, you are absolutely correct, I agree 
with that, that is what she said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 309 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   What I am simply saying is that after I 
spoke – actually, I did not even finish what I was saying at 
the meeting when I was talking about PRASA, then the 
President stopped me in the middle of that discussion and 
he asked the minister is what Lucky is saying true?  The 
minister confirmed that.  Then the President looked at the 
Chair of the Board, Mr Molefe, and said Mr Molefe, is what 
Lucky saying – and Mr Molefe then made that statement, 
Chair, in that context and the President said – because he 
was quite disappointed he said well, there is a war.  
10 
Actually I think he may have used those words, but there is 
a war out there, we come to a meeting, we are told that 
PRASA is making this progress, we are told that this young 
man – he uses those words indeed, this young man is 
knowledgeable, he knows about transport, yet – so this is 
said in a meeting, but out there it is war.  Chair, I think – 
and it is at that point that I remember both myself and Mr 
Molefe were asked to leave because the President wanted 
to have a conversation with his two ministers. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At paragraph 88, second sentence, 
20 
Mr Molefe says that: 
“President Zuma said we should sort out our 
differences and bring Mr Montana back as Group 
CEO.” 
Did he say that? 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 310 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   No, that is not – the President never said 
such a thing, he never said that at all, it is incorrect, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then at paragraph 89 he says: 
“The President indicated that some senior members 
of the ANC were concerned that Mr Montana and I 
had been making unpleasant statements about and 
against each other in the media.” 
Did he say that? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, in his opening remarks of why, was 
about the public spat and not about bringing Montana back 
10 
to PRASA.  The never President never [indistinct – 
dropping voice] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then he says that he and Minister 
Peters had gone into the meeting not knowing what the 
agenda was but it appears that you had been briefed 
beforehand because you then proceeded to present a long 
report in which you attacked Minister Peters and him. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, that is not correct.  I mean, I would 
be disrespecting the President by attacking ministers and 
the Chair of the Board.  I mean, I - it is not done and 
20 
Chair, I had there my notebook, so as they were speaking I 
prepared notes because I decided on my approach – and 
some of these ideas I came to write later about where 
PRASA is and all of those things but there was not such a 
thing, I never – there was – actually the meeting ended on 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 311 of 335 
 
a very positive and a jovial note and then we left the 
ministers, the President and the ministers, we took leave 
and Mr Molefe and I then had a bit of discussion, we said 
our goodbyes.  That was the end of the matter, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So one, are you saying that you and Mr 
Molefe left the meeting at the same time? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Leaving it not on the basis that you 
would be called back, there would be some discussion and 
you would be called back leaving completely for the 
10 
evening? 
MR MONTANA:   Completely, totally, Chair, yes, it was 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And because the President wanted to 
speak to the two ministers? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The meeting you said should have 
probably started around quarter past six, I think you said? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair, around that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was meant to be six o’clock but 
20 
probably started at about quarter past six. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, but I am not referring to the earlier 
meeting because I did not know about it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no.  No, no, I mean the one 
which you attended.  Now on your recollection, how long 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 312 of 335 
 
did this meeting take more or less? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, it took a bit of time, four, five 
hours probably.  It was late when we left there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I think both Ms Dipuo Peters 
and Mr Molefe said, if I am not mistaken – certainly Mr 
Molefe said it was about two o’clock I think in the morning.  
Ms Peters, she might not have been certain but I think she 
spoke also of the meeting either having ended around that 
time or certainly after twelve. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think at around twelve, I do not 
10 
think it went to 2 a.m.  No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes, and you think when you – 
on your version when you and Mr Molefe left it would have 
been around what time?   Or when you say twelve is it 
when you left? 
MR MONTANA:   When we left ja, I think probably it was 
just after – just after 11 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MONTANA:   But again the issues of time for a meeting 
Chair, I cannot – I do not want to be firm about it, the 
20 
meetings takes place, the times are, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but what it means is that you can 
only talk about when you and Mr Molefe left the meeting 
you wouldn’t know how long they remained after you left. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed Chair. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 313 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right?   Okay so on your version 
about five hours ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Ja, four or five hours ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Four or five hours, and I think both of 
them if I am not mistaken, that is Ms Dipuo Peters and Mr 
Molefe, said that you took most of the speaking time, I 
think the estimate is by one of them, I don’t know if it was 
both, it was maybe about two hours. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Two hours that’s right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Two hours or so which maybe on 
10 
reflection might not be most of the speaking time, maybe I 
am wrong to say that, but they said you took quite some 
time. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair that is not – this was interactive 
meeting, of course I was, I prepared a note because I am 
talking to my leaders, I cannot just – they are sitting there, 
they are making their views known, when I am given the 
opportunity I must be systematic, I am with the President 
and the Minister, so I jotted down points that I wanted to 
raise in the course of that conversation.    
20 
 
Chair I wouldn’t have spoken because – spoken that 
long, Minister Peters spoke for a while, then the President 
asked Chairman Comrade Popo what is your view on this 
issue and then there was a discussion for a while Chair 
and then the President says well let’s hear the views from 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 314 of 335 
 
the young man and then Chair that is when I made my 
point. 
 
Chair I had a list of things that I wanted to raise 
about PRASA, but I have only spoken about five at that 
meeting if I remember well.  That is when the President 
stopped me and say the PRASA you are describing and the 
award that we have does not correlate.   He then wanted – 
he wanted to confirm from Minister Peters if what I was 
saying was true and correct.   Minister Peters responded 
positively, the Chair then – the President asked Mr Molefe, 
10 
who also confirmed Chair, and it is in that context that a 
statement that Mr Molefe says President Zuma stated that 
Mr Montana was very knowledgeable about transport, it 
was made by him, he even said inform the President that 
that is why he as Chairman he said I wanted Mr Montana to 
stay for another three years, and that is what actually I 
think it left the President puzzled.  So you want him to stay 
for three years and then – but that doesn’t correlate with 
the reality of that, and Chair that was the context of the 
discussion if I could recall very well Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, well Mr Molefe’s version, which I 
think to a very large extent was corroborated by Ms Peters 
...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:    ...[Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that – was that one, I think Ms 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 315 of 335 
 
Peters put it along the lines that your presentation, or 
whatever you said, made it clear or was consistent with 
somebody who wanted to come back, that you were talking 
about how knowledgeable you were with PRASA’s business 
and so on and so on.  I think, I may be mistaken, but I 
think Mr Molefe may have been more direct in terms of 
saying you wanted to go back to PRASA and his version 
was that – and the President was trying to get him to – that 
is Mr Molefe – get him to agree that you would be taken 
back, but Mr Molefe said he was resisting that because as 
10 
the Board they had taken the decision to accept your 
resignation and he said he went so far as the discussion 
between him and the President went as far as him saying 
to the President well President you will have to come and 
address the Board and when I questioned Mr Molefe what 
emerged was that he was saying well if the President 
wanted the Board to rescind its decision to accept your 
resignation you would have to come and talk to the Board, 
or the President was asking what the rationale was of the 
Board’s decision to accept your resignation. 
20 
 
It was along those lines, and I think Ms Peters was 
also along those lines, even though she might not have 
been emphatic, but you are saying, one, you never spoke 
on the basis that you wanted to go back, two, you say the 
President never talked about you being knowledgeable 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 316 of 335 
 
...[intervenes]     
MR MONTANA:    Not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...in PRASA’s business, it was Mr Molefe 
who said that? 
MR MONTANA:   It was Mr Molefe Chair in the three year 
story. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, are you saying that Mr Molefe was 
in a way lamenting the fact that you had left, you had – 
even though they wanted you to stay for three years, is 
that what you are saying or not really? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   No Chair I think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or he mentioned, he just mentioned it? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair the issue about the PRASA Board 
was never discussed even at that meeting. There was no 
issue, I think I know that Mr Molefe sometimes wants to 
present himself as a hero, and that he took on the 
President to say come, these are just afterthoughts Chair, 
there was never such a discussion.  I don’t know what is 
the views of Mr Radebe, Minister Radebe who had 
convened the meeting, but that is not my recollection 
20 
Chair, I never asked to go back to PRASA, at that time, 
today and even tomorrow Chair that I am very clear on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And so on your version the discussion, 
was the discussion about the two sides, namely Mr Molefe 
and yourself, stopping the public spats.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 317 of 335 
 
MR MONTANA:   Chair it was about that, the person who 
introduced the issues was my notes how I spoke, because I 
said what do I debate with my leaders, that was actually 
my introduction, I said Mr President these are my leaders, I 
respect them and so I decided to use this meeting as a way 
of giving a report, and then I highlighted – I then provided 
some of the key highlights, because I had left government 
Chair, I thought that would be it, but there was never at 
any point a discussion where the President chaired, the 
President would not, he has not spoken to me to ask me do 
10 
you want to go back into that position, we never had that 
kind of a conversation. 
 
So I mean I was surprised when I read the affidavit 
about what Mr Molefe but look it was a meeting in the 
middle of the night, I may be wrong, he may be right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   But I never asked to go back, I never 
asked to – the President never asked for me to be there, 
the meeting was about – so I wanted – I couldn’t discuss 
with them Chair, what will I discuss with them, except 
20 
substantive issues and that is what I put on the table, 
which the President stopped to ask the others to confirm 
whether what I was saying was correct and that is my 
recollection Chair of the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well was the substance or gist of what 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 318 of 335 
 
you said, you say it was a report or a report back, was it 
about what you had done at PRASA, what the state of 
PRASA was when you left and what the challenges of 
PRASA were as you knew them when you left, was it along 
those lines? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair – it was along those lines Chair, but 
I started with the fact that I outlined a number of 
government policies, that had been adopted and key 
decisions going back to the National Rail, Passenger Rail 
Plan in 2006, the Public Transport strategy adopted by 
10 
Cabinet and say all these initiatives were aimed at giving 
effect to government – it was not somebody taking their 
own initiatives on the side, and then I went onto – so Chair 
the fact, so all in all I think that was the – that was the 
approach that I took for the meeting.   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chair.  So can I just – 
and I know it is five years ago, about how long did it – you 
speak for Mr Montana? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair I cannot recall, I don’t even think I 
20 
spoke for 30 minutes when the President stopped me.   I 
think as I said from my points that I jotted down I think that 
the President stopped me, because he wanted to confirm 
what I am saying was true which is what then we reverted 
to, then at the end of the responses that’s when he said 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 319 of 335 
 
but I cannot understand, that’s what he spoke about this 
wall, we are agreeing inside but this wall is there and the 
conversation continued.   I never even had the opportunity 
to complete all the notes, all the points that I have jotted 
down to share with the meeting Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana can I ask you about a 
document called PRASA In Turmoil?  That’s a document 
which as I understand it you compiled around the 26 t h of 
July two thousand and ...[indistinct – dropping voice] 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair I noted there was a 
10 
document in the Unions that was called PRASA in turmoil 
or PRASA’s recent developments, something to that effect 
there, which was shared with me.  I have heard Mr Molefe 
saying that the document was compiled by me.   No that 
cannot be correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, I just want you to be 
unequivocal about this.  That document you’re aware that 
there is a document called PRASA in Turmoil?   
MR MONTANA:   If I remember there was. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But you didn’t compile it? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair I didn’t compile it, I note 
that the document was sent by the Unions, they were 
saying oh a whole range of situations that I shared with 
you yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I asked the question in this 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 320 of 335 
 
context 
because 
Mr 
Molefe, 
and 
maybe 
I 
got 
that 
impression, seemed to suggest that to a large extent at the 
meeting 
you 
articulated 
what 
was 
contained 
in 
that 
document which he says you had compiled?  
MR MONTANA:   No Chair, I don’t know what is the 
relationship, I don’t know what his impressions were of me 
speaking.  There were certain things that we know, that 
were very clear about us, and I think maybe that’s the 
impression that he may have but no Chair I had notes 
written on my black notebook and hopefully I will still be 
10 
able to find it and share it with the Commission’s evidence. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I then ask you this, on your 
version, and I am saying this because there is the Molefe 
version. 
MR MONTANA:  His version, indeed Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   On your version you and Mr Molefe 
left whilst the two ministers and the President continued 
the meeting, is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Mr Molefe says that the meeting 
20 
stopped because the President fell off to sleep.  Is that 
correct? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is important to clarify this.    You may 
be saying it is correct that what – it is correct that’s what 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 321 of 335 
 
Mr Molefe said, or you may be saying it is correct that the 
meeting ended when – because the President had fallen 
asleep? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair, I think Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Which one is true? 
MR MONTANA:   No that the President dozed off during the 
conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   And Chair I have heard what Mr Molefe 
said but I think there is a context to it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Fortunately for me who knew a lot of 
people in the Presidency, I remember when I arrived and 
served with tea some of the guys there they were saying 
we are opposed to this meeting, you guys know that 
[speaking in vernacular] has taken medication and actually 
the time that this meeting was taking place that Ubaba is 
not well, so that in fact doctors because this chap was 
sharing with me that I know them, were saying at that time 
half 
past 
six 
we 
have 
actually 
been 
given 
straight 
20 
instructions for the President not to meet with people, that 
is when he is supposed to take medication and all of those 
things.  Chair and the President did at some stage leave 
the meeting because of that and I think that the medication 
was taking effect as a result of that, so Chair but these are 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 322 of 335 
 
State secrets that we should not be talking about in that 
way, but I think for me that was the context, but I have 
listened to how Mr Molefe was using that thing to say here 
is the President who then called the meeting and later on 
the President Chair continued with the discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He came back? 
MR MONTANA:   He came back Chair as it were, so this 
thing about him falling asleep I knew it because PRASA 
colleagues said no but the President fell asleep, he doesn’t 
even know what happened.  Chair that is not true, that is 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Unless of course – unless of course they 
are talking about – he is talking about what happened after 
you had left but you say you left with him, Mr Molefe? 
MR MONTANA:    No, no I left with Mr Molefe Chair, we 
spoke on the passage, we parted ways, we went to our 
cars, and that was it Chair.  What happened after – behind 
– both of us did not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, because it is interesting because 
both Ms Dipuo Peters and Mr Molefe spoke on the basis 
20 
that everybody left at the same time, it was I think on Mr 
Molefe’s version around two am, and when they left the 
President had dozed off and was sleeping, that is what 
both of them said.   Am I correct Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is how she put the context 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 323 of 335 
 
correctly Chairperson, that is the one issue that both Mr 
Molefe and Minister Peters agreed on, that the meeting 
stopped because the President had dozed off, and they all 
left the meeting, leaving him alone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   None of them spoke – testified about 
any of the participants in the meeting having left earlier 
than others. 
MR MONTANA:    No, no Chair my, and maybe because I 
was the youngest of all of the people in the meeting so I 
think I should be given the benefit of the doubt on that 
10 
one, because Chair I remember very well when I arrived I 
went to the reception room, I sat there, I was offered 
tea/coffee, that’s what I had and then I spoke to one of the 
guys there, who had served me coffee and that’s when he 
said hey but you guys why do you do this to Ubaba, you 
know that he is not well, it is the timeframe to take things, 
we are under orders but – and he said we hope this 
meeting will take an hour, will take only an hour, that’s 
what he said to me Chair and that is what happened Chair 
so for me the following, the dozing off there is a context to 
20 
the fact that here is someone who is taking medication and 
the meeting was not supposed to be, but it has been said 
in a very derogatory sense out there as if you know – and I 
think it is something that is not right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Soni?   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 324 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just want us to understand because 
I need to put to you the dozing off according to Mr Molefe 
came at the time when he said to the President, and I know 
you disagree with me, but I am putting it so that we 
understand where the differences are, when he said to the 
President well if you want Mr Montana back you must come 
and address me and the President was, as he puts it, 
didn’t take kindly to that, but just soon after that he dozed 
off and everybody left.   You say that that didn’t happen at 
all. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And there was no reference on your 
version to the Board rescinding the decision.  Sorry you 
shake your head, does that mean no?  
MR MONTANA:   No Chair there was no such a discussion 
Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    Okay, and there was no discussion 
about the President being invited to address the Board?   
MR MONTANA:   No Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now when you – and you say you and 
20 
Mr Molefe left, but the few minutes ...[indistinct] the 
President ...[indistinct].  What did you and Mr Molefe say 
to each other as you left? 
MR MONTANA:   It was just small talk, it was just small 
talk, nothing of substance really and then we parted ways. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 325 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just now again want to understand 
each of your states of mind.   You are in a state of war with 
each other, that is the purpose of the meeting as you 
recall, is that right? 
MR MONTANA:   That is right Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right, now this meeting takes place 
and you on your version it all ends well because you and 
Mr Molefe agree that you will not be attacking each other? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
Was 
there 
any 
discussion 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that a yes? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes that is a yes Chair, sorry. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was there any discussion, I mean it 
looked like now maybe you didn’t bury the hatchet but it 
looked like there was some less antagonism between you 
and Mr Molefe.   Was there any discussion of how there 
could be a reproachment rather than simply a cessation of 
facility? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair that has never been my approach, 
20 
you know in these positions in politics, even your enemy 
you walk with them, and I mean Mr Molefe will confirm this, 
I have met with him, bumped into him whether in a mall, at 
a funeral of ANC people, I always go to him, polite, greet 
him, even in the middle of this war Chair.   It was a war but 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 326 of 335 
 
we were not fighting each other physically, I will greet him 
and to this very day Chair I think he has treated me 
unfairly, 
I 
think 
that 
he 
was 
not 
frank 
with 
me, 
understandably angry, I know where Mr Molefe stands on 
issues, I know where he stands and I know that in this 
divide it is that side and that side.   So I didn’t want – I 
accepted the guidance we got, that this is bringing you 
know ANC into disrepute, you guys stop all of those things 
and life continues. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you stop attacking each other 
10 
thereafter? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair the – you recall that what happened 
thereafter, there were all these court cases that were 
unfolding and I think in a way the war continued in the 
media because for example I think when we met in 
November, that’s when the ...[indistinct] in 2017 I think 
there was this Yangela matter, so to a large extent the 
matters in the public space continued, so I don’t think it 
was what you call the cessation of hostilities because I 
usually don’t sign those Chair, if you fight with me I fight 
20 
with you forever but still greet you when we meet here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the meeting when the two of you left 
on your version, was there a formal pronouncement, maybe 
I shouldn’t say formal I should say clear pronouncement of 
what the conclusion was, you had been invited to this 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 327 of 335 
 
meeting to try and resolve the public space, was there a 
pronouncement articulated as to what the outcome of the 
meeting was? 
MR MONTANA:   No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was on such? 
MR MONTANA:   There was probably with the Ministers, 
the President just said to us look I want to talk to my two 
Ministers and then we left, me and Mr Molefe so there was 
no such, I don’t know whether it happened after we’d left, 
but when we left the only thing that we knew was that look 
10 
a public spat is not in the best interests of the country and 
the ANC and that was it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, but did you know that because you 
– that’s what you were told at the end before you left the 
meeting, or that’s what the two of you just understood? 
MR MONTANA:   No Chair after the President had opened 
the meeting and then Minister Radebe also spoke at the 
meeting in terms of what he has done, there was a lot of – 
it was a jovial meeting but at the same time you could see 
that there was a ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   A jabbing? 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
A 
jabbing 
thing, 
for 
example 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Not physically. 
MR MONTANA:   Not physically, for example Mr Molefe 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 328 of 335 
 
accused Minister Radebe that no he is closer to me and – 
no in fact I think it was Minister Dipuo Peters that when 
she called me to cancel the press conference I refused but 
when Minister Radebe called me to cancel I then cancelled 
and then she was saying to the President but ...[indistinct] 
is only prepared to listen to – he is closer to Minister 
Radebe, he is only prepared to listen to the Minister.  Then 
Minister Radebe in his response in a very jovial fashion 
said but I am much closer Mr President to Popo than to 
Lucky and he went on to explain at length some of the 
10 
interactions that this is to I think Botswana ...[indistinct] all 
of those things were – so it was a political meeting Chair 
where you know somebody is a ...[indistinct] position, 
somebody moves his position and everything but still the – 
it was a cordial discussion and for me I was in a difficult 
position Chair, because despite the fact that I was unhappy 
with some of the things that happened I couldn’t say it in 
that meeting because I am meeting with my seniors, not my 
own age group, I had to be respectful to the President and 
the Ministers so I had to be careful and that is why I jotted 
20 
the note so that when I speak I am not all over the show, 
but I more pointed, I deliver the message that I wanted to 
give, and that’s what happened Chair, so when we left, me 
and 
Mr 
Molefe, 
there 
was 
not 
a 
clear 
instruction 
...[intervenes]  
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 329 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Outcome? 
MR MONTANA:   Outcome as it were, they remained to 
continue the discussion, and I never spoke to any of the 
Ministers or Mr Popo Molefe about that meeting, I just – 
life continued Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, it just seems a little strange to me 
that 
when 
the 
President, 
Minister 
Radebe 
maybe 
a 
minister, Dipuo Peters, prior to the meeting were very 
concerned about the so-called public spat which was 
between yourself and Mr Molefe, that they should allow a 
10 
situation where you leave the meeting before there is a 
clear outcome about this issue of the public spat.   You 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   No Chair you are absolutely correct, 
except that we took it when the President made the 
opening remarks, because he said this has to stop, and so 
I think there was no debate about that, and that’s when the 
composition happened Chair so there was no discussion 
but – there was no discussion further, I think that the 
President made it very clear and I take it that all of us had 
20 
accepted that the President has shown us the line and all 
of us have to accept that that is the way to go. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that’s fine.  Mr Soni I don’t know, I 
am aware that the Commission did ask Mr Radebe to 
provide an affidavit and give his version of the meeting 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 330 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I don’t know whether you have got it 
because it would be interesting to see what his version is 
compared to the two. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson I don’t have it at hand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you know of it? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    Yes, yes.  And I will check it, I will 
check it up before the next time, that is one of the matters 
we will raise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson I just want to ask one 
further question in relation to this meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana if you look at paragraph 
91 at the bottom of page 23 in the second sentence Mr 
Molefe says – well let’s read the first sentence, he says 
you 
spoke 
disparagingly 
about 
the 
Board, 
he 
didn’t 
respond, we know your answer to that was that that didn’t 
happen, you didn’t speak disparagingly. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He says something that I would like 
you to react to, he says: 
“As Mr Montana had threatened to litigate against 
the Board, although he never did follow through 
with this threat, I told the meeting that I would reply 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 331 of 335 
 
in court should this threat to litigate materialise.” 
Do you recall him saying that? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair, this was not – I think Chair 
that I dealt with the issue at the press conference, where I 
said 
actually 
the 
Board’s 
decision, 
because 
it 
was 
procedurally, it was not done in a – a proper procedure has 
not been followed, I will take this on the thing, so in my 
press conference you recall that I was asked to cancel it 
but I didn’t cancel it because the media was already there, 
but I didn’t go into the details of the issue and I made that 
10 
statement Chair, so I think he is confusing the statement I 
made when I spoke to the media with what had never 
transpired at that meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I just – I thought as you did, I 
would just like us to read this again, because he says as 
Mr Montana had threatened to litigate against the Board, 
he is not saying that the threat came at the meeting, as I 
read that and then he says although he never followed 
through so I don’t think there’s a confusion in his mind that 
the threat was earlier.  What though is there is no doubt in 
20 
his mind that he told the meeting that he would reply in 
court should your threat to litigate materialise.  I just want 
to know whether that issue was discussed ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Not at all Chair, not at all, it was never 
discussed at that meeting. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 332 of 335 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And he didn’t raise it? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, not as far as I can recall. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So you understand he is not saying 
you made the threat at the meeting. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no but the matter was never 
discussed or raised Chair from my recollection of the 
meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson the rest of Mr Molefe’s 
affidavit doesn’t deal with any matters concerning Mr 
Montana so insofar as Mr Molefe’s affidavit goes we have 
10 
asked all the questions we want to, subject of course to 
the matters that are in abeyance, especially about the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Minister Radebe’s affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Affidavit and also in relation to 
judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay no that is fine.  I think we 
should stop at this stage, obviously we have not finished.   
Tuesday next week is available, there was a witness who 
had been scheduled but had to change and some other 
20 
date that would have been used by another witness that 
will be given to him, so how is your availability on Tuesday 
from the morning? 
MR MONTANA:   Well Chair if you remember I have been 
summoned to this meeting Chair. 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 333 of 335 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you would avail yourself? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no I will make myself available Chair, 
thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay Mr Soni are you okay? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us adjourn your evidence then, 
further evidence to Tuesday.   Let’s start at half past nine, 
let’s start at half past nine ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson if I can just give a 
roadmap of what is still ...[indistinct – dropping voice] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It will be and so Montana can 
prepare for these things, it will be Ms Ngoyi’s affidavit, Ms 
Mzingwayo’s affidavit and Mr Ollerman’s report.  Those are 
the matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that’s fine.   Thank you very much 
Mr Montana for your cooperation so that we could work 
right into the night, thank you Mr Soni and your team, 
thank you to the staff and the technicians, thank you to 
everybody for all your cooperation, I know it is Friday 
20 
evening and Mr Montana was saying earlier on it is Friday 
and for young people, so I am hoping that the young 
people in this room don’t say hey you know these people 
who are not young anymore they forget that it is Friday, but 
I just want to thank everybody for all your cooperation to 
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 334 of 335 
 
assist the Commission to try and finalise everything. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson can I – I just wanted to 
finish on a bit of a positive note, in relation to Mr 
Montana’s affidavit I have indicated to him that there may 
be a very expeditious way to ensure that his affidavit 
...[indistinct – dropping voice] he has agreed to meet – yes 
and Bongani so that – Ms Msinga, so that we can – it 
probably won’t be done by Tuesday but at least we would 
know quite soon how the matter can be brought forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well I think that if the spirit that 
10 
characterised today’s proceedings is anything to go by that 
issue is going to be sorted out at least, it is just not going 
to be a problem, and I think it just shows what happens 
when everybody has a constructive and positive approach 
and attitude to issues, so I have no doubt it is going to be 
sorted out, so thank you very much to everybody once 
again. 
 
I must just announce for the benefit of the public 
that on Monday the Commission will be hearing the 
evidence of the Speaker of Parliament, Speaker of the 
20 
National Assembly as well as the Chairperson of the NCOP 
on the issue of Parliamentary oversight. 
 
And then in the – that will be during the day in the 
evening Mr Mantashe will come back to finish his evidence 
representing the ANC.   
16 APRIL 2021 – DAY 376 
 
Page 335 of 335 
 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 19 APRIL 2021 
