 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
26 MARCH 2021 
 
 
DAY 369 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 301 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
26 MARCH 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 3 of 301 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 26 MARCH 2021 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Kennedy, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Good morning Chair.  We are ready to 
proceed Chair with the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes good morning Mr Mantsha.  Thank 
you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are ready to proceed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you My Lord.  May I indicate 
10 
that Mr Mantsha is today assisted by his attorney Mr 
Bhenga. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  You can place yourself on 
record from where you are if your mic is working.  If it is 
not working they will sanitise the podium.   
MR BHENGA:  As per the hearing I am Mr Bhenga hearing 
on behalf of Dan Mantsha. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Good morning Mr 
Mantsha.  Mr Mantsha I would like to pick up on the point 
20 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Mr Mantsha are you going to 
prefer to have your mask on today?  Okay alright.  Okay.  
Thank you.  Yes Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Mantsha we 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 4 of 301 
 
were dealing last time with the situation concerning the 
termination of employment of the then Group CEO Mr 
Saloojee, the Group CFO Chief Financial Officer Mr 
Mhlontlo and the Company Secretary Ms Africa and you 
recall we started dealing with the process that was 
followed in that regard.   
And we were looking specifically at the steps that 
were taken in relation to the disciplinary inquiry that they 
had been told they would be facing and we were exploring 
why it took so long and ultimately it never took place at all 
10 
because the – the termination of employment was then 
done by settlement. 
 
Now Mr Mantsha I would like you please just to 
confirm you have before you a bundle hopefully what you 
have in front of you is Exhibit W4B.  Do you have that? 
MR MANTSHA:  I do Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you and we looked at part of 
the annexures to Mr Saloojee’s statement last time.  I 
would like to take you please to Bundle – this bundle and it 
has got different page numbering system than some of the 
20 
other bundles so it is – just bear in mind in this – in this 
file we have to look at the numbers on the right hand – top 
right hand corner and I would like you please to turn to 
page RS405. 
MR MANTSHA:  Page? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 5 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  RS405.  When I am dealing with this 
bundle I am going to omit reference to the RS unless we 
run into difficulties.  Right do you have that?  That is a 
letter from Zarina Walele attorney. 
MR MANTSHA:  I do Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And we looked at part of that letter on 
the last occasion.  That is the letter from Ms Walele who at 
the time was acting as the attorney for Mr Saloojee, Mr 
Mhlontlo and Ms Africa, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct Chairperson. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And it is – it is dated the 18 t h of 
February 2016.  Now by this stage Mr Saloojee, Mr 
Mhlontlo and Ms Africa had been on suspension since 
September, is that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And they had received a charge sheet 
– I think it was in December of 2016 and we dealt last time 
with the process in which it was that disciplinary inquiry 
was meant to proceed in January instead it did not proceed 
instead a mediation process was attempted and there was 
20 
various correspondence between the attorneys.  Cliffe 
Decker Hofmeyr to whom this letter is addressed were 
acting at the time for Denel.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now we already dealt I believe 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 6 of 301 
 
on the last occasion with the first part of the letter on page 
405 where Ms Walele referred to your appearing as 
Chairperson of the Denel before a select committee of 
Parliament where you had made statements that and she 
quotes there 
“These officials were in breach of the law 
and 
they 
failed 
to 
observe 
the 
legal 
requirements of the PFMA.” 
You recall we dealt with that in your evidence last time? 
MR MANTSHA:  I recall Chairperson. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you recall saying yes you said 
something along those lines in Parliament. 
MR MANTSHA:  Chairperson if I were to repeat myself 
again I said I am not going to take this statement because 
it is allegedly reported by the paper and I told the 
Chairperson that Parliamentary presentations are in a 
documentary form.  So if that statement which I made from 
Parliament was to be quoted then I would either agree or 
disagree.   
But I cannot comment on statements which are 
20 
allegedly coming from the paper and are then said to your 
Chairperson I would be very conscious as in terms of my 
own training not to put the word allege.  Ja so that was my 
answer. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right thank you. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 7 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I take that to mean that you are 
saying you do not want to commit yourself as to whether 
you were correctly reported to say you have – you accept 
this?  But you say there would be some document 
somewhere which reflects what you said. 
MR MANTSHA:  Indeed Chairperson that is what I am 
saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what you are saying.  Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:  Thank you Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now what Ms Walele says on the 
10 
following page is that this is unfortunate because it 
indicates a view on your part and on the part of Denel that 
her clients – the three individuals have already been found 
guilty before even having a hearing.  What do you say to 
that?   
There was no response that we are aware of from 
Denel’s correspondence to that letter to say no in fact Mr 
Mantsha did not say that in Parliament or to say no there is 
no decision already taken by Denel as to your guilt. 
MR MANTSHA:  Chairperson with respect this letter is 
20 
addressed to the then attorney of the Denel at the time 
whom I have no doubt was competent to deal with the 
matter.  And I had no doubt that where necessary he 
responded to correspondences.  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just come closer to the mic so I can hear 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 8 of 301 
 
you. 
MR MANTSHA:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MANTSHA:  All I am saying is the letter was addressed 
to the then attorney of Denel so not either to my board or 
to myself.  So what – whether there was a reply or no reply 
is not a matter within my knowledge.  And whether there is 
a complaint that these three employees were found guilty 
before the disciplinary hearing took place – listen she was 
entitled to represent these people and she was entitled to 
10 
say whatever she said but all I can say to you is this was 
never brought to my board, it was not addressed to my 
board so I am not going to comment. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  What she then says in her letter and 
you may have the same answer to this that is up to you 
whether you want to comment on this but I believe fairness 
requires that I put it to you that what she then records in 
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 is a concern that there – her clients 
had not yet been heard and that they were requiring she 
said we insist that the disciplinary process that your client 
20 
claimed in the same forum that was Parliament is underway 
is convened or at the very least a date is agreed upon for 
it so that the matter can be finalised.   
Were you aware that the three officials who were 
still on suspension on full pay through their attorney were 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 9 of 301 
 
repeatedly through their attorney in the correspondence 
saying we have not been heard, we want to be heard 
please would you get on and convene the inquiry.  Were 
you aware of that? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson again I think we must 
distinguish the role of the board and the role of the 
executives including the legal department of Denel.  The 
legal department of the company with the executive they 
were in communication with their attorneys who were 
representing Denel at the time and I do not think the 
10 
attorneys of Denel at the time were not responding to the 
correspondence.  
But what you do not have Chairperson you do not 
have a correspondence from Denel attorneys at the time 
address in reply to this which of course have given the 
reasons.  But be that as it may Chairperson of course is – I 
am not trying to say – to suggest anything but it is one 
thing to present correspondences from one party and you 
do not present correspondences from the other party. And 
the 
correspondences 
that 
we 
dealing 
with 
here 
is 
20 
correspondence to the attorneys of the company.   
I am sure the company would probably maybe have 
the records or maybe the attorney in question have the 
record.  But repeatable as they are I do not think they were 
not responding to correspondence.  Whatever answers they 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 10 of 301 
 
have given I cannot say because I do not have that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but the question is irrespective of 
whether Denel’s attorneys did or did not respond to the 
executives’ attorneys the question is whether you were 
aware on the basis of whatever source which could well be 
the legal department of Denel telling you as Chairperson of 
the board or the attorneys if they had direct communication 
with you as Chairperson of the board 00:12:18 whether you 
were aware that the executives, the suspended executives’ 
position was repeatedly conveyed as being that they 
10 
wanted the disciplinary hearing to take place.   
MR MANTSHA:  Chairperson what I knew at the time was 
the matters was not concluded.  The attempt for mediation 
failed 
and 
these 
disciplinary 
proceedings 
were 
still 
pending.  I was not privy to the to and fro communication 
between the respective lawyers of the parties concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Is that answer to say you were not 
aware that the suspended executives repeatedly said 
through their attorneys we want a – the disciplinary 
hearing to take place taking that position and conveying 
20 
that position over … 
MR MANTSHA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A number of months. 
MR MANTSHA:  I – I – if I can try to recall of course there 
were communication from probably the legal team to the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 11 of 301 
 
executive – executive to the board about these processes 
but what I cannot tell you is what was said at the time.  But 
what I can tell you now is that I do not remember being 
told that they – are these correspondences were they 
insistence please do this, please do this.  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Maybe – maybe this is the right time 
for me to say this.  I would have expected that in the light 
of the seniority of the executives who were suspended that 
the board would be quite involved in terms of the process 
for the disciplinary process and the preparations for the 
10 
disciplinary hearing and the suspension that is what I 
would expect simply because of the seniority of the people 
involved including the executives.   
It would have been different if one was talking 
about lower management and so on.  But the – the fate of 
the Chief Executive of any organisation would be in the 
hands of the board I would imagine and therefore I would 
expect that even the internal legal department if they were 
handling that they would be reporting to – to the board and 
taking instructions in quotes as attorneys would do from 
20 
decline because they should not do anything that is 
contrary to what the board maybe wanting to be done. And 
they would be – I would be expecting that they act as 
advisors to the board but they are not – they would not be 
the decision makers.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 12 of 301 
 
The decision makers would be the board.  They 
would just advise.  Would this approach be legally 
defensible, would that approach be tenable in law but in 
the end the decision makers would be the board.  That is 
what I would have expected.   
But from what you said last time and maybe that is 
what you still say today that is not how it happened.  In 
this case the legal department did not so to speak take 
instructions from the board or from you in regard to the 
handling of the disciplinary process. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  Okay Chairperson maybe let me put this in 
proper context.  The – the board has taken a decision 
which it had to be implemented.  In terms of – of course 
governance 
the 
decisions 
of 
the 
board 
they 
are 
implemented by various functions and this specific decision 
the functionaries involved the HR department, the legal 
department and of course in terms of the protocol they 
report to whoever is the Chief Executive.  So the decision 
was 
Chair 
the 
implementation 
is 
done 
by 
those 
functionaries.   
20 
Those functionaries will report as they execute or 
implement the decision.  But again what you do not have is 
any of the reports from those functionaries through the 
board that says this is what happened, this is what not 
happened.  So to then ask me almost four years down the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 13 of 301 
 
line – five years down the line of course I would not have 
you know that information in terms of what was it for.  And 
maybe to create the impression as you were trying to relate 
to me the board did not just – took a decision and walked 
away.   
The 
board 
duly 
expected 
the 
management 
to 
process in terms of the governance of the company and 
there were interactions between the board and the people 
who were involved.  There were displeasure as I indicated 
previously that the board expressed about this process but 
10 
of course he do not have you know that information.   
That information is not within my control it is within 
the company that is for sure because again the actions of 
the board are through the minutes and the minutes would 
say exactly there was a report by Group Legal, there was a 
report by this one, HR and these other 00:18:50.  So those 
reports would be there and again I repeat what I kept on 
emphasise throughout from the beginning of my evidence 
the board was overwhelmed by the bigger issue.   
I understand the position of a Chief Executive 
20 
Officer but at this point in time the board was overwhelmed 
by the situation where the country could find itself in the 
serious crisis because there would have been a default by 
the state owned company and that would have meant that 
other learners to other companies state owned companies 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 14 of 301 
 
might recall therefore.  So that was an issue of marginal 
importance which the board was preoccupied.   
But I am not saying the board was not serious about 
this matter.  Yes there were reports which were given and I 
am sure the records of the company will reveal in every 
either meeting of Audit and Risk.  What were the reports 
given as 00:20:05 of these suspensions? What the lawyers 
were saying.  I am sure those reports are there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Let me say 
10 
immediately Mr Mantsha I do understand it is some years 
afterwards and I cannot reasonably expect you to recall 
every last detail and that is why I think most of my 
questions in the last few minutes have been – have started 
with do you recall whether there was a response – do you 
recall why there was a delay etcetera and that is really 
what we are after.  And if you cannot remember you must 
say I cannot remember.   
What I can take and sorry just the other point that I 
just want to draw your attention in response to one of the 
20 
comments you made.  You said all that has been presented 
to you are the letters from the executives, attorneys and 
there are no – there are no letters that we have produced 
from the attorneys acting for Denel at the time – Cliffe 
Decker.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 15 of 301 
 
In fact this bundle includes various letters from 
Cliffe Decker from Mr Adel Patel some of which are 
relevant to what we have – what we are dealing with.  
Some were in fact raised on the last occasion I believe but 
we are going to deal with a few of – of the crucial letters in 
that regard from Cliffe Decker.   
So there is no selectivity certainly not on the part of 
the commission and its investigators and legal teams we 
have repeatedly asked Denel for all the documentation and 
we have produced to the commission in the form of the 
10 
bundles that have admitted by the Chairperson all the 
relevant documents that seemed to be material. 
 
But may I now take you Mr Mantsha to a letter 
which in fact came from the board and in fact came from 
yourself.  If I can ask you in the same bundle to look at 
page 412 please?    That is a letter from Denel it is on 
Denel Group letterhead you have it? 
MR MANTSHA:  I do Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And on the top right hand side just 
under the heading Denel Group it is dated the 17 t h of 
20 
March 2016.  You see that? 
MR MANTSHA:  I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And we see your name and what 
appears to be your signature on page 413.  Is that your 
signature? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 16 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thank you.  Do you recall that 
you sent this letter if I can just remind you we are going to 
look at the detail in a moment but this letter effectively was 
saying the board has decided not to renew Mr Saloojee’s 
fixed term contract when it expired.  You remember that 
decision was taken by your board? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do remember. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And this is the letter in which 
you recorded this and just – just if you go back to your 
10 
signature and name on page 413 we see that it is typed cc 
Zarina Walele Attorneys so she was cc’d – she was copied 
in on this letter. 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 And 
which 
was 
– 
which 
was 
addressed to Mr Saloojee personally on page 412 but quite 
correctly you or the people who were preparing this letter 
and advising you quite correctly as a matter of courtesy 
addressed a copy also to Ms Walele.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Right thank you.  Now let us just look at a 
couple of the paragraphs of your letter.  It is headed 
Termination 
of 
Employment 
Relationship 
Group 
Chief 
Executive Officer Position at Denel.  Now if we can just 
remind ourselves where we are in the sequence.   This is 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 17 of 301 
 
the 17 t h of March 2016 Mr Saloojee had as we have heard 
much evidence on being suspended about six months 
before that in September, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  September 2015 and they had then 
received a charge sheet saying they were going to be 
disciplined. 
 
They 
were 
suspended 
pending 
that 
disciplinary process and we have seen letters where there 
is a complaint that there is a delay in the disciplinary why 
are you not convening it?  And why are you not sending us 
10 
documents?  You have dealt with all of that.  Now your 
letter does not say we are going to now hold the 
disciplinary inquiry it is – it deals with another matter. 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that is the termination of the 
employment 
relationship 
not 
through 
the 
disciplinary 
process, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You could have proceeded with the 
disciplinary process at least in theory, held it if you had 
20 
substance – if Denel had substance to the charges and 
persuaded the independent Chairperson that Mr Saloojee 
was guilty he might have been dismissed at the end of that 
process but here you were saying that you are terminating 
the relationship on a different basis – on a contractual 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 18 of 301 
 
basis.  Is that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now you say in paragraph 1  
“The above matter refers to:  The board is 
of the view – this is Mr Saloojee that – 
sorry that your – Mr Saloojee’s contract of 
employment was not valid extended as per 
the 
PFMA. 
 
Nevertheless 
your 
alleged 
current fixed term contract of employment 
terminates 
on 
31 
January 
2017 
10 
notwithstanding your current suspension as 
the Group Chief Executive Officer which 
was effective from the 23 r d of September 
2015.” 
 
Now this contains quite a number of elements to it 
but just to unpack it essentially what you are saying is 
there is doubt as to whether in fact Mr Saloojee’s current 
contract had been validly extended but despite that 
reservation you had decided as board that if there was a 
contract at all still in existence it was going to expire on 
20 
the 31 s t of January 2017 and it would not be extended.  Is 
that right? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And then you say this:: 
“The alleged acts of misconduct are viewed 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 19 of 301 
 
in a serious light and as a result the trust 
relationship between the board and yourself 
has irretrievably broken down.” 
 
Now as I understand it in context you referring 
there but correct me if I am wrong the alleged acts of 
misconduct are the alleged acts of misconduct according to 
the charge sheet which was already issued to them for a 
disciplinary inquiry that was pending.  Is that right?  
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You not referring to other alleged 
10 
acts.  Correct.  Now I just want to ask you and let me 
explain the relevance upfront so that we know where we 
going.   
I am raising the next series of questions really to 
deal with the evidence that the commission has heard from 
Mr 
Saloojee 
and 
a 
commissioned 
Chairperson 
will 
obviously with respect have to weigh up all the evidence 
from Mr Saloojee and from yourself and anybody else who 
may testify in this regard.   
Mr Saloojee’s version is one that paints a very 
20 
negative picture about the board and you in particular in 
relation to why he was suspended and why and how his 
employment was terminated.  And you will recall because 
as you have confirmed previously you have seen at least 
parts of the evidence that Mr Saloojee provided to the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 20 of 301 
 
commission previously.   
You will recall that Mr Saloojee’s evidence and I 
hope I do justice by way of summary is that there was a 
sinister 
purpose 
to 
the 
suspension, 
the 
disciplinary 
charges, the failure to hold a disciplinary inquiry and 
ultimately to terminate the relationship inter alia in terms 
of this letter.   
And the – a text that he has really proposed as it 
were a motion that he has posed – proposed to the 
Chairperson is that what you were really doing, you Mr 
10 
Mantsha as Chairperson and those who acted with you was 
really to get him out of the organisation on a pretext that 
the charges against him were a pretext, charges about 
misleading the board at the first board meeting etcetera 
was all a pretext and that in fact you were trying to 
contrive a false basis to get rid of him and the real purpose 
was because he was perceived as being somebody who 
would not facilitate the awarding of contracts to the Gupta 
business conglomerate.   
You recall that that was essentially I hope I did 
20 
justice to his version but I am trying to give as brief as I 
can.  So that is his theory that he has put before or view or 
opinion that he has put before the Chairperson.  Now you 
finuously [?] disagree with that you have already said that 
on the previous occasion.  Correct? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 21 of 301 
 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
Ja 
Chairperson 
should 
I 
just 
say 
something?  Look I am going to repeat myself.  Mr 
Saloojee had no problem with Mr Essa because Mr 
Saloojee negotiated that Mr Essa buys three 00:29:30 this 
is the information that I tell – I told him before that I had 
reason.   
Mr Saloojee was working with Mr Essa and I said to the 
commission I am not saying anything beyond that.  The 
reports which are tabled before this commission the BBO 
report 
they 
did 
inform 
this 
commission 
that 
the 
10 
investigation was that the entry of VR Laser and to Denel 
was not ...[indistinct] [Speaker ’s voice drops – unclear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was not? 
MR MANTSHA:   Was not ...[indistinct]  
[Speaker ’s voice drops – unclear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And therefore, that taking actions and 
those executives who were involved with.  And it is before 
this Commission, the evidence from the so-called people 
implicated 
in 
signing 
the 
first, 
I 
think 
they 
call 
it 
20 
memorandum or whatever the case is.  Wessel told this 
Commission that he was told by Mr Saloojee that we need 
to work with VR Laser(?)  He gave his reasons what he was 
called ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
[Speaker ’s voice drops – unclear] 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 22 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That we need to work with...? 
MR MANTSHA:   They need to work with VR Laser.  Yes.  
Mr Burger the same.  Mr Ntshepe the same.  So I do not 
think it is going to help us that I must keep on repeating 
my answers because questions are asked ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  Mr Mantsha, no. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy’s question is not the one 
you are addressing.  His question is:  What do you say to 
Mr Saloojee’s evidence that you or the board of Denel 
10 
suspended him, not because of any proper grounds but 
because of some other agenda because you suspended him 
on the basis of allegations of misconduct in September.  
He was ready for a long time for a disciplinary inquiry.   
 
You made approaches to him to try and resolve 
the matter by paying him money – by paying them money.  
They rejected that.  They said:  We wanted a disciplinary 
inquiry because we want to clear our names.  When there 
was supposed to be an inquiry, you, Denel, proposed 
mediation and he said at the mediation they took the 
20 
position that they want a disciplinary inquiry to clear their 
names.   
 
And that is why the mediation failed because 
that is what - ...[indistinct].  And if I recall correctly, they 
asked for some documents as well.  Now you will remember 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 23 of 301 
 
from last time that the evidence revealed that sometime in 
December you had made – there was – Denel made an 
offer.  I do not know whether it was for three months’ 
payment, just before he charges were – the charge sheet 
was set.  If I am not mistaken.   
 
And then now we have a letter, a number of 
months, three months after that in March from – ja, in 
March from you.  The letter that we are looking at, 
17 March.  Where, despite the fact that you said, right from 
the beginning when you suspended, Denel had strong 
10 
evidence in March 2016.   
 
You still do not want to use that strong evidence 
and have a disciplinary hearing.  And if he is as guilty as 
you say you thought he was in terms of the evidence, get 
him dismissed without him being paid for so many months 
but you are offering to let him be paid for maybe something 
like eight, nine months.  Somebody that you believe is 
guilty of most serious misconduct.   
 
So I think it will be in your interest to address 
that issue properly because I am very interested to hear 
20 
your side of the story on that.  Because to me, on the face 
of it, there seems to be a problem when the employer says:  
I 
have 
strong 
evidence 
showing 
misconduct, 
serious 
misconduct by this employee.  So I suspend him in order to 
for a disciplinary inquiry.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 24 of 301 
 
 
And six months later, despite the fact that there 
is strong evidence, there is no inquiry.  And on the 
evidence that I have been told, the employee or the 
employees keep on saying:  Bring it on.  Let us have the 
hearing.  You know.  They do not seem to ask for any 
settlement but it is the employer that keeps on come – 
approaching them for a settlement.   
 
There is an allegation.  They say:  According to 
the evidence, we want a hearing.  In March 2016, you now 
say:  Yes, your contact – the allegations against you are 
10 
very serious but want to pay for about 10-months.  Where 
you could say:  Come next week for a hearing.  We have go 
the evidence.  We believe that you would be found guilty.  
And then you do not have to pay him for 10-months.   
 
So I just want to say.  It is important that you 
address that because on the face of it, it calls for an 
explanation to say:  If you have got evidence and you 
believe it is strong evidence, why do you – have you not 
have an inquiry for so long?   
 
So I am mentioning this you because it is 
20 
important that you know some of the things that are 
causing me concern so that you can address them head on.  
That is the purpose. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson, thank you very much.  
All I am trying to do before you is to actually give you the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 25 of 301 
 
context because the point, the evidence is driving to, is 
that Mr Saloojee would be an obstacle in terms of the 
Denel Asia.   
 
I am saying this because when I give you that 
background, it is simply because he was not an obstacle to 
VR Laser because he got VR Laser to Denel.  So one 
cannot say that the charges had something to do with VR 
Laser because he brought it.   
 
So to then suggest that the charges had to do 
with Denel Asia, I am then trying to give you that 
10 
background.  That is nonsense. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  If you put it like that, I 
understand the background.   
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So...so...  You must carry on.  Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   So all I am trying to say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You will have to deal with that.  So but 
that background is good. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But ultimately, I must listen to everything 
20 
you have to say. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes.  So all what I am saying is.  To say 
these charges have anything to do with the decision which 
was ended up taking of – taking Mr Essa as a partner to 
Denel Asia.  You know, this is what I want to address, to 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 26 of 301 
 
say he had a longstanding relationship with Mr Essa.  He 
made a lot of efforts to get Mr Essa to Denel.  I recall when 
we were in London, he did pleaded with me when he was in 
confidence, telling me some of the efforts he had made to 
assist Mr Essa.   
 
But he has always said to me:  Well, this is what 
I have done.  But in terms of the understanding of us as a 
board and my understanding, the defence in this country is 
an industry where there are no black players and part of 
the mandate from the shareholder whose government to 
10 
Denel is that:  Please transform the industry.  We want to 
see black suppliers on the main business of Denel.  Not to 
supply toilet paper and what have you.   
 
So VR Laser, according to what has been 
presented and according to what Mr Saloojee said, it was 
that black empowerment partner which plays in the space 
of Denel’s main business and it was the only black 
company as it was presented to us.   
 
So in short.  All I am trying to drive to is that, 
there was no any other motive to put these charges against 
20 
Mr Saloojee and his two co-employees.  The only motive 
was the misconduct committed.  I recall, I think my dealing 
with him in London, after the email he came to me, he 
came to my room and he really pleaded with me that he 
should not be fired.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 27 of 301 
 
 
And that was the very same day when there was 
a call from the Audit and Risk Committee to say:  We are 
not given access to the committee rooms to have our 
meeting to discuss the investigation about that LLS 
transaction.  So he pleaded with me to say:  Chair, please 
protect me.  I should not be fired.   
 
And with respect, I was very troubled to see him 
crying and to see him pleading because at that time, he 
realised that the relationship between himself and the 
board, as a result of the LLS transaction was broken.  And 
10 
the only thing he could do was to plead that I try to find a 
middle-ground between him and the board.   
 
And something, as I said to you when I started 
this evidence, I had a very good relationship with him.  I 
think we liked one another.  So it troubled me.  I did not 
sleep that night.   
 
So when I got back home, I tried to see if there 
is any other way we can avoid suspensions and conflict but 
the evidence was such that it was difficult because 
Mr Saloojee and Mr Mkhonthlo, they went to conclude a 6-
20 
months or 5-months a bridging finance contract with 
Nedbank while the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
Public Enterprises had approved a facility for five years.   
 
And what complicated the matter further was 
that.  We did not have the money. We did not have the 450 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 28 of 301 
 
to pay.  So it was impossible to then try to stay off the 
eminent disciplinary proceedings against him.  So the only 
reason, the only reason why he was suspended.  It was 
simply because of the misconduct in regard to that 
transaction.   
 
He did not comply with in terms of the approval 
of the Minister of Finance and from the Minister of Public 
Enterprises.  No one, between those two offices, knew that 
Denel had to pay 450 within 6-months.   
 
When the matter was reported to the Executive 
10 
Authority.  The Executive Authority then implored the 
board:  Please find a solution because if you do not then it 
is going to be catastrophic because other bond holders will 
pull and will demand their money and there will be a cross-
default.  So that was a clear instruction to say resolve this.   
 
And I can tell you, at that point, most members 
of the Audit and Risk Committee and some members of the 
board, they wanted to resign because they felt that they 
were being, so to speak, under the bus.  That the 
appointments for the board, it is actually an appointment of 
20 
a sinking ship.   
 
So I had to try to get board members there.  To 
get board members to work very hard with the Executive.  
To try and convince Nedbank which was very angry.  As I 
have indicated before.  Immediately they realised that 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 29 of 301 
 
apart from the fact there were the transactional advisor to 
Denel when Denel was acquiring this asset.  Denel gave 
ABSA Bank R 400 million in case, as a security, and they 
were given nothing.   
 
So at that point, they did not want to hear 
anything because they felt they were doomed.  And at that 
point, the Minister of Public Enterprises clearly set the 
condition:  Please do not conflict the two banks because 
you are going to ask this money from the two banks.   
 
So it was a difficult situation for me as the 
10 
leader of the organisation to try to see how I can get a 
middle-ground between Mr Saloojee and the board and also 
to get the board members to stay and not to resign.  And 
get the board to try to get some resolution with Nedbank.  
So it was quite a very difficult challenge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what you have said up to now 
Mr Mantsha might explain certain things, certainly, subject 
to what Mr Saloojee’s evidence is in this regard and maybe 
other people in regard to his working with Mr Essa, as you 
say.  That might be one thing.   
20 
 
But nothing you have said so far explains why 
the board when it had strong evidence against Mr Saloojee 
and the other executives in September 2015 still did not 
have – had not put together a hearing by March 2016.  So 
that...  I hear what you say but that is the part I am also 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 30 of 301 
 
interested in.   
 
I am not saying what you have said is irrelevant.  
Certainly, the part that deals with Messrs Essa and 
Saloojee working with Essa is quite important.  And the 
other part that you said also might explain certain things 
but I just want to make sure, do not forget that I am 
interested on this aspect as well. 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, I am actually happy in the 
sense that I am talking to someone who, in a sense, a very 
experienced 
and 
authority 
on 
the 
labour 
related 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am rusted on that. 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
In 
the 
name 
of 
a 
chairperson 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] I am rusted on it.  [laughs] 
MR MANTSHA:   So Chairperson, there are, of course, two 
issues here that Chairperson has delivered several times... 
in terms of the substance.  Substantive issues and 
procedural issues.  I do understand the Chairperson’s 
concern and to sum up the Chairperson’s concern is:  
20 
Look, you say you have got a strong case but you do not 
proceed to finalise it.   
 
And I think at the starting point, I then said:  
Look, we were very overwhelmed.  We were busy with 
other matters of default.  We were not happy with the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 31 of 301 
 
Executive.  I mean, the department concern who was 
handling this matter.   
 
So.  But the fact that the procedural issues and 
substantive issues... The substantive issues, as I am 
saying Chairperson, is that there was a case – the 
evidence – I mean, the objective evidence before this 
Commission, not from me and not from Mr Saloojee but 
objective evidence from people who had nothing to do with 
this, who just investigate the matter.   
 
The objective evidence before the Commission is 
10 
that:  Look, where we are at the moment, we are trying 
even to work the interest rate that we had paid for 6-
months versa vie the five year ’s fee.  So the objective 
evidence before the Commission is that, there was indeed 
a serious misconduct by this employee.   
 
So the issue that the Chairperson is raising with 
me relating to say:  You said there was a serious breach 
but the disciplinary hearing is not finalised ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not act like somebody who 
believes you have got a strong case. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   You do not act.  Yes, you do not act like 
somebody who believes that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   But Chairperson is well-aware that that 
does not mean that the breaches are not serious because 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 32 of 301 
 
there was a delay in prosecuting the delays.  I think we 
can cite a lot of case law where there has been delay 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  I accept.  I accept that you can 
have a situation where you have a strong case that an 
employee is guilty of misconduct but you might not follow 
procedural steps that you are supposed to follow.  And I 
accept that just because you do not or you did not follow 
proper procedure does not necessarily mean that on 
substance you do not have a strong case.   
10 
 
But what I am saying to you, as you have also 
indicated, is that, I am saying what one expects from an 
employer who believes he has a strong case is to act 
pretty fast, you see?   
 
Particularly when you are dealing with high 
executives.  Executive who are being paid a lot of money 
while sitting at home, you know.  You do not want to be 
paying a lot of money for over months when you do have 
the evidence.  You do not have - to be investigation.   
 
I 
mean, 
it 
is 
different 
if 
you 
must 
still 
20 
investigate.  When you do have the evidence, once expects 
that you would act expeditiously.  When you do not act 
expeditiously, one starts looking for inspiration, why?   
MR MANTSHA:   Exactly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if there is no explanation, it 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 33 of 301 
 
may well be that one starts to say:  Did you really have a 
strong case?  You see?  You will see that I am not saying 
one will start saying you do not have a case. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But one would start questioning because 
you are not acting like somebody who believed they had a 
strong case.  So.   
MR MANTSHA:   I think, I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...I fully agree with Chairperson on that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   But Chairperson, as I have indicated 
earlier.  I am sure the board minutes would indicate the 
nature of reports given about this matter and how the 
board acted in those matters.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   I think you would see that - I think the 
person who was acting as the Company Secretary and also 
a Group Legal, also had to leave and in the process 
because of the pressure from the board, there was some 
20 
medical condition because the board was not happy.   
 
And the other thing which, of course, triggered 
the – apart from that the fact – the process was draining 
from our point of view but there was leaking of letters.  The 
letter that we dealt with last week, the letter which was 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 34 of 301 
 
addressed to the acting Company Secretary ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Company Secretary. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...and the legal whatever.  That letter was 
leaked to the suspended employees.  That is how they got 
it because the letter was addressed to her.  So.  And when 
an incident like that happens – so there was a serious 
rupture within the organisation between her and the 
Executive and other people who were involved and the 
board.  How could a communication between you end up 
with the suspended employees?   
10 
 
So the impression that we formed at the time 
was that, of course, she was working with the suspended 
employees.  We felt that at the time she was deliberately 
dragging the process because she probably had alliance or 
allegiance to the suspended employees.  So that was our 
impression out of all the dragging and the matter not 
arriving speedily as we thought.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   So eventually, we removed her from being 
Company Secretary.  We got somebody to act in that 
20 
position and later, I think, we got somebody to act as a 
Group Legal.  But yes, there was dragging from within.  
And as far as we – I can remember we did act. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 35 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Well, I do not think from that I got 
an explanation as to why with this strong evidence the 
board did not act expeditiously, other than that you have 
said that:  Well, the board was under pressure because of 
other challenges and what you have just about the 
Company Secretary.  I do not want to take it further but I 
am just saying that is the impression I get. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, it matters to me Chairperson 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   How so? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   ...the impression you have because what I 
am trying to say to you.  In terms of the governance, the 
board cannot process it.  These things are processed by 
relevant sections...   
 
And I am saying to you:  Yes, correctly, there 
was dragging but that dragging was not by the board.  That 
dragging was by the officials, as I mentioned, acting Group 
Company Secretary and the acting Head of Legal and steps 
were taken against that person.  The person was removed.   
 
And I said to you.  If you are having the minutes 
20 
of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the board meetings. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...of the board meetings.  Because 
remember, throughout that process, the suspension in 
many 
board 
meetings, 
it 
was 
a 
standing 
issue 
for 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 36 of 301 
 
reporting(?).  What is happening?  How far?  So the matter 
was being reported.  But you know, for me to actually make 
detailed explanation to say:  No, you know, this month, this 
is what happened.  That month, this is what happened.   
 
The person who was full-time dealing with that 
matter would be able to explain.  How did he do this?  Why 
this was not done in time?  But the decision we took, it had 
to be implemented by those people.  So I do not think I can 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Take it further. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   ...say more than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  No, no.  That is fine.  I just want 
to say this because you have mentioned the issue of 
minutes of board meetings.  Prior to Mr Kennedy coming 
into this work stream, for quite some time I had spoken to 
the team that was working at the Denel work stream and 
said they must obtain a lot of documents and minutes of 
board meetings and they had given me reports that they 
were not finding cooperation.   
 
I think I was told, this would have been in, 
20 
maybe early 2020 or probably not or even 2019, at some 
stage that the Company Secretary was somebody from 
outside Denel.  I do not know whether it was an accounting 
firm or legal firm and that – I think I was told it was a she.  
She was not cooperating.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 37 of 301 
 
 
At some stage, I even said they must approach 
the chairperson of the board to try and get assistance but 
for quite some time there were serious difficulties as:  
Those are the reports that were given to me in getting 
various document but the resolutions and minutes of the 
board.   
 
So to the extent that there might not be certain 
documents here.  It may be that partly that was the 
problem but it may well be that the problem was solved at 
some stage.  But I thought I would just mention that for 
10 
what it is worth.  Mr Kennedy might know better. 
MR MANTSHA:   May I say something on that Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   I am here primarily to explain the actions 
of the board that I led.  And the action of the board that I 
led are captured in various board meetings.  And since I 
am called to do that here, it would be more than fair that I 
am assisted by those minutes because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   Chair, you would recall you warned 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fair enough. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...the previous board minutes, some of it, 
you forget. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is a fair point. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 38 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is a fair point. 
MR MANTSHA:   So to a point where I might not assist you 
because I might not have certain recollection. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might not recall. 
MR MANTSHA:   I think, accept my good faith in that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   I would have loved to explain everything 
as per the actions of the board as captured by the board 
minutes.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, of course, the question which I 
would like to pose to you in that regard is, whether from 
your side you made any approach to Denel to say:  Look, I 
am required to give evidence.  I am the former chairperson 
of the board.  I need documents from Denel that would 
assist me.  And if you did, what was the response? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson, there is so much 
hostility.  There is so much hostility there and there is, with 
20 
respect you know condemning and sentencing people 
without giving them a hearing.  So there is so much 
hostility that you cannot even break the air.  So, you know, 
those things, you know, I would love it in another ideal 
world.  That would be …[intervenes] 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 39 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy, do you want to say 
something about the board meeting minutes or something? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, we have it at various stages 
since I became involved at a fairly late stage in the email 
stream, we have been engaged in attempts to get further 
minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And some minutes have in fact been 
produced for us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And are included in a bundle that is 
being made available.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But we do not believe that there is 
anything there that seems to actually shed any light 
otherwise we would have relied on it here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So I am deliberately trying to limit my 
questions to things that are fair to put to Mr Mantsha and 
particularly where we have a letter from him he can either 
20 
explain it or he can say, if he wishes, I cannot remember, I 
cannot give an explanation because I cannot remember 
why I said that but at least we can ask him that and 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, whatever minutes are there, if they 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 40 of 301 
 
relate to particularly the period September to the departure 
of the executives. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think they should be shared with him if 
they have not been shared. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let him satisfy about what we have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if he takes a different view he might 
say no, this one jogs my memory on something that is 
10 
relevant. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then he can take it from there. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, thank you, we will do so.  May I 
then proceed to return to this letter, Chair, in asking just a 
few more questions on it from Mr Mantsha. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The Chair ask you earlier that – or 
he put it to you that this – that if you were – if you decided 
not to renew his contract, he would not be employed after 
20 
his contract expired, that was in January 2017, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And so that was the ten months that 
Chair referred to, nine or ten months, in fact ten months 
from March to January but he would be entitled to be paid 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 41 of 301 
 
out for the rest of his contract, so that would be ten 
months he would still received, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that would, of course, be in 
addition to the seven months that he had already been 
sitting 
at 
home 
on 
suspension 
since 
September 
the 
previous year, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I just want to draw your 
attention to paragraph 4 and I just want you to see if you 
10 
are in a position based on your memory to explain what I 
am going to ask you to explain.  You say in paragraph 4: 
“The alleged acts of misconduct…” 
Which you have already indicated related to what they 
were suspended for. 
“…are viewed in a serious light as a result the trust 
relationship between the board and yourself has 
irretrievably broken down.  The question of whether 
they were guilty of misconduct and the question of 
whether 
trust 
relationship 
had 
broken 
down 
20 
irretrievably or otherwise surely was something that 
could have been deal with in a disciplinary inquiry.” 
What you were saying here was a view as to the alleged 
acts of misconduct having broken down are very serious 
and having broken down irretrievably the element of trust.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 42 of 301 
 
That was said to Mr Saloojee in your letter to him without 
having afforded him yet an opportunity to be heard, is that 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:    Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And he says – not what I am saying, 
he says, I am just putting to you his version, he says that 
shows that you in fact had a closed mind, you were 
determined to get rid of him without a hearing.  Any 
comment on that? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, Chairperson, Mr Saloojee knew 
10 
himself that the allegations against him are so serious and 
that is why, as I said, he pleaded with me that I should try 
to avoid that he gets suspended and expelled.  So, as I 
indicated, what the board or the audit and risk committee 
was dealing with was an objective evidence before the 
board that says please pay in two weeks an amount of 450 
million which we did not have.  How did that come about?  
It came about because Mr Saloojee and his CFO went 
against the instruction given to them as an approval for the 
PFMA application.   
20 
 
The PFMA application said yes, you can die, LSSA 
…[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mantsha, I am sorry to interrupt 
you, I do not mean any disrespect but this is the third day 
on which we are hearing evidence and on the last occasion 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 43 of 301 
 
you complained that the evidence was taking a long time.  
With respect, we do need to try and keep some sort of 
focus on this.  My question was very limited.  It was not 
was he guilty of misconduct, my question was not was he 
guilty of misconduct that had resulted in irretrievable 
breakdown of trust, my question is very focused and it is 
simply this.  When you reached that conclusion that you 
express in the letter that was at a stage when he had, as 
yet, still not been subjected to a disciplinary or any other 
hearing. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    But, Chairperson, I think it is also 
important for me to give context to a correspondence 
because if you see the letter that he is referring to, the 
letter starts with: 
“The board is of the view…” 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:    So which means there was a report 
before the board looking at this matter and the report could 
be saying look, depending on what they have reported 
about this hearing, the hearing is dragging, there is 
pressure to finalise the funding structure with Nedbank and 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 44 of 301 
 
there is a pressure that the lenders and the partners out 
there, they want to deal with people who are permanently 
in the position.  So there was a context to the letter. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But the point is that there may have 
been reason – there may be reasons apparent from board 
minutes that are not before us now but the point is that it 
was done without a hearing.  That is all I am all I am 
asking for, okay? 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes but at that the same token, 
Chairperson, I think for me to explain should not be seen 
10 
as I am delaying the hearing because I think I am the only 
person 
here 
who 
has 
got 
the 
background 
and 
the 
information of decisions taken and some of the things 
taken.  So when I am of the view that perhaps an 
explanation is needed, a context is needed to be given, so 
I should not be penalised for trying to drag the hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, obviously we have got to 
strike a balance between being fair to you but also utilising 
the time properly, also for your own sake because you are 
paying. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For – so but I think what you have 
conceded is yes, there was – the board reached that 
conclusion about giving him a hearing, ja.  The one thing I 
wanted to put to you, you said Mr Saloojee knew, I think 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 45 of 301 
 
what you said he knew in effect how guilty he was.  In 
effect how guilty he was, you did not put it like that but I 
am saying but you came across as saying ja, but Mr 
Saloojee knew, that he knew what he had done, he knew 
we 
had 
evidence. 
 
Did 
I 
understand 
your 
evidence 
correctly? 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
 
I 
think 
Mr 
Saloojee 
knew 
that 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, there was a strong case against case 
against him. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:    That there was a strong case against him 
and it was wrong for them to have approved six months 
bridging finance without the permission of the Minister of 
Finance and Minister of Public Enterprises, that he knew it 
was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine.  What do you 
say to the proposition that between September 2015 when 
he was suspended and March when he wrote this letter he 
never acted or conducted himself like somebody who was 
scared of the disciplinary hearing.  On the contrary, he was 
20 
saying bring it on, acting like somebody who was confident 
that he would not be found guilty of anything and he never 
made, unlike the board, unlike Denel, he never made any 
offer to settle the matter. 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, with respect again, Chairperson, I 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 46 of 301 
 
am speaking with a very experienced Chairperson on 
things like this, that the bravado that accused persons and 
all sorts of people do in court, sometimes they fight for six 
years and go up and down and claiming innocence but it 
does not mean the bravado that you do should mean that 
you are not guilty of anything. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy, maybe we should take the 
tea break. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us tea break and resume at 
10 
quarter to twelve.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mantsha so 
you and your board adopted the position then, as we have 
seen in the letter, that there was a breakdown of the 
relationship and therefore the contract which was due to 
expire the following January would not be renewed and 
that it was proposed – that it had been decided that he 
20 
should not continue to work the rest of his contract until 
January but he would be paid out for that period, is that 
right? 
MR MANTSHA:    That is what the letter say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy, I have just consulted with 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 47 of 301 
 
my registrar because …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry, I cannot hear you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just consulted with my registrar 
because I seemed not to remember the oath being 
administered to Mr Mantsha this morning and she confirms 
that no, it was not administered. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry.  I take it that will be 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is not your fault, Mr Mantsha, it is 
my fault, so I think we should have it administered now and 
10 
I think you can then ask Mr Mantsha whether the evidence 
that he has given up to now is true and correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then that should cover it.  Okay, let us 
have that done. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MR MANTSHA:    Lugisani Daniel Mantsha. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to making the 
prescribed affirmation? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:    No objection. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you affirm that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth,.  
If so, please raise your right hand and say I truly affirm. 
LUGISANI DANIEL MANTSHA:   I truly affirm. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 48 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  If we did not discover it and 
somebody else discovered it they would wonder how a 
judge and so many lawyers including a lawyer witness did 
not remember this.  Okay, alright, you may continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So, Mr Mantsha, 
you have given evidence on two previous occasions under 
oath and you have given evidence again this morning so 
far, under the affirmation.  Do you confirm that they 
evidence you gave already this morning is covered by the 
affirmation that you have just taken, that is was true and 
10 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:    It is true and correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  Now, Mr Mantsha, 
so there is further correspondence in the file.  I do not 
need to take you through it all but effectively it says that 
Ms Walele says we are not happy that he should just stay 
at home until the end of his contract and we demand that 
you convene the hearing and then what we have is a 
response from Denel’s attorneys, Cliffe Dekker, CDH at 
20 
page …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Kennedy, Ms Walele’s 
letter that you are referring to, what page is it? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I might have a moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is that the one we looked at earlier? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 49 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, so we have just been looking 
before the tea adjournment at page 412 which was Mr 
Mantsha’s own letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then there was subsequently 
correspondence at page 415 and 417, is an example of 
where she has indicated that they want a hearing, not for 
the first time such a request.  If I can take you, Chair, to 
page 418, paragraph 6: 
“Our 
client 
holds 
the 
view 
that 
your 
client’s 
10 
resistance and failure to follow a fair procedure to 
determine 
any 
wrongdoing 
is 
pertinent 
to 
the 
aforesaid and it is an opportunity to be heard by the 
shareholder of your intention is required.  We 
further believe since no fair procedure has been 
followed to date that there is no grounds for early 
termination of employment of our client.” 
7: 
“We 
therefore 
urge 
your 
client 
to 
convene 
a 
disciplinary process as a matter of urgency.” 
20 
So are you aware that that letter was sent or is that just 
something that happened behind the scenes? 
MR MANTSHA:    I am not aware, Chairperson, of the 
letter. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Alright, thank you.  And then 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 50 of 301 
 
we get to the letter I mentioned at 420 from Cliffe Dekker 
from your attorney Mr Aadil Patel and he says, paragraph 
1: 
“We do not intend dealing with all the allegations.” 
And they reserve rights.  Then paragraph 2: 
“Your request for a hearing is misplaced, your 
client’s 
employment 
is 
not 
terminated 
due 
to 
misconduct.  We reiterate what is stated in our 
client’s letter to you dated 17 March 2016.” 
That was in fact your own letter of 17 March, let me just 
10 
put to you, Mr Mantsha.  And then he says: 
“Your client’s contract is simply not renewed.  Our 
client does not require your client to work the 
remaining part of the contract.” 
So that is the answer to the request for a hearing.  He is 
saying it is not needed because your client’s employment 
has now been terminated, it is not going to be renewed 
from next January, in the meantime, he does not have to 
come to work.  Are you aware that that was taken 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
20 
MR MANTSHA:    Absolutely I am shocked, I am not aware. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You are shocked? 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What later happened though was a 
letter …[intervenes] 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 51 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry, what shocks you, 
Mr Mantsha? 
MR MANTSHA:    No, that this was never brought 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, to you, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then we came to page 422, another 
letter from Denel’s attorneys and this relates to – I am 
going to try and go through this quite quickly now, the 
correspondence, it in fact relates to a further proposal to 
try and settle the matter and it refers what would be paid 
10 
out to Mr Saloojee.  Then if I may take you please to – if I 
might have a moment Chair – page 490.  490 is yet another 
letter from Cliffe Dekker, this time it is dated the 23 May 
2016.  It is rather faded, the quality of the copy, but it says 
– it refers to earlier correspondence and then says in 
paragraph 2: 
“We 
confirm 
that 
Bafana 
Ncube 
or 
Ncube 
Incorporated Attorneys has been appointed as a 
Chairperson for the disciplinary inquiry.” 
So it seems at this stage …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page is that, Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   490. 
CHAIRPERSON:   490, okay. 
MR MANTSHA:    490? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you see that? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 52 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So it seems that having previously 
told 
Ms 
Walele 
Mr 
Saloojee’s 
attorney 
in 
earlier 
correspondence that there is going to be no disciplinary 
inquiry, there does not need to be because his employment 
is now terminated with effect from the next January and he 
is not going to come in the meantime.  It appears that that 
was revisited and now back on course is the proposal or 
the intention to hold the disciplinary inquiry and in fact the 
attorneys have gone so far as to appoint Mr Ncube, an 
10 
attorney to chair the disciplinary inquiry.  Were you aware 
that that was done? 
MR MANTSHA:    No, but Chairperson, let me speak under 
correction. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    As I said before that ordinarily this 
matter, as long as it was still pending, it would have served 
before the board and as I indicated before, of course the 
board was not happy with the internal people who were 
working on the matter, I have explained the reasons and 
20 
what happened.  So the appointment of the Chair or 
whatever in terms as this letter say is not something that is 
within my knowledge, so as I indicated, we were not 
dealing 
with 
the 
attorneys 
ourselves, 
the 
respective 
officials were dealing with the attorneys on the matter. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 53 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  Now there is a 
response to the last letter from Cliffe Dekker that I have 
just taken you to and it is a few pages earlier in the same 
bundle at page 487.  By this stage it is apparent that Mr 
Saloojee was no longer represented by Ms Walele and he 
had moved to Mr Shaheed Dollie.  For the transcriber ’s 
benefit, it is D-o-l-l-i-e, and Mr Dollie responded to Mr 
Patel’s letter, the one we have just looked at where he said 
attorney Ncube would be appointed as the Chairperson and 
so Mr Dollie says in paragraph 2: 
10 
“On the 23 May…” 
I am sorry, before I get there, I just note the date of Mr 
Shaheed Dollie’s letter to Mr Patel, it is the 1 June 2016 
and he says in paragraph 2: 
“On the 23 May 2016 you informed us that attorney 
Ncube would be the Chairperson of the disciplinary 
proceedings.  You further informed us that you 
would 
let 
us 
know 
when 
the 
disciplinary 
proceedings would commence and that you would 
also furnish us with a bundle of documents your 
20 
client 
intended 
utilising 
for 
purposes 
of 
the 
disciplinary proceedings.  The charges have been 
pending since 22 September 2015.” 
And then he proceeds to explain why his client feels 
prejudiced because of this delay and then in paragraph 6 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 54 of 301 
 
there is a threat that if Mr Patel does not furnish a date 
when the disciplinary proceedings will actually commence, 
which must be within a reasonable period, there is an 
indication that they would bring an application – a legal 
proceedings to set aside his suspension and an order 
entitling him to return to work and resume duties.  Are you 
aware that that was said on behalf of Mr Saloojee to your 
attorney? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, I do not recall, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Can recall and I appreciate 
10 
that you do not have – we do not have in front of us all the 
minutes and so forth but can you from your memory recall 
at this stage – I also appreciate that at this stage Denel 
was still in a state of serious difficulties and your focus on 
the board was largely on trying to get out, get Denel out of 
the financial and other difficulties, but can you recall – this 
is now June 2016, about nine months since you had taken 
a decision to suspend Mr Saloojee and the others, can you 
recall whether you ever felt concern that these executives 
were no longer doing their job because they have been 
20 
suspended, they were still receiving pay, substantial pay 
and that nine months or so down the line they still had not 
got to the beginning of a disciplinary inquiry, let alone the 
end of it?  Was that not a concern to you bearing in mind, 
for example, you were accusing them of breaches of the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 55 of 301 
 
PFMA, that under the PFMA you, as executive authority, 
had the obligation to ensure that discipline was taken and 
to avoid fruitless and wasteful expenditure? 
MR MANTSHA:    Just correction, Chairperson, the board 
is not an executive authority in terms of the PFMA, the 
board is an accounting …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I beg your pardon, you are quite 
right. 
MR MANTSHA:    It is an accounting authority. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But you still had that obligation, not 
10 
so? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, let me say, Chairperson, we were 
extremely concerned about the delays in this matter and as 
I alluded before, there was people internally, as I have 
identified the former acting company secretary who was at 
the same time the head of legal.  So there was in the 
opinion of the board at the time a deliberate strategy to 
frustrate the process, to move it slow and, of course, we 
were concerned and we tried to push that person out.  I 
cannot tell you when the person was pushed out, but we 
20 
were concerned about it.  It was a big concern because we 
wanted clause on the matter. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just want to go back to what you and I 
had an exchange on with regard to the delay.  Of course is 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 56 of 301 
 
it not true that if a disciplinary inquiry was held there 
would be the possibility that the executives or Mr Saloojee, 
the executives could be found not guilty and if they were 
found not guilty the board would have no option but to 
allow them back into their jobs?  Would you accept that 
proposition? 
MR MANTSHA:    No, there was no possibility of them not 
being found guilty, it was not possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am not sure why you say that if 
you were not going to chair the …[intervenes] 
10 
MR MANTSHA:    I can tell you the reason why. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you are not going to chair the inquiry, 
I mean… 
MR MANTSHA:    Look, Chairperson, I can tell you why I 
am saying this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:    Because, you see, firstly, when you take 
a decision to suspend, when you take a decision to 
suspend, I think as the evidence showed you, it was not 
like one morning people wake up and [indistinct – dropping 
20 
voice]. 
 
There 
were 
several 
meetings 
there 
were 
investigations and members of the audit committee, some 
of them were delegated to meet the bankers, Nedbank and 
Absa, I tried to find out what really happened and they got 
the side of the story from Nedbank because Nedbank were 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 57 of 301 
 
helping from the transaction, so there was an investigation 
which was conducted in the bank and, Chairperson, you act 
on the basis of the approval that you were given by the two 
executives authorities which is Minister of Finance and 
Minister of Public Enterprises and on the documents you 
were given an approval of five years to pay the loan and 
you go and change that to six months or five months to pay 
that loan.  Clearly on the face of the document you have 
contravened the approval.  There was no approval for six 
months so which means in effect that transaction was not 
10 
approved and this is the evidence that it is conveniently 
now serving before this Commission.  There was no proper 
approval for that transaction because when the terms – so, 
Chairperson, when you enter transactions like this, I know 
you know this very well in your previous life, you prepare a 
term sheet where the term sheet records the agreement 
between the lender, in this instance these two banks and 
Denel and that term sheet is submitted for the purposes of 
the PFMA approval to the relevant executive authority.  In 
7this instance it is Minister of Finance and Minister of 
20 
Public Enterprises.  They look …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I stop you there? 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think let us put it this way, I think your 
answer to my 
question is the evidence against the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 58 of 301 
 
executives was so strong that you are saying there was no 
chance of them being found not guilty. 
MR MANTSHA:    Correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, of course that strengthens the 
difficulty about delaying when you are so certain that, you 
know, these people, you know, there is no chance of them 
not being found guilty.  But we have dealt with that, I am 
not wanting us to go back there, ja. 
MR MANTSHA:    Ja but just to add on that, Chairperson.  
Precisely the delay was not on the part of the board.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:    The board act through functionaries 
being HR, being company secretary being the head of 
legal, they have appointed reputable law firm.  So it was 
not on the part of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, for me – or let me ask 
this question, are there any specific steps that the board 
took against people in the management who, according to 
the board, were failing to do their job properly because 
their job was to make sure that this process was expedited. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes, we did, Chairperson, the acting 
company secretary at the time and the head of legal who 
took steps, we had to remove that person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 59 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:    And, as I said earlier, there was also 
clear evidence of leaking communication between herself 
and the board to these executives and it was clear to us 
that she is deliberately aiding them maybe because they 
were working together for a long time, they developed 
some allegiance to one another but she was deliberately 
aiding them and we took action. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when was that if you are able to 
remember? 
MR MANTSHA:    I think as I said, Chairperson, I mean 
10 
when this matter, as a standing matter to the board comes 
to the board, so the minutes would have captured lot of our 
displeasure and a lot of our discussion about this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But have you got a recollection whether 
it might have been 2015 of 2016 or you do not remember? 
MR MANTSHA:    No, I do not think it is -  I am not really 
sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:    But I am not really sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:    But I do not think it is 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you say you removed the head of 
legal? 
MR MANTSHA:    The company secretary.  Eventually, I 
think – I am speaking under correction because there were 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 60 of 301 
 
a lot of pressure we put to the Acting CEO and the Acting 
CFO because the two of them were also getting pressure 
from the lenders to say …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is happening? 
MR MANTSHA:    Ja, what is your standing talking to us 
because 
you 
are 
acting 
and 
I 
they 
put 
a 
lot 
of 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to …[intervenes] 
MR MANTSHA:    Sorry, Chairperson, sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I just wanted to have the names of 
10 
the people you say you took action against, was it the 
company secretary and the head of legal or was it the 
company secretary only?  I wanted the names of the people 
of their positions against whom you took action because 
you believe as the board that they were delaying or failing 
to expedite the process.  You said it was the acting 
company secretary, is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes and head of legal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was there somebody else? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, she was the only one who was 
20 
solely responsible with the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes, that is the only person that action 
was taken. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The head of legal? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 61 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:    Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was her name, do you remember? 
MR MANTSHA:    It was Legoabe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Legoabe? 
MR MANTSHA:    Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you, Chair.  So after this 
correspondence between the attorneys, Mr Mantsha, we 
know that from the documents – I do not know if you recall 
or have knowledge of it, Mr Saloojee then lodged a dispute 
10 
with the CCMA.  You are aware of that? 
MR MANTSHA:    I see the referral (indistinct – recording 
distorted) 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  I am not sure why we have got 
a feedback – in fact the referral is right here as you point 
out, it is from page 492.  We do not need to go into the 
content of that.  That was referred and the dispute was 
then resolved.  Are you aware then that there was a 
settlement with Mr Saloojee? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, eventually there was a settlement 
20 
with Mr Saloojee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    Which was, I think facilitated by the 
former CFO. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  If I can just have a moment?  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 62 of 301 
 
Yes, it is page 513, in fact it starts a bit earlier.  Sorry, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is 5.3, is that a paragraph of a 
document? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry, I am just speaking, Chair, 
I thought it was 513. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It actually starts at page 499. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I think we touched on this on a 
10 
previous occasion but there are just a few aspects I need 
to ask you some questions on.  Were you the signatory on 
behalf of Denel to that settlement agreement?  If I can take 
you to page 513, it seems that it was signed not by you but 
someone else.  Mr – I cannot actually quite read the 
writing of his name, he was Acting Group Financial 
Director.  Can you help me with the name, is it Mr 
Mhlwana?   
MR MANTSHA:    Ja, I see here it is the former CFO of 
Denel, Mr Mhlwana. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, he was acting at that stage and 
we see that that settlement agreement was signed on the 8 
November 2016.  So that was some 14 months or so after 
they had been suspended, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:    Correct. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 63 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And just a couple of points I need to 
raise with you here.  What he was – the terms of the 
settlement reflect that he was given an ex gratia payment 
on the basis that his employment was terminated, an ex 
gratia was the amount of R2 362 492.  Were you aware that 
there was this settlement?  You will find that at page 505, 
clause 6.  Presumably this must have come to you or your 
board for approval to settle with Mr Saloojee. 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, it was debated in the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And did you give your 
10 
approval?  You did not …[intervenes] 
MR MANTSHA:    The board approved it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And so that, as it says, the 
R2.36-odd million is an amount equivalent to 50% of his 
annual remuneration so he got effectively a payout of six 
month salary – an amount equivalent to six months’ salary.  
Were you aware of that? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  And that was – in addition 
there were certain other amounts such as accrued leave in 
20 
clause 5 and so forth.  Now was in addition to the payment 
that had already been made pursuant to your letter earlier 
that year where you had said we have decided not to renew 
your contract but will pay the rest of the year out and that 
was duly paid long before he referred the dispute to the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 64 of 301 
 
CCMA.  Are you with me? 
MR MANTSHA:    I do not remember that payment, 
Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  So on the basis of his – and 
that we know was about ten months from the time of your 
letter and that was in addition to the seven months that he 
had been suspended.  So if we take all of these periods 
together he was on paid suspension for seven months until 
you terminated his contract by saying we are not going to 
renew it and we are not requiring you – we do not want you 
10 
back.  Then there was another ten months to the end of the 
period of contract so that was 17 months and in addition 
you were now – you, Denel, I mean, were now paying him 
out ex gratia another six months of salary to resolve the 
dispute, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson, just to give some 
background, the letter …[intervenes]   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am just asking you for the facts and 
then I will ask you for the background. 
MR MANTSHA:    No but you made a statement that I do 
20 
not know where you are getting the facts from. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So is it request for clarification? 
MR MANTSHA:    The letter which indicated – as was read, 
we are terminating your contract, I do not remember that 
there was payment after that.  So if …[intervenes] 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 65 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   After when? 
MR MANTSHA:    There is a letter which he has read. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one about ten months’ payment? 
MR MANTSHA:    The one of – yes, it proposed termination 
and all the things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
MR MANTSHA:    I do not remember there was payment 
made at that stage, I remember there was payment made at 
the end of this settlement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:    Ja.  But again, I mean, I would rely on 
the figures which are said on the document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the letter which the payment that 
you say you do not know whether it was made, that would 
be the payment in terms of the letter which I am under the 
impression you signed. 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of 17 March. 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the one.  That letter did say to 
20 
him he was going to be paid for the rest of his – balance of 
his contract period. 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that it said that you know but what 
you say you do not know is whether it was implemented. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 66 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:    Indeed, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
MR MANTSHA:    I have not seen any evidence to show 
that that was accepted and implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is fair enough, Mr Mantsha, 
thank you, and I rather skipped over a few letters in the 
hope that we could make some progress but I am happy to 
take you back to page 422. 
MR MANTSHA:    Page? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   422.  422 is another letter from Cliffe 
Dekker, CDH, dated the 13 April 2016.  That was shortly 
after the letter that the Chairperson has just referred you 
to that you confirmed that you signed and he says: 
“We record that in relation to this dispute your 
client’s employment has been terminated and your 
client…” 
And that is Mr Saloojee. 
“…has been paid out for the remainder of the term 
of the fixed term contract of employment up to and 
20 
including 31 January 2017.” 
So 
that 
was 
what 
Denel’s 
attorneys 
confirmed 
Mr 
Saloojee’s attorneys confirm we received it but we do not 
accept that that is sufficient, we want a disciplinary inquiry.  
We are not satisfied that you are entitled to terminate and 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 67 of 301 
 
Mr Saloojee has also given evidence that he did receive 
that payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that is what I wanted to confirm 
also, that in his oral evidence he confirmed that the money 
was paid into his account. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, thank you Chair.  So I appreciate 
your position Mr Mantsha.  You do not know, you cannot 
remember.   
MR MANTSHA:  I do not know. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But I just thought in fairness I need to 
10 
show you the missing evidence as you suggested.  
MR MANTSHA:  Thank you Mr Kennedy, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me ask you about the payment that 
you know about at the end.  You said the board debated 
the matter and approved the final settlement.  Why did the 
board in November 2016 give Mr Saloojee who had not 
been working, who had not rendered any services to Denel 
for over a year, why did you decide it should give him any 
money other than what was due to him because his 
contract was going to expire in January? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  Chairperson, as I indicated earlier, there 
was a long discussion which in this instance was the 
company was represented by the then CFO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By? 
MR MANTSHA:  By the then CFO. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 68 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
WITNESS:  Talking directly to the suspended employee.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Njebe, that was Mr Njebe. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes, and at that stage we were under 
tremendous 
pressure. 
 
We 
were 
under 
tremendous 
pressure to stabilise it.  Stabilise the company by having 
permanent [indistinct].  In order to give assurance to our 
learners, to our business partners, that whatever decisions 
we arrived at, whatever negotiations we are busy with, 
these officials are permanently employed and they will be 
10 
there to see this decision through.  
 
So the settlement was given primarily weighing the 
interest of the company at the time, what the company was 
losing at the time because of the vacuum at the top and of 
course there was submission by the relevant officials to the 
board, to say look, this is where we find ourselves and in 
view of all these problems that we have, in terms of 
stabilising the company, stabilising the business of the 
company, we are of the view that this kind of settlement 
would be in the best interest of the company. 
20 
 
After the board has considered the issue and 
considering the pressure at the time, the board was of the 
view that it was in the interest of the company that this 
matter must be closed so that we can then move on to have 
permanent appointments which would then give confidence 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 69 of 301 
 
to  our partners, give confidence to our learners.  
 
So it was just the interest of the company that has 
given us to accept the submissions made.  Firstly of course 
there was submissions made by the executive to say look, 
can we talk to these people.  If I remember I think the CFO 
was approached.  
 
I am not sure whether by the former, the suspended 
CFO at the time and they started to explore these issues 
and of course he came to the board to say look, this is 
what we think is in the best interest of the company, can 
10 
we proceed to talk.   
 
He was given the go ahead to talk, and when the ... 
he has reached this kind of conclusion, he came back to 
the board and said look, we request that you approve this 
for these reasons and the board took a decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I must just say Mr Mantsha it does 
not make sense to me.  
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson, it is not going to, sorry 
to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
20 
MR MANTSHA:  It is not going to make sense to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  Because you have no benefit of the 
discussions.  The rational of arriving at this is not before 
you.  So I do not accept this to make sense to you and as 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 70 of 301 
 
much as you should not expect me to then reprint what was 
discussed 
when 
these 
discussions 
was 
taking 
place 
because I do not have it in my [indistinct]. 
 
But there is a context, there is full discussion about 
this and again Chairperson, I would, I am talking to 
somebody who has presided over settlements, many years 
of your time and Mr Kennedy as well.  We sit here as the 
commission, looking back to five years ago. 
 
As the commission as we sit here today we do not 
have the submissions made to motivate certain decisions 
10 
and if we then expect the Chairperson of the commission to 
come to more or less same conclusion with those who were 
given the submissions or expect the Chairperson of the 
commission 
to 
say 
this 
is 
reasonable, 
this 
is 
not 
unreasonable, in the absence of those submissions, I think 
it is a difficult decision. 
 
It is difficult for me as I represent the board to then 
go point by point on those submissions I do not have and 
try to explain submission by submission and the reasons 
for it.  So I think it is unfair to expect that kind of a thing.  
20 
I think the nature of this process Chairperson, we must 
accept 
that 
certain 
things 
we 
might 
not 
understand 
properly because we were not there five years ago. 
 
We were not seized with the moment because apart 
from if you look at the settlement, this settlement is not in 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 71 of 301 
 
isolation of the total issues that the company was facing at 
the time.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  So those who took the decision, they had 
to look at the bigger picture and satisfy their fiduciary duty 
to say look, we can pay this amount but for the greater 
good.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, you see I wanted to say in  
particular what does not, what makes this not to make 
sense to me, is that in March Denel is aware that Mr 
10 
Saloojee's contract is going to come to an end by a 
fraction of time in January 2017. 
 
It is even aware that that would not be seen as a 
dismissal, it would just be the coming to an end of a fixed 
term contract.  It has taken the decision it will not renew.  
Various things happened in the meantime after that.  Now 
in November, Mr Saloojee is left with November, December, 
January for his contract to end.  
 
He has been on suspension for more than a year.  
All that one would expect is that at that stage, Denel would 
20 
simply allow the contract to come to an end by a fraction of 
time.  if Denel wanted to appoint a permanent CO, CEO in 
order to address the concerns of the investors or whatever, 
if it made an announcement that it appointed a CEO but he 
would start with effect from, you know February after the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 72 of 301 
 
expiry of this contract, at least the investors would know 
that at least now there is going to be a permanent CEO.  
 
So, so you have a situation where as far as Denel is 
concerned, as far as the board is concerned, for over a 
year it is sitting with on its version, very strong evidence 
that these executives are guilty  of serious misconduct.  No 
hearing takes place.  
 
Closer to the end of the contract period, three 
months, when the ... if they just allowed the contract to 
expire they would not pay anything extra.  They pay him 
10 
more.  I do not know whether it is three months more or six 
months more ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It was six months more, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, they pay him more.  This is, this 
person that they say has put the financial position of the 
company in a very difficult position, they give him some 
more money that he is not entitled to, so but I do not want 
us to go back.  
 
I just want you to understand what is going on in my 
mind.  
20 
MR MANTSHA:  I really appreciate that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  Let me just say one thing.  What are we 
settling? 
 
What 
are 
we 
settling? 
 
We 
are 
settling 
[indistinct]. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 73 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  What? 
MR MANTSHA:  We are settling a case, we are settling a 
litigation and Chairperson, you would know that whether we 
have got a case or not, is a matter for another day.  At this 
stage we concede within the best interest of the company, 
that the litigation must and this is the primary reason of 
the settlement.  
 
Would be reasons that I have given, because 
whether the contract is finishing in three months or 
whatever the case, there was dispute in every board and 
10 
we did not want to sit in that dispute because it was 
harming us for the greater part.  
 
That is how far I can give you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Just to complete 
the factual situation as to the settlement.  We have dealt 
with Mr Saloojee’s settlement in relation to how much he 
was paid and you have explained why.  On the same page, 
505 Clause 4.2, says it is recorded that all disciplinary 
proceedings against the Employee have been terminated.  
20 
 
Were you aware that one of the objectives and 
terms of the settlement agreement was to abort the 
disciplinary inquiry that was still to take place? 
MR MANTSHA:  It was to terminate all the legal [indistinct] 
– 00:12:15]. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 74 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, well I am referring not to a legal 
action in general.  
MR MANTSHA:   Yes.  
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
I 
am 
referring 
specifically 
to 
disciplinary proceedings.  
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to confirm also, there was no 
litigation at that stage between the executives and Denel, 
is that right? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  Well, there is a letter where there was a 
threat for some applications and all of that.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I just help you Mr Mantsha, I am 
sorry 
to 
cut 
you 
short, 
but 
it 
seems 
to 
me 
that 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Nothing came of it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That there was litigation in this 
sense, apart from that threat of an urgent application which 
presumably they were threatening to bring in the labour 
court although they did not say it, there was litigation in 
20 
the looser sense, in the sense that he has already referred 
his dispute to the CCMA.  
 
So it was a legal dispute that was pending before 
the CCMA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 75 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  And we saw the referral that you in fact 
pointed out there was a referral document there.  So in 
that sense there was litigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry to have ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no that is helpful. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Pre-empted the witness to answer 
your question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is helpful, ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But that seems to me Mr Mantsha to 
10 
have been present in your mind with the board that you 
want to terminate any dispute.  
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So there is a dispute about whether 
they were guilty and so forth, which could have been the 
subject of a disciplinary inquiry.  He was raising disputes, 
threats of urgent applications which he does not seem to 
have carried out.  
 
But what he did carry out was the threat to bring a 
CCMA dispute before the CCMA and that was then pending.  
20 
So 
this 
was 
all 
completely 
resolved, 
including 
the 
disciplinary proceedings.  
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright, thank you.  Thank you Chair, I 
am sorry if I ...[intervenes] 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 76 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
Stepped 
on 
his 
toes, 
but 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is helpful.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Mantsha, we have touched 
previously in an earlier session before today on the fact 
that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Kennedy, I just realised 
that for some reason I do not have the second page of the 
letter at 422.   
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry, 522. 
CHAIRPERSON:  422. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  422.  
CHAIRPERSON:  One page only, but your junior could 
attend to it while you ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I see we have the same problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We have the same problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If that can be addressed.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, perhaps with your leave may we 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, during lunch. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Get that page and have it inserted? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, that is fine.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Apart from Mr 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 77 of 301 
 
Saloojee Mr Mantsha, you also of course had two other 
employees then on suspension, Mr Mhlonhlo and Ms Africa 
and the evidence from Mr Mhlonhlo has been that he 
signed a settlement agreement and he was paid an ex 
gracia 6.6 million rand which was equivalent to 24 months 
of his salary plus a bonus of 1.6 million rand.  
 
Did you also have that brought to the board’s 
attention for your consideration and approval? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And he of course had not litigated 
10 
although the attorneys who were acting on his behalf, 
expressing 
concern 
if 
there 
were 
delays 
with 
the 
disciplinary inquiry etcetera. 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So all of that issue was settled with 
Mr Mhlonhlo to the tune of 6.6 million rand plus the bonus, 
and then we also know that Ms Africa also had a settlement 
concluded with her.  Were you made aware of that at board 
level as well? 
 
There was a settlement on the basis that Denel and 
20 
she agreed that she would then take early retirement and 
then apart from whatever benefit she may have had under 
her retirement or pension fund, she was paid a settlement 
amount of 1.6 million rand equivalent to 12 months’ 
remuneration in her case, plus accrued leave, plus 75% of 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 78 of 301 
 
an incentive bonus.  
 
Were you aware of that settlement ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   Ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  On those terms? 
MR MANTSHA:  Approved by the board.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  I am not going to take you to 
those settlement agreements.  You are comfortable with 
the point that I am putting to you.  So there were very 
substantial amounts that were paid to these various 
executives.  
10 
 
Mr Mhlonhlo appears to have got perhaps the most, 
but bearing in mind, his senior position and also the fact 
that he was a permanent employee whereas Mr Saloojee 
was not, he was on a fixed term contract.  So it was 6.6 
million plus another 1.6 million for Mr Mhlonhlo, you know.   
 
It was about 2.4 million in the case of Mr Saloojee 
in addition to what he had already been paid for about 17 
months, and then Ms Africa was 1.6 million in addition to 
accrued leave, etcetera.  In relation to those two other 
executives, with whom there were settlement agreements, 
20 
is the reason why the justification why they, the board 
approved those settlements, is the justification effectively 
the same as the justification you have already given in 
relation to Mr Saloojee’s settlement or were there any 
different factors? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 79 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson, as I said there were 
proper presentations. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  To motivate the settlement of the two 
executives.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, just start afresh ja.  
MR MANTSHA:  Well, the to start with I did not give the 
details of the motivation here.  I just highlighted certain 
points which were primary drivers to those settlements, but 
I am saying the documents which have been submitted to 
10 
motivate those settlements, and of course the, those 
documents would have given reasons for both Mr Saloojee 
and both Mr Mhlonhlo on those amounts that were finally 
agreed and the submission would have given reasons why 
Ms Africa there must be settlement the way it was.  
 
Yes, it would contain all those reasons.  I might not 
say all of them here.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Oh, of course.  I accept that.  
MR MANTSHA:  Ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Accept that.  Now may I just go and I 
20 
want to be very brief on this, because it has been 
traversed in some detail already, particularly in questioning 
from the learned Chairperson.  I just want to give you a 
final opportunity to reflect on this question and give an 
answer.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 80 of 301 
 
 
If we accept your logic, if we accept your facts and 
your logic, then there were very serious charges against all 
three of these individuals.  You have suspended them you 
say for good reason that you have explained.  You had 
them charged for good reason that you have explained.  
 
You 
had 
an 
unanswerable 
case 
as 
you 
have 
explained.  They should have been, they could have been 
fired on the spot, because your evidence is a few weeks 
back, and if you have done that, you could have terminated 
their employment.  
10 
 
You are very confident about that result and you 
would have then not needed to settle anything.  The 
settlement appears to have been of the order of almost ten 
million rand.  We are talking here not of Mr Mantsha’s 
personal 
money 
but 
of 
Denel 
which 
was 
a 
public 
corporation, a state owned entity having public funds that 
are now being spent in terms of settlement agreements and 
public funds held by a state corporation that was in dire 
straits as you and many other witnesses were given.  
 
I just want to give you a last opportunity to try to 
20 
explain what I perceive as a logical problem, because if we 
accept all of your logic, at the beginning you had a perfect 
case, you had great evidence, you had the law on your 
side. 
 
You suspended them for good reason, you were 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 81 of 301 
 
disciplining them for good reason and you could have done 
it and it was not done.  Instead you paid them out 
settlement amounts that you did not even need to pay.  In 
Mr Saloojee’s case you said we want to fire you now and 
you did not discipline him. 
 
You then said via Mr Patel, the attorney, you said 
we do not have to employ you past January next year so 
we do not need to discipline you in the meantime, so we 
paid you  out until the end of that.  Mr Saloojee then could 
have been left on the basis your contract has come to an 
10 
end. 
 
Instead he is paid another six months and so I can 
go on with Mr Mhlonhlo and Ms Africa.  You  understand 
the logical difficulty that I have when  I were to invite you 
to explain, if you could have done it and you should have 
done it at the beginning, why did you not when it actually 
meant that you were paying approximately ten million rand 
in that sort of ball park, the public funds that Denel 
desperately needed.  
MR MANTSHA:  Okay.  Let me deal with what you term 
20 
your logical difficulties.  I am called here as a witness in 
my capacity as the Chairperson, the then Chairperson of 
Denel.  There are issues raised about decisions of Denel.  
I mean the decisions of the board.  
 
But there is no attempt to bring the documents upon 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 82 of 301 
 
which those decisions are made.  You are given the 
information as you are given today.  You have listened to 
my evidence and you have listened to the evidence of 
many of Denel witnesses, and some of them Mr Kennedy 
you cross-examined them.   
 
You questioned them.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  To give you the information, the past and 
the current, but clearly the evidence that they have told 
you, that they  have told you, objective evidence that they 
10 
have told you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  You should not have that difficulty that you 
are raising to me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Why is that? 
MR MANTSHA:  For the simple reason because your 
difficulty is based on confusing the substantive nature of 
the process and the steps which were taken to prosecute 
the substantive part of it.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  How am I confusing them? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  I have already told the Chairperson that 
we did in fact act as the board.  We were not impressed 
with the delay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
We 
changed 
the 
person 
who 
was 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 83 of 301 
 
responsible.  I even told you that the letter that you have 
read to me the last time was in fact leaked to the 
suspended employee, which to us as a board, seek now 
that this person is deliberately frustrating this process, not 
to move. 
 
Not to move.  So when you say having such a 
strong case which we could have dismissed them.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  And eventually that did not happen, they 
would have been saving if that process would have been 
10 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  Taken forward, but what you also do not 
say, it is how far the litigation would have gone and at what 
cost to the company in terms of the money we paid to the 
lawyers and I think you would appreciate that the law firm 
that we were using, is one of the biggest law firm in the 
country. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Undoubtedly. 
MR MANTSHA:  So it does not come cheap.  So there is a 
20 
cost here.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  To the lawyers.  There is a cost to 
whatever we were going to pay.  We did not know, as you 
know the, I mean you know it better than me, that this 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 84 of 301 
 
litigation can drag a very long time.  So there would have 
been money to be paid there.   
 
But there is also opportunity cost that is difficult to 
quantify that we wanted to have stability. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  We wanted to ensure the investors, the 
lenders, that yes, there is permanent leadership.  When 
you talk to them, the decision that you made with them, 
they have got five years to see them through.  We were 
trying at that time, to renegotiate the Nedbank loan, and it 
10 
was difficult.  
 
I remember I have attended, there was a high level 
meeting which was called at, at Absa where they requested 
me as a Chairperson.  They have raised the issue of 
stability at the time, and I think there was another meeting 
where Nedbank representative involved in the matter, came 
to the company and they have raised this issue.  
 
So the opportunity cost and the cost to litigation 
and other related costs, where they were going to do a 
disciplinary hearing, there were costs involved.   
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Even ten million costs ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:  It could have been more.  I mean, you 
know in this profession depending on who you employ.  
Some would charge you a lot of money per day.  So we do 
not know.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 85 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you believe that you had an 
unanswerable defence to those? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  The case is a strong case, not only 
by my evidence.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  But by objective evidence that you were 
told in this commission, that in fact we are taking steps to 
try to recover the money.  So that evidence you were told.  
So that is the objective evidence.  So it does not mean the 
fact that there was a settlement it was waste of money. 
10 
 
What I am saying to you, you were not in the 
position of the board.  You were not in the positions of 
those executives.  Those executives and the board had to 
take a decision, given the material condition at the time 
and that decision was taken informed by a lot of dynamics.  
 
Considering the cost of ten million that you are 
reading to me, we could have litigated more than ten 
million.  The opportunity cost more than ten million and 
other related consideration that the board has considered.  
I do not expect you with the limited information that you 
20 
have, 
and 
not 
having 
the 
sight 
of 
deliberation 
and 
submissions, which were given to the board to motivate 
settlement on those amounts, to find it reasonable.  
 
It is difficult for you to ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes ...[intervenes]  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 86 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Because even the evidence that you are 
going through here, omit the evidence which was presented 
to the board.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Ja, but that is why I am debating it 
with you.  You say you are not surprised I cannot 
understand.  
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am simply saying to you, I am not 
putting what I would want written in a report or a judgment 
or anything, I am simply saying there seems to be a logical 
10 
disjuncture.  If there is not, please tell us why there is not. 
MR MANTSHA:  In the absence of these documents that I 
am telling you, of course you would not understand.  It is 
logical, but if you were to take me through ja, this is what 
was presented to the board as far as the rationality of this 
settlement and this and this and this, this to you does not 
make sense.  
 
It is one thing to stand here today and go back five 
years, and try to decide that no, no that was wrong.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
20 
MR MANTSHA:  And we were never in the shoes of those 
people ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  Who were making decisions at the time, 
and that was the time of a serious political time out in this 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 87 of 301 
 
country. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.   
WITNESS:  There were lots of things happening in this 
country, we were preoccupied to save the country.  We 
were preoccupied to satisfy the lenders and the investors, 
to say we are stampled[?], you can deal with us.  You are, 
the agreements we make with you will be honoured, 
because this executive have got five years term. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright, thank you Mr Mantsha.  Chair, 
I am about to, I am going to move away from that whole 
10 
topic and move to another one.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am happy to start ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Kennedy you still have about 
five minutes or so.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you very much, I am 
absolutely happy to – you know however long you want me 
to go on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, I want now Mr Mantsha to get 
20 
to the issue of benefits you may possibly have received 
from the Gupta family and their business associates. 
 
Now let me just understand if I – if I got your 
evidence previously.  As I understood your evidence in an 
earlier session with us, some weeks ago, you indicated 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 88 of 301 
 
that you sometimes travelled overseas during this period 
that the Commission is looking at, and sometimes we would 
travel on official business for Denel in which case you’re 
travelling costs would be paid for by Denel, and we have 
no difficulty with that.  
But you also indicated that there were some trips 
that you would take that were not for official business of 
Denel 
and 
that 
you 
always 
paid 
for 
that 
yourself, 
personally. Remember, you gave that evidence. 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed Chairperson,  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And I am doing justice in my 
summary to your evidence? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And does that mean that whenever 
you travelled other than for official Denel business, which 
Denel would have paid for, whenever you went overseas 
for other reasons, for a personal reason you would pay for 
the 
air 
travel 
and 
the 
accommodation 
and 
related 
expenses?  
MR MANTSHA:   Correct, Chairperson. 
20 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Right, 
now 
there 
are 
some 
documents in the bundle Chair may I take you Chair and 
the witness to the bundle specific to Mr Mantsha.  It is 
bundle 8 and it is exhibit W22.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we going to go back to this other 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 89 of 301 
 
bundle or can they take it away?  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, they can take it away for the time 
being.  I do not think we are going to - come back to it 
later, but perhaps if it is just kept somewhere fairly close.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
MR MANTSHA:   You said bundle? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, it is bundle 8, it should have 
on the spine to Denel bundle 08. 
MR MANTSHA:   I have got W4.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry; Mr Mantsha I did not hear 
10 
you.  If you have that file, you will find exhibit W22 starts 
at page 319, and if I can remind you just look at the top 
left hand corner for those page numbers.  It is exhibit W22, 
Mr Mantsha.  Just…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Will your junior assist him to find the 
file. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, perhaps we should, can 
someone approach the witness and assists him. 
MR MANTSHA:   Okay, I see 22 this one? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Have you got it? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, and if I can take you just 
to make sure we talking on the same bundle.  If you look at 
the top left hand corner of each page for the page numbers 
go to page 330, it was your first statement that we went 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 90 of 301 
 
through on a previous occasion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Three, three zero, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Three, three zero, okay.  
MR MANTSHA:   Three, three zero? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, in your version is that the first 
page of a statement that you signed? 
MR MANTSHA:   Maybe if someone can help me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May my learned junior approach the 
witness to assist and ensure? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, I am told by my learned 
junior that Mr Mantsha had indicated privately to her that 
he would like a comfort break.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja, then maybe we may as well take 
the lunch break. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As you please, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so let us take the lunch break and 
we will resume at 2 o'clock. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   2 o’clock thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair, Mr Mantsha may I 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 91 of 301 
 
just make a request to you that has been passed on to me 
by the technical people who are doing the televising for the 
streaming of the evidence.  Apparently, sometimes you sit 
back quite a bit or sometimes turn and I have no doubt 
what your trying to do is just engage me in eye contact, 
which is a courteous thing in a way, but it means that 
sometimes the - particularly the voice does not get picked 
up.  
So if you do not mind try and – and I know it is 
difficult, rather than looking at me try and look rather in the 
10 
direction of the Chair, because of course, you are giving 
evidence to him, ultimately, rather than me, if you can try 
and do that and then hopefully, that will direct your voice 
towards the microphone.  I know it is a bit of a bore to 
have to sort of remind yourself on that but if you would not 
mind just doing that that will help.  
MR MANTSHA:   Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mantsha you indicated that we 
were going to look into issues relating to your travel 
overseas and who paid them, we have had just over an 
20 
hour for you to reflect over lunch.  Is there anything you 
want 
to 
start 
with 
before 
I 
take 
you 
to 
individual 
documents, in relation to your evidence just a short while 
back, that when you travelled overseas, if it was official 
business for Denel it would be paid for by Denel, if it was 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 92 of 301 
 
any other business of your own that would be - that was 
paid for by yourself? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I think without trying to waste time 
we can answer document by document. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You want to do that? 
MR MANTSHA:   As we move - so I will explain the context 
of what I am taking about. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sure.  Let us start please and Chair 
we still in bundle 8 from page 465. 
MR MANTSHA:   Sorry which bundle are we in? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Bundle 8, page 465 it is the one that 
includes your statement that we were looking at just before 
lunch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one that we were looking at just 
before we adjourned.  
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, Chair I do have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, thank you 465 please. 
MR MANTSHA:   I do have Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, thank you and you see this is 
an invoice issued by Travel Excellence.  They are a firm of 
20 
travel agents and it is an invoice that reflects some travel 
details and in particular flights and visas.  Now, if you look 
at the table in the middle, it is headed Emirates/SAA, you 
see that? 
MR MANTSHA:   I do. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 93 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then it refers to passenger, there 
are three passengers referred to in the first column under 
that heading passenger.   
MR MANTSHA:   I can see. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The first is the name of Mr Duduzane 
Zuma, I think it may have been misspelt, but that is Mr 
Duduzane Zuma, not so? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the route is indicated as a 
particular flight on a particular date, the dates it appears 
10 
was the 7 t h of October and we see from the date of the 
invoice itself near the top right just below the picture or 
the logo rather of Travel Excellence.  It says date 10 t h of 
the 10 t h 2015, do you see that?  
MR MANTSHA:   I do.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And so we are talking about October 
2015 and then the second passenger is Ms Shanice, is it?  
I am not sure how to pronounce that, I think it is Shanice 
Zuma.  
MR MANTSHA:   I can see that. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that the correct pronunciation to 
your knowledge? 
MR MANTSHA:   No I - of course I suffer from the same as 
you do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But do you not know her?  I do not 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 94 of 301 
 
know her so that is why I am saying it…[intervene] 
MR MANTSHA:   Look, I would assume from this, it would 
be Mr Zuma’s wife.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, that is my understanding to. 
MR MANTSHA:    Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, in fact, I think they were married 
just a bit earlier in 2015 and the flight details are exactly 
the same and then the third passenger is your own name, 
is that right, Lugisani Daniel Mantsha? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct.  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, the same flight details 
again, except that the dates is different, for Mr and Mrs 
Duduzane Zuma the date is the 7 t h of October and in your 
case, it is the 6 t h of October, correct?  
MR MANTSHA:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then it says Dubai visas times 
two, and there is a charge for that and a ticketing fee 
charge for that.  Now, this appears to then reflect that a 
travel agent made bookings for air travel by yourself, as 
well as Mr and Mrs Duduzane Zuma, on the 6 t h or 7 t h of 
20 
October and also arrange things like, visas.  Do you recall 
having a trip, taking a trip to Dubai?  
MR MANTSHA:   I do Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that was at the same time 
roughly as Mr and Mrs Duduzane Zuma. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 95 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and we see that the invoice is 
made out by the travel agents to Westdawn Investments 
Pty Ltd, you see that? 
MR MANTSHA:   I can see that Chairperson.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And are you aware of the fact that 
Westdawn Investments was a shareholder in VR Laser? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think just getting back to my evidence I 
indicated that yes, I knew around the time when we were 
doing due diligence in VR Asia, as a partner of Denel and 
10 
this is around 2016, November, December somewhere and 
then I knew then they are. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You knew then and you confirm now 
that Westdawn was one of the shareholders in VR Laser? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And is it correct that Mr Duduzane 
Zuma himself personally, was at least at that stage, I do 
not know about now, but at that stage was a shareholder in 
West Dawn Investments? 
MR MANTSHA:   That Mr Zuma was a shareholder? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, in 2016, when it appeared he was a 
shareholder. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and Mr Salim Essa was also a 
shareholder, is that correct? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 96 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, my recollection is Mr Duduzane 
Zuma and Mr Tony Gupta were the shareholder. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Tony Gupta, himself? 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, I am not aware of Mr Salim Essa 
being a shareholder of West Dawn.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, alright thank you and what was 
the purpose of this trip to Dubai? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, as I indicated, this was a personal 
trip. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Personal as in a holiday or is it 
10 
personal as in you were doing business but not Denel 
business, you were doing personal business? 
MR MANTSHA:   I was not doing Denel business it was my 
personal business. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you doing any other business, 
was it a holiday or were you doing any other business? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I was doing my own personal 
business at the time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So it was for business reasons? 
MR MANTSHA:   It was for my personal business. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, run, non-Denel business 
reasons? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, not Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And may I add this Chairperson?  I have a 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 97 of 301 
 
family, brother, direct after me, who lives in that country 
probably 10 years now or more.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Your own brother? 
MR MANTSHA:   My own brother who comes after me.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And we have been talking about a lot of 
things and this trip was undertaken in pursuant of some of 
the things that I have been talking to him about. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, in pursuit of? 
MR MANTSHA:   This trip has been undertaken, in 
10 
pursuance of a lot of opportunities that myself and my 
younger brother have been talking about. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Business opportunities? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, business opportunities. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see, so those were business 
opportunities that you enjoy younger brother were pursuing 
that 
those 
business 
opportunities 
also 
involved 
Mr 
Duduzane Zuma? 
MR MANTSHA:   Not at all. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Not at all, so why is it that Westdawn 
20 
were invoicing sorry, why is it that the Travel Excellence, 
travel agents were invoicing Westdawn Investments for 
tickets that were bought for firstly Mr Duduzane Zuma, 
secondly, his wife and thirdly yourself? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think I explained myself Chairperson, I 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 98 of 301 
 
used Mr Ashu arrange a trip. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You used Mr? 
MR MANTSHA:   Mr Ashu.  
CHAIRPERSON:   You used Mr Ashu Chawla? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I have got difficulties to pronounce 
properly.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   So I have used him to arrange this and I 
10 
have given the background before, why I used him.  So of 
course, when you engage a person to arrange this, I did 
not know which account he was using to pay to travel.  But 
the arrangement between me and him, he arranged, and he 
tells me how much it is, and then I settle, so this was the 
arrangement here.  
He did indicate to me that Mr Zuma would be 
undertaking the trip, more or less the same time as ours.  
So I knew that Mr Zuma would be going to that place, I 
think we all know that Mr Zuma is actually based in that 
20 
part of the world. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and did…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, you said you did explain 
previously I think that is why you used Mr Chawla, is that 
right? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 99 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please refresh my memory because I 
cannot remember. 
MR MANTSHA:   What I did say Chairperson was that the 
first engagement I had with him is when I travelled to 
India.  
CHAIRPERSON:   When you found? 
MR MANTSHA:   When I travelled to India. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   He was doing some sort of a side 
10 
business or side show to try to facilitate this kind of 
arrangement.  So for convenience sake, so I used him 
here, and I used him in other things as well, as to arrange 
for the trip.  That is why this happened. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now let us just, Chair I can take the 
witness to exactly that if you are asking who is Mr Chawla?  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I just want to get this out of the way. 
He was not a travel agent, he was not owning a travel 
agency, is that correct or did he Chawla?  
MR MANTSHA:   Well, owning a travelling agency in which 
20 
sense? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I am just - when you say, you asked 
him to organise as I understand your travelling. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am just trying to find out whether 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 100 of 301 
 
the reason you asked him may be connected with the fact 
that he had the running, he had a travel agency anyway, so 
apart from other reasons. 
MR MANTSHA:   No, no Chairperson, the first engagement 
was when I went to India, and he said, look in future if you 
have got this kind of things, contact me I will arrange your 
visa, whatever you need to save, to be convenient. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You talking about if you were travelling? 
MR MANTSHA:   If I am personally travelling, I can ask him 
to arrange because I am sure he was doing a lot of these 
10 
things for a number of people, and he was able to secure 
whatever…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Discounts, benefits. 
MR MANTSHA:   …discounts for others.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Alright, Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Now Mr Chawla was in 
fact at that time the chief executive officer of Sahara 
Computers, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   I am not sure whether his position was 
chief executive but what I am sure of he was working in 
20 
one of the entities where the Gupta families were the 
owners or shareholders. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, he was a very important part of 
the Gupta family business structures, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, it seems so. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 101 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and he of course, has also been 
implicated in other issues relating to the Estina Dairy 
Farm, the way in which the Gupta’s obtains naturalisation 
from the Home Affairs when Minister Gigaba was in office.  
And yeah, so his name has come up in this Commission a 
number of times previously.  
Now, I just like to explore with you why you 
considered 
it 
appropriate 
to 
take 
up 
Mr 
Chawla’s 
suggestion 
that 
when 
you 
doing 
travel, 
travel 
trips 
overseas for your own personal business either family, 
10 
recreation, holidays, whatever or family business like you 
were going to do with your with your younger brother, why 
would you use the CEO of a major company in the Gupta 
Empire to arrange your travel?   
If you wanted -  if you could not do your own 
bookings online, or you could not get a secretary to do 
that, or somebody like that, would not the obvious thing 
have been to go to a travel agent?  Instead you go to Mr 
Chawla who presumably is – and certainly my information 
is that he was at the time group CEO of Sahara.  In any 
20 
event, he was a prominent businessman.  Why would you 
be 
using 
him 
to 
make 
your 
own 
personal 
travel 
arrangements?  Why not, why did you not go to a travel 
agent like Travel Excellence?  We know he did not do it 
himself, he did not sit late at night, on his computer going 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 102 of 301 
 
into Emirates websites and make the bookings, he used 
travel Excellence. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson, we are entitled to 
arrange your own affairs and whatever information you 
have about Mr Chawla who he is, how he is implicated on 
other things, I am not here to talk about. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   But there was nothing wrong and I do not 
see anything wrong for an individual like myself at the time 
when there was convenience, and I took the convenience.  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I, see. 
MR MANTSHA:   So I am not going to get into who he is or 
who his all that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Very well. 
MR MANTSHA:   It was convenient for me at the time to 
actually take the offer, he has done it before and there was 
no reason for me to say I cannot deal with him, I do not 
have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I suggest a reason why it may 
have been considered inappropriate, not prudent, not 
20 
sensible 
and 
that 
is 
you 
had 
recently 
taken 
over 
Chairperson of Denel which is great deal of this entered 
into Denel as Chairperson.  Did you not at least feel or 
with a bit of hindsight, do you not feel now that perhaps it 
was a bit unfortunate.  I take your point that at least 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 103 of 301 
 
people run their lives to see fit but when you are occupying 
a very prominent able position, a person of the Board saw 
potentially of Denel we are talking hundreds in terms of 
that were rewarded to VR Laser. 
Did you know at least that used to be showing that 
he was linked to the Gupta’s rather than picking up the 
phone and chatting to when I have to go to Dubai will you 
sought 
out 
the 
travel 
arrangements. 
 
Do 
you 
not 
understand or do not appreciate now, at least for the 
benefit of hindsight, that the perception is not a fortunate 
10 
one, it does not tell the nation out their good things, if you 
behind the scenes, or making private arrangements with 
Gupta executives. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well with respect, Chairperson, I think let 
me put the context correct.  VR Laser got the contract with 
Denel way before my Board and myself were appointed as 
non-executive directors of Denel.  Already there were in 
the so called West Star Project, which I think evidence 
before you estimated how much they were going to get out 
of it. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, which project, the Hoefyster? 
MR MANTSHA:   The Hoefyster. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry I did not hear you. 
MR MANTSHA:   And I think there was another one 
Platform halls or whatever. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 104 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Platform Hulls, that is correct. 
MR MANTSHA:   So those contracts were entered before 
we were even appointed.  So the question that you are 
trying to say that does not dawn on me that asking such a 
person to arrange this while this person is linked with the 
Gupta’s family who were a shareholder of VR, that is what 
you are saying to me. 
Let me explain this to you.  I have always known VR 
as Mr Salim Essa’s business until…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry you have always known who? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   I have always known VR as owned by Mr 
Essa, at no stage until the due diligence on VR SA in 
preparation of the Denel Asia, then reveal some, I think 
was 15% whatever, that Tony Gupta and Duduzane Zuma 
has/ 
So I was surprised and I remember I did ask, I did 
ask Mr Tony Gupta I said Well, I did not know you part of 
VR South Africa.  Mr Tony Gupta told me and just said to 
me look, we are not interested in the defence business but 
happened Salim Essa borrowed money from them and when 
20 
he borrowed money from them as he was struggling, then 
there was an agreement to take some shareholding.  
And they said, look, we did not even want to talk to 
you about this because we do not want to interfere with 
what you do.  So, just in short, I did not even know that 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 105 of 301 
 
they had some percentage in VR SA, I did not know until 
the due diligence revealed that, and I did ask a question 
and I was given an explanation. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I just ask again, I am speaking 
on behalf the technicians who have asked me to ask this 
one, quite often you keep moving your face away from the 
mic, and I see you also tapping something a little, I do not 
know if it is the desk or the or the book or whatever, if you 
can try not to tap. 
MR 
MANTSHA:   My apologies 
Chairperson, in my 
10 
upbringing, I am told when a person is talking to you must 
look 
at 
him 
to 
show 
respect. 
 
So 
I 
am 
very 
sorry…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   …but when I turn my back on you and you 
are talking it is disrespect. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mantsha I actually credited you 
with good manners earlier for doing that and that is a 
natural human instinct as well.  But may I just suggest in 
your…[intervene] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just keep on trying. 
MR MANTSHA:   I will try. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I just want to suggest the 
President here is not me it is the Chairperson of the 
inquiry who has to be addressed, but thank you for that.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 106 of 301 
 
But in fact you right that there were certain contracts 
between VR Laser and Denel before you took up the 
position of Chairperson of the Board but there were also a 
number of major contracts that were awarded to VR Laser 
after you took up the Chairpersonship, not so? 
MR MANTSHA:   I do not have recollection or knowledge of 
those contracts. I see on the papers, you know, before this 
Commission, they were contracts between DLS and VR and 
those contracts, they serve in the DLS board, they do not 
serve in the main Board.   
10 
So I was not even aware that there were those 
contracts until I see these documents and I have read Mr 
Stephan Burger, the then CEO of Denel Line System haw 
he explained those contracts.  I have read various 
statements, how people were involved, explain those 
contracts but none of those contracts served before the 
main Board, which I was Chairing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But did you not give approval for one 
of 
those 
contracts 
where 
Mr 
Mlambo 
the 
head 
of 
procurement at the Denel group level that refused to sign it 
20 
off? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, with respect Chairperson, I have 
never dealt with procurement people.  My Board has never 
dealt with procurement people.  We have never dealt with 
any contract between VR SA to any entity of Denel, the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 107 of 301 
 
only matter that we have dealt with VR related, is VR Asia 
in partnership with Denel.  That is the only VR matter 
which served before the Board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, during your trip to Dubai, on 
this occasion we are talking about early October 2015.  Did 
you socialise with or have any meetings or encounters with 
Mr Duduzane and wife? 
MR MANTSHA:   Of course, of course, yes I did socialise 
with them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am not suggesting it is necessarily 
10 
wrong, I am just asking about the fact.  So why were you 
socialising with him, if I may ask, were you friends from 
before this? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Mr Duduzane Zuma, is well known 
to me.  It is somebody that I have known for quite some 
time. We were in the same place of course we did 
socialise, I do not remember how many times, how many 
minutes we met but we did socialise because I think we 
were even staying in the same place if I may remember. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that…[intervene] 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   So I did socialise with him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry to have interrupted, sorry 
are you finished? 
CHAIRPERSON:   He say at some stage they stayed in the 
same place. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 108 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I heard that I interrupted him 
and I just wanted to make sure I completed his sentence.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   No, no I have completed it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You have completed it thank you, and 
what was that same place was that a hotel or his private 
residence or somebody else's private residence, your 
brothers perhaps? 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
Well 
look, 
I 
am 
speaking 
under 
correction, but I was staying in a hotel, I think I am 
10 
speaking under correction, that he was also staying the 
same hotel but I am speaking under correction because it 
is quite a while ago. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He at least at a certain stage, owned 
his own property residential property in Dubai, not so? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson with respect, I do not 
know 
whether 
Mr 
Duduzane 
Zuma 
owns 
a 
place 
in 
Dubai…[intervene] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You do not know. 
MR MANTSHA:   …or he does not.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, thank you.  If you do not know, 
you just simply have to say that, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He has given evidence about property 
that he lives in, in Dubai.  I am saying Mr Duduzane Zuma 
has given evidence before the Commission about property 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 109 of 301 
 
in which he lives in Dubai, ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, that is what I was referring to 
but the witness as I understand that you do not have 
personal knowledge of that, yourself? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, I am not aware. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, now did you say that your 
arrangement with Mr Chawla was that he would do the 
arrangements, 
make 
the 
arrangements 
and 
then 
presumably send you the travel tickets and so forth, is that 
right? 
10 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
Ja, 
he 
would 
he 
would 
do 
the 
arrangement and tells me how much it is going to cost and 
then I settle. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So would he contact you each time to 
say, I can get you a flight on the 6 t h as you want and the 
cost is going to be X, number of rand’s, is that okay can I 
go ahead, how did he do it? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, of course he would, I would speak to 
him and he would go around and he would come back to 
me with some arrangement and if we agree, and then we 
20 
pursue it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay now, I see that your travel 
tickets the airfare was R28 860 with airport taxes of just 
over R4 000 which then gave just for your air ticket, 
presumably a return R33 280. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 110 of 301 
 
I am going to leave out of account for a moment, 
the visas and the ticketing fee, because it is not clear 
exactly which of the two individuals whether you are one of 
them, let us simply look at the airfare.  So he would have 
got confirmation from you that he could proceed to make 
this booking?  
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, of course. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did he make those inquiries with you 
or did he get the travel agency to do so? 
MR MANTSHA:    The inquiries about cost and everything? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:   No remember, I had asked him that was 
his responsibility. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Right, 
you 
see 
what 
I find 
interesting, and I would like to give you a chance to 
comment on it, is that when the arrangements were made, 
and an invoice was made out, it was made out by the travel 
agents not to you, not to Mr Duduzane Zuma, either.  
It was made out to Westdawn Investments.  Why 
were you not invoiced?  It was going to be your travel; it 
20 
was your personal business with your brother.  You were 
not going on a business trip with Mr Duduzane Zuma, 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I think the logic is very simple the 
invoices directed to the party that Mr Chawla indicated to 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 111 of 301 
 
the - whoever was arranging these.  These are the details 
and that is something not within my knowledge.  Whoever 
he was asking where the invoice should go that was his 
own arrangement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But is it not, surely again, with the 
benefit of hindsight now that you know that the Gupta 
Empire and their dealings have become matters of huge 
public and media interest and controversy, and have been 
the subject of many days of very lengthy evidence before 
the learned Chairperson who is the Commissioner. 
10 
With the benefit of hindsight do you not appreciate 
that it may be regarded by the public when they see 
evidence like this that you were travelling at about the 
same time as Mr Duduzane Zuma and his wife to the same 
city.  You have now said you were staying in the same 
place; you think it was a hotel where you stayed with him.  
And the arrangements were not only made by Mr Chawla, 
CEO of Sahara, which is a part well you may not be sure 
about that, but he was an executive of the Gupta Empire.  
And that, not only the arrangements, but actually invoicing 
20 
and payment has been done by West Dawn Investments.  
Do you not understand that, it is not exactly the Gupta’s 
and their empire. 
MR MANTSHA:  Well - look with respect Mr Kennedy I – it of 
course depends where you stand. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 112 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  It depends where you stand and where I 
stood then at the time of arrangement there was nothing 
sinister to make this arrangement.  I think I have explained 
what I knew at the time and what I did not know.   
 
Where we sit today there are many allegations 
against this family and their associated businesses. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  I am certainly not here to talk about the 
merits or the merits of those. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Absolutely. 
MR MANTSHA:  All I can say is this arrangement was made 
and there was nothing wrong that says to me in my private 
capacity as a non-executive chairperson of Denel by then 
with the knowledge that I knew with the knowledge I had 
there was nothing wrong to do this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am asking you with the knowledge you 
have now. 
MR MANTSHA:  And whether the perception – I think again 
when you in a decision of authority and when you are – when 
20 
you are in a position of authority and when you are in a 
position where you have to decide certain matters before you 
yes you can consider to settle but you do not necessarily 
have to make a decision on this.   
 
As I am saying to you what perception would these 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 113 of 301 
 
made that as you said I am not acting in I am 00:01:56  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  And what I am saying to you is as far as I sit 
here that perception whereas and where I am it has to be 
based on certain factors and certain knowledge. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  I did not have the facts to base that 
perception, I did not have the knowledge to raise this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But that you have the facts and 
knowledge now.  Where – let us assume in your favour that 
10 
at that time you were not aware that the Gupta’s and Salim 
Essa were actively involved in a company called VR Laser in 
doing business with Denel.  Let us assume that that is right.   
 
But that is what you knew at the time.  You did not 
know at the time on your version.  Now you do know.  That is 
why I am asking for you with your current knowledge not just 
simply your knowledge at the time.   
 
So I can fully understand if you said to us yes at the 
time I am – I had no reason to feel that this might be 
regarded inappropriately but with the benefit of hindsight 
20 
now that what has come out is that VR Laser actually was 
very much involved in doing business with Denel not just 
before but very much after as well and there have been huge 
allegations before the learned Deputy Chief Justice and the 
commission that the procurement regulations and so forth 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 114 of 301 
 
were flouted and where procurement officials left in despair 
that their advice to try and keep the – the Denel procurement 
process legal.  All of that has led to a number of 
controversial aspects. 
 
Do you not feel say well at the time I think it was fine 
based on my knowledge then but with the knowledge I now 
have I do accept that it could be perceived by reasonable 
people as – as having a – a disturbing connotation. 
 
You know the expression that justice must be done, it 
must be seen to be done.  Well independence objectivity, a 
10 
lack of bias by a chairperson of an inquiry must not only be 
done but also be seen to be done. 
 
And that is why surely as a chairperson of a major 
corporation you should be keeping it absolutely at arm’s 
length.  You not agree with that? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well absolutely I do not agree from the 
premise you knew. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  Because I see contradiction in what you 
were asking me earlier and what you saying now.  What you 
20 
are saying to me now is then as the former chair this VR 
which I knew it was owned by Mr Salim Essa was irregularly 
appointed into Denel in various forms before and after I was 
aware.  I have answered you.   
I said as far as after my appointment the contract 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 115 of 301 
 
with DLS the only time I saw that it was when I received the 
papers of the commission.  And the contract with the 
00:05:15 contract and the whole platform contract those 
contracts were made before my appointment and I think I 
have 
indicated 
earlier 
Chair 
that 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
transformation in 00:05:36 and Denel being a defence 
company where in that space we were of course told that 
there was no company, a black owned company that is 
getting business from Denel on the core business therefore 
the VR Laser which was by the way owned before Mr Essa 
10 
was owned by some white people and then Mr Essa bought 
this company from these white people.  When he bought this 
company the company of course became a black owned 
company.   
When the company become a black owned company 
we were told of course in terms of what Denel was expected 
to do to transform the defence industry in the country that 
VR helps Denel to achieve that.   
So it has been a plus from the information we 
received that the relationship between Denel and VR was 
20 
founded on the basis that VR is black owned, VR does 
supply Denel on the main business because they were 
building some 00:07:17.  So – so that was the case of VR. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I understand Mr Mantsha I am sorry 
to interrupt but you asking a different question that you 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 116 of 301 
 
would like me to ask perhaps and that is was it – was it a 
good idea for Denel to do business with VR Laser and you 
suggesting 
that 
well 
because 
of 
black 
economic 
empowerment objectives which obviously are not just good 
objectives but in fact part of government policy and 
legislation all of that is telling us what you have already told 
us a number of times which is that it was important that 
Denel should transform and give business to black people 
within the economy not just simply white people.  All of that 
you have said a number of times and – and that obviously 
10 
does answer the question.   
Was it a good idea for Denel to do business with VR 
Laser?  That is simply not the question.  The question  was 
simply this when the company was doing business with VR 
Laser which is related to – connected to the Gupta’s and Mr 
Duduzane Zuma and Mr Salim Essa who is – was part of – 
very much of the Gupta Empire – was it not – was it not 
perhaps inappropriate for you to be taking the assistance of 
Mr Chawla of the Gupta Corporate structure because that 
could give rise to wrong – in your view wrong perceptions.  
20 
Mr Saloojee of course has said you were basically far too 
closely aligned with the Gupta interests and you interfered 
and that is why you got rid of him.   
 
Now I am not expecting you to admit that he is being 
truthful there but the Chairperson has had that evidence.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 117 of 301 
 
With respect the Chairperson will probably want to consider 
whether there is any substance in Mr Saloojee’s evidence 
and this is your chance to show why there is no substance. 
 
And I just want to invite you again to focus your 
answer on the specific simply question. 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja look Chairperson I am focussing my 
answer.  When I started to answer I said I disagree with the 
premises upon which you based the assumption of this 
allegation.  And I then went further to say what you telling 
me is contradiction from what you were asking me before.  
10 
Because I would – I would expect the commission to probe 
certain things without contradicting itself. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Mantsha I am sorry to interrupt you 
but may I just ask you to exert a little discipline on your own 
evidence.  With respect you are here to give evidence not to 
criticise the commission or its evidence leader in how we 
may or may not arguably have been contradicted.  With 
respect that is – we are not at a stage of legal argument 
here and perhaps one you must just forget for a moment that  
you are an attorney and maybe your instinct maybe as many 
20 
lawyers is to try and find the contradictions and so forth.  All 
I am asking you for is a simple answer to the simple 
question.  Not to be criticising how I have put the question.  
You would not mind. 
MR MANTSHA:   Without offending you Mr Kennedy all I 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 118 of 301 
 
was… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe… 
MR MANTSHA:   I was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just hang on Mr Mantsha.  Just repeat 
your question Mr Kennedy I just want to follow the answer. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat the question. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Leave aside the issue of whether it was 
a good idea for Denel to do business with VR Laser the fact 
was that it was doing and continue to do major business with 
10 
VR Laser.  Would it not have been better with the benefit of 
hindsight to not accept the assistance of Mr Chawla of the 
Gupta’s in relation to your personal dealings because 
otherwise it could give rise to the reasonable impression of 
people out there that you were not at arms’ length that there 
was a cosy relationship between you and the Gupta’s and 
their associates.  That is the question. 
MR MANTSHA:  I disagree with that Chairperson.  I repeat 
my answer is no.  Mr Chawla was an employee yes I agree 
but whether – you see a perception Chairperson depends 
20 
where you stand and I am not here to try to talk about what 
someone should have perceived.  I am just here to explain 
the basis of my arrangement and my knowledge and the 
basis upon which Mr Kennedy says perception can be formed 
here that there is a cosy relationship.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 119 of 301 
 
Well I disagree with that.  I mean my arrangement 
with Mr Chawla does not mean any cosy relationship with the 
Gupta family.  Here I am as a chairperson of the Denel he 
then was already at that time given I think over R200 million 
contracts to VR Laser.  So what I have done with Mr Chawla 
had nothing to do with either VR or anything else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he... 
MR MANTSHA:  Mr Chawla – sorry Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm – ja continue. 
MR MANTSHA:  Mr Chawla was doing this in his personal 
10 
capacity not as an employee of the Gupta Company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay hang on one second.  Mr Kennedy 
has put a proposition that at that time Denel was continuing 
to do business with entities associated with the Gupta family.  
You accept that? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I think let us be specific was doing 
business with VR Laser. 
CHAIRPERSON:  VR Laser. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja  - yes that one.  Are you saying you as 
20 
you sit there see nothing wrong with the chairperson of an – 
of the board of an SOE which is doing business with a 
certain 
entity 
having 
what 
Mr 
Kennedy 
calls 
a 
cosy 
relationship with let us say somebody closely associated 
with that entity let us start just there then we – I just – just 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 120 of 301 
 
testing the – the general proposition. 
 
As – if somebody said to you let us say now you are 
being interviewed for a position to take the position of 
chairperson of one of – of the SOE’s now you are asked is it 
proper for the chairperson of a board of an SOE to have a 
cosy relationship with somebody closely associated with an 
entity that is doing business with the SOE.  Would your 
answer be there is nothing wrong with that or would your 
answer be there is something wrong with that? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well my answer will be there is nothing 
10 
wrong.  Because that person that we talking about I am 
specific on … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja general. 
MR MANTSHA:  I am not talking in general. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:  I am specific on my matter.  He is not a 
shareholder of the company.   He is not the company 
himself.  He does that in his own personal capacity.  So if we 
then see it and say if you relate to somebody in his personal 
capacity who works for XYZ you might be perceived to be 
20 
having a cosy relationship.  Yes I understand somebody can 
come with that perception but another person might say well 
what is the basis of that perception?  I do not agree with that 
perception.  So what I am saying as I answer now I do not 
see anything wrong with that arrangement because it had no 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 121 of 301 
 
bearing with my work, it had not bearing with… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but hang on. 
MR MANTSHA:  With which I with… 
CHAIRPERSON:  At this stage I am not talking about the 
specific situation you were involved in.  I am just testing the 
general proposition because as a director of a board and as 
chairperson of a board it would be important to understand 
what you understand as acceptable relationships for board 
members to be involved in as well as for management, 
CEO’s of your company.   
10 
So are you saying if you were – if you were the 
chairperson of the board of Denel today and VR Laser 
continued to have – to do business with Denel you would 
have – you would see nothing wrong with you having a cosy 
relationship even if in your personal capacity with somebody 
closely associated with VR Laser? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well a correction point here Chairperson.  I 
never had cosy relationship with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but you – but you… 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You talk about your case I am talking about 
the general. 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I think … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us not say you let us say Mr X, let us 
say Mr X. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 122 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  Chairperson I appreciate that 
intimation from the Chairperson.  But again Chairperson I am 
talking to a Chairperson who comes from a background that 
its case depends on its own merits.   
So it is one thing for me here to sit and talk in 
general terms.  I think Chairperson I would refrain from 
talking in general terms.  I would only speak to explain what 
I knew at the time, what were my reasons at the time and 
how I conducted my affairs in certain areas.   
But in general terms Chairperson I would not want to 
10 
sit here and say because when we getting to the area of 
perception there are so many perceptions about everything 
that we do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you see Mr Mantsha talking in general 
terms to test – talking in general terms is – has an important 
place because it enables me to know what values you 
subscribe to.  If for example I am looking for the chairperson 
of an SOE board I must be looking for somebody who has 
certain values and those values you start testing by in 
general then you can – when you have a specific situation 
20 
you test that specific situation against the general values to 
say well if somebody subscribes to these values then they 
will not do ABCD when such a situation arises because they 
believe in these values.   
So that is why I am putting the general because when 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 123 of 301 
 
you put the general that is when it is going to be easy to say 
okay let us go to a specific situation.  You might say in terms 
of the general – you might say the one I put to you.   
As long as I am acting in my personal capacity with 
somebody closely related to – or associated VR Laser I see 
nothing wrong but if I am acting in my capacity as 
chairperson of Denel and Denel is having businesses with – 
business dealings with VR Laser I can see a problem.  Or 
you might say well whether I am acting in my personal 
capacity or in my capacity as chairman of Denel it is 
10 
problematic to have that cosy relationship with that person. 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
I 
really 
appreciate 
that 
question 
Chairperson and of course my values are you cannot place 
yourself as the non-executive in a position of conflict.  I 
subscribe to those values and I subscribe to the values that 
exercise your fiduciary responsibility in a transparent and for 
the interest of the company.   
Those are the values that I subscribe to.  And that is 
in general terms what I subscribe to and what I conducted 
my affairs as the chairperson at the time did not place myself 
20 
in a conflict situation where I had to decide about certain 
transactions with the people that I have one way or the other 
an association with.  That I subscribe to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy you want to take it from there? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair I think – I think I 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 124 of 301 
 
would like to just take the witness if I may to a couple of 
more page references. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  If I can you ask you please to turn to 
page 434.  That is the act… 
MR MANTSHA:  4? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  434 that is the actual travel itinerary 
from Travel Excellence it seems for the same trip specific to 
you, is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:  434? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  434 yes Mr Mantsha.   
MR MANTSHA:  Just bear with me Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes if you can find 434 that is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That is all I am asking you.   
MR MANTSHA:  Yes I do have 434. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right so that is the travel itinerary for 
your own trip, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And now 449.   
20 
MR MANTSHA:  449. 
MR MANTSHA:  That is an email from Mr Chawla to Galiema 
Malana at Travel Excellence.  You see that? 
MR MANTSHA:  449? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 125 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And it is headed under the subject 
Mr Mantsha’s passport and then he says: 
“Please buy Dubai Visa”  
And then we see attached it seems that what may have been 
attached to that was your passport copy from the previous 
page.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:  It appears so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Right.  And then if we can go to 
453.  There is an email from Travel Excellence the travel 
10 
agents to Mr Chawla in fact we see his email address is 
ashu@sahara.co.za and the attachments refers to your name 
and then it says: 
“Dear Ashu please see attached tickets.” 
So all of this seems to have been part of the transactions 
relating to that 00:23:59, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  It appears so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  Now you said your 
arrangement with Mr Chawla was that you – that he would – 
he would make the arrangements, he would do so in his 
20 
personal capacity and then you would pay him back. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that right?  Why then is the invoice 
not in his name, Mr Chawla’s name?  Why was it in the name 
of Westdawn Investment? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 126 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I think that is for Mr Chawla to explain. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes obviously I mean what – do you 
know why? 
MR MANTSHA:  Of course I do not know why.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You do not know why?  Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:  When you – sorry can I explain this? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes sure. 
MR MANTSHA:  When you ask a travelling agent or 
somebody to arrange the travel you of course do not know 
from you know the pre-existing or the prearrangement 
10 
travels.  You do not know from which account they will pay 
the people they are dealing with.  So I do not know Mr 
Chawla can explain that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Did you actually pay back the… 
MR MANTSHA:  I did pay back. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The R38 000.00 (talking over one 
another). 
MR MANTSHA:  I did pay him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you pay him? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay because it was invoiced not to 
him but to Westdawn – did you pay back Westdawn or did 
you pay back Mr Chawla? 
MR MANTSHA:  I would assume that he would not use the 
money that was not his and not pay it.  So I would assume 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 127 of 301 
 
when he received the money he paid whoever he was 
supposed to pay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you recall how you paid him back?  
Was it in cash or an EFT or what did you do? 
MR MANTSHA:  I paid him in cash. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  In cash? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  R38 000.00 in cash that you had lying 
around? 
MR MANTSHA:  I am not sure exactly whether it was 28 that 
10 
but I think there were some little bit – maybe just little bit 
over that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes that is right.  We have seen I am 
rounding it off for convenience.  I do not want to have to 
repeat the full - last – down to the last rand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was – I am sorry Mr Kennedy.  Was any 
invoice sent to you and if so by whom?  Westdawn or Mr 
Chawla? 
MR MANTSHA:  No, no invoice was sent to me.  He would 
then say to me this is the cost and then I would settle him.  
20 
So that was the arrangement.   
CHAIRPERSON:  He would tell you over the phone or 
something or you could be meeting or something? 
MR MANTSHA:  We would sometimes talk face to face. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 128 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  I do not know in this instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  How did we communicated it could have 
been face to face. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:  So I – I do not have recollection. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay but what you confirm is that you 
never received any invoice? 
MR MANTSHA:  No it was all verbal from him.  This is how 
much it costs and then I would give him the money. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So because it was in cash if I asked 
you to produce proof that you made payment for example a 
bank statement for an EFT or whatever you could not come 
up with that presumably? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson I do not understand what 
the question is supposed to mean. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry just answer the question rather 
than puzzle over what it is supposed to mean unless you say 
it is not clear in which case I am quite happy to explain what 
20 
I think was a very clear question but I am happy to repeat it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The question is do you have proof that you 
paid him? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I have the proof that I have paid him as 
I am telling to you I have paid him.  And if you then asking 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 129 of 301 
 
me how I paid I told you that I have paid him in cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  If you then ask me produce where you got 
that cash.  I mean we do business we do receive cash.  And 
– so at any given time then there is the cash that I have and 
I used that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not make him sign any receipt of 
that money? 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
Well 
Chairperson 
these 
personal 
arrangements and… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no I … 
MR MANTSHA:  And this is – this is not anybody to crook 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:  So you know when we act as ordinary 
people out there if I come to you as a friend and say look I 
am short with R5000.00 to pay the school fees.  You said my 
friend here is R5000.00 you are not going to get me to sign a 
loan agreement that I will pay you at the end of the month 
when I get paid.  That is not how you know loosely we relate 
20 
to one another. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But in this type of situation it did not 
just involve Mr Chawla it also involved the Westdawn.  So 
what would have happened if Westdawn’s accountants or 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 130 of 301 
 
auditors had come to you and said we see that our company 
Westdawn has paid R28 000.00 odd for a business ticket for 
you to Dubai and we have been told within Westdawn that it 
has nothing to do with Westdawn business it was just a 
private arrangement between Mr Chawla and you can you 
pay it back?  You would not have anything to show him not 
so – the auditor? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well of course I would have relied on the 
bona fide of Mr Chawla. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Mr Chawla. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And if he was run over by a bus or 
immigrated?  You would have nothing to prove that is my 
simple point. 
MR MANTSHA:  Well all I am trying to say to you with the 
example that I have given to you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  I borrow money for school fees from you.  I 
get run by the bus, no agreement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I understand your logic. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  So of course it is your loss. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I understand your logic yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  May I now look at another travel 
arrangement that appears to have been made by Mr Chawla 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 131 of 301 
 
on your behalf?  Can I take you please to page 429.  You 
have that? 
MR MANTSHA:   I do.  Ja? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On this page 429 and the next few 
pages, there are number of emails that relate to a flight 
that was been arranged on the air service called Freedom 
Air Services.  Now I understand, correct me if I am wrong, 
but this is a private charter company that provides charter 
planes 
to 
those 
who 
can 
afford 
it. 
 
Is 
that 
your 
understanding too? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And it appears from this, if we 
look, for example, halfway down on page 429.  It is an 
email from Ashu Chawla.  Now Ashu, we know is the first 
name of Mr Chawla.  And his email address, we see is 
ashu@sahara.co.za.  So halfway down, you see there is a 
– it says:  Thanks, Ashu.  And then it says:  From Ashu, 
sent 05 August 2015.  Do you see that? 
MR MANTSHA:   I can see. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it is addressed to Freedom Ops.  
20 
Subject:  Updated passenger list for owner.   
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am not sure how to pronounce the 
name.  Mitten(?) G.   
“Here 
is 
the 
final 
passenger 
list 
arriving 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 132 of 301 
 
tomorrow with ZSOK...” 
 
Which presumable is a flight number or a flight – 
or rather,  a plane registration number. 
“Ms Angoori Gupta, Mr Rajesh Gupta...” 
 
Now I understand Mr Rajesh Gupta is known, 
generally, as Mr Tony Gupta.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
“...and together with him, Ms Ati(?) Gupta, 
Mr Shashank(?) [00:01:51] Singala...” 
10 
 
And there has been evidence that Singala is 
actually part of the wider Gupta family.  Do you confirm 
that or do you not know? 
MR MANTSHA:   I did not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The Singala’s are part of the Gupta 
family. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, I think the person you are referring to 
is the son of one of the Gupta brothers.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then there is another person, 
also with the surname Singala.  That is Mr Amand-Khand(?) 
Singala.  And then also Mr Salim Essa.  And then also 
yourself, Mr Lungisani Daniel Mantsha.  And then also Mr 
Gysbert van den Bergh.  So are you – do you recall 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 133 of 301 
 
actually going on a plane trip operated by a private charter 
company? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Organised by the Gupta’s? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And with the Gupta’s? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And arranged by Mr Chawla, the very 
same Chawla we have just ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And that was where to? 
MR MANTSHA:   This was to India. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   To India? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And what was this trip for, 
personal or business? 
MR MANTSHA:   Personal trip. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Personal trip? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And is it correct that they paid for 
20 
your ticket? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, this was a lift that I got from 
them because this was, in my understanding, their flight. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Their flight? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 134 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  When you say you mean their 
flight, do you mean that they owned the plane or that they 
organised 
this 
flight 
on 
a 
plane 
that 
they 
charter 
...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   No, my understanding is they owned this 
flight. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  And so, why were you getting 
a lift from them?  It is not that common that one accepts a 
lift from somebody with a charter jet to take on to India.  
Why were you favoured by this arrangement? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, firstly, as I said.  This was not a 
charter plane.  This was, according to my knowledge, a 
plane they own.  And in the course of interaction, as I said, 
I have interacted with them.  I expressed the desire to visit 
this part of the world just to explore for myself and then 
they said to me:  Look, we will be going there sometime 
and we can give you a lift.   
 
So, of course, I was fine with that.  And I think if 
you just look at the documents, I think the business was 
made sometime for the trip kept on, I think, being 
20 
postponed for one reason or the other but this was the 
flight they owned.  And the background of it.  We had 
discussion sometime.   
 
I expressed interest to visit this place for my 
own and there was a lift.  They said:  When we go there, 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 135 of 301 
 
we will invite you.  And the opportunity came and I took it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   When you say it was a lift.  My 
understanding of a lift is that you do not pay.  It is free.  Is 
that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chair, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   This was a lift.  The arrangement was 
that:  Look, when we travelled that side, we will let you 
know and give you a lift. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   And indeed when they travelled that side, 
they indicated to me:  We are travelling that side.  The lift 
is here.  So I took it and then I went. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you have a recollection of how long 
before that trip you might have indicated to them you had a 
desire to go to that part of the world? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it 2015?  Was it earlier? 
MR MANTSHA:   No I think it is as early as 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, as early as 2014? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, as early as 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Before or after you became 
chairperson of the board? 
MR MANTSHA:   Before I became the chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you...  Yes.  I am might have 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 136 of 301 
 
forgotten something you might have told me previously.  
How long have you known the Gupta’s or Mr Salim Essa 
prior to being part of the Board of Denel? 
MR MANTSHA:   I have known them as from 2014.  I mean, 
we had direct contact. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.   
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Early part of 2014? 
MR MANTSHA:   It should have been around May/June. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Around May/June 2014? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, somewhere there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And who in particular were you 
dealing with at that time that you had met or had contact 
with in the Gupta family or...? 
MR MANTSHA:   At that time, the person who was mainly 
of – in the media business was Mr Tony Gupta. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   And of course, my interaction started with 
him being a stakeholder in the portfolio where I was... a 
Minister. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  It is ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   And you know, interacted with issues 
relating to, you know, the media landscape. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 137 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you, Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And when you 
went to that – on that trip to India, thanks to free lift that 
you have got from the Gupta’s in their privately owned 
plane, did you in fact travel around as a tourist in India? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, when I got there, I moved around to 
see.  I think I have visited a lot of places, you know, 
around the cities where I was. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   I was in Mumbai.  I was ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I do not think we need all the details. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am just asking generically. 
MR MANTSHA:   I visited the place. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And were you taken around by the 
Gupta’s to show you the tourist spots or did you go without 
them? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, I went on my own. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On your own? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You see, it is significant that, it 
seems, that on this passenger list there is a whole large 
number of Gupta’s and Singala’s, all part of that – of the 
overall Gupta family and then somebody called Mr Mantsha 
and you do not have family with you.  Was it your habit to 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 138 of 301 
 
travel on your own, as a person completely on his own 
travelling a foreign country? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think on one of the occasions, I think 
probably we were in Delhi.  I think two of their youngsters, 
I think accompanied me to some place. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Two of the Gupta youngsters. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see. 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
They 
were 
trying 
to 
give 
me 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...because it is quite a very – a very 
congested place.  It is very highly densely populated.  I 
think on one occasion, yes, they walked around with me.  
But more often, you get your own movement.  I moved 
alone. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  And did you declare to Denel?  
Because by this stage, of course, you were recently – you 
had recently assumed office as the Chairperson of Denel.  
Did you disclose to Denel as a benefit, the fact that you 
20 
have received a free flight from the Gupta’s? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, firstly, it depends on where you sit.  
I did not ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, where who sits?  I am asking 
you.  You sat as the Chairperson of Denel. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 139 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I am saying this was a personal trip. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I am sorry Mr Mantsha.  Really.  
I do not want to go into another day of evidence, please. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We really need to try and focus on 
the questions.  Simply...  I did not ask you where you sat 
or where anybody sat.  I said, you, by this stage, had 
recently taken up office as Chairperson of Denel.  Did you 
declare it as a benefit?  The answer would be either:  Yes, 
I did.  Or:  No, I did not. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   No, of course, I did not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, please let me finish.  And then 
if you say no, one can accept or should not as witness be 
try to anticipate everything but you can know what I would 
then ask is:  Why not?  Did you not think it appropriate?  
And you might say:  Well, no, I did not think it appropriate.  
That is why I did not and this is the reason. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, to start with.  This was something 
undertaken in my private capacity as a non-executive. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you declare it Mr Mantsha? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Of course I did not.  It was not necessary 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...I do not know.  That is why I am 
asking.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry.  I am sorry.  He 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 140 of 301 
 
did say earlier on but I think the two of you were talking at 
the same time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He did not declare it.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry I did not hear you, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   He did say earlier on. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think at that time, you might not 
10 
have heard him because the two of you were talking at the 
same time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He did say he did not declare it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He did not declare it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then I missed it.  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I apologise.  But I am just trying to 
keep answers a little shorter if you would not mind.  You 
20 
will be aware that the Chairperson is under huge pressure 
to finish the huge work of the Commission and we cannot – 
we really cannot have yet another day having to hear your 
evidence.   
 
So you did not.  Now in a sentence or two, 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 141 of 301 
 
please try and keep your answers brief.  Why did you feel 
that you did not need to?  You started by saying and then I 
interrupted you.  You started by saying:  Because this was 
a personal thing.  Just please finish the answer. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, but Chairperson, can I also say this?  
I understand the urgency of the Commission to finish.  I 
also do not want to keep on coming but at the same time, I 
think I must be given an opportunity to explain what I think 
it is appropriate as I am giving the answers.  It is up to you 
to decide otherwise. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Whether ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe I could say this.  What does help 
Mr Mantsha is when a question requires a yes or no, is to 
start by saying yes.  Or if you say no, you say no.  Even if 
you might have an explanation because when you start with 
an explanation before you can say yes or no, it does create 
a problem.  But preferable, if you can just say yes, it is 
yes.  If you would like to explain, you can say:  I would like 
to explain.   
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, what I am explaining here 
is.  I did not declare because I did not see any conflict or 
possible conflict of it.  I did not declare it.  And my 
understanding is, you declare where there is conflict of 
interest. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 142 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, we could debate that, the 
legality and the business ethics and so forth.  I am not 
proposing to that this afternoon.  We are here to just deal 
with facts.  The next page I would like you to go to, please.  
Sorry, Chair.  It is page 478. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We have an indication somewhere 
Mr Kennedy or are you going to deal with it at some stage 
what the monetary value of that lift was? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I have not dealt with that but perhaps 
I should do that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On your guidance.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mantsha, it would cost – if you 
have not taken that lift with – on the private owned jet of 
the Gupta family, how much would you had to have paid if 
you paid like the rest of us normal airfare with a normal 
commercial airline?  
MR MANTSHA:   I do not know. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, we know that your ticket to 
20 
Dubai, it is very roughly the same sort of distance from 
South Africa to Dubai as it is to India.  Do you know that 
cost about R 28 000,00?  Do you agree that it would be in 
that sort of ballpark, not precisely? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, I will not speculate.  I do not 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 143 of 301 
 
know.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I take you now, please, to page 
478? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   This, again, is a series of emails in 
which Mr Chawla is an active participant and this refers, as 
I understand it, to a reservation at the Oberoi Hotel in 
Dubai.  You see the subject about five lines from the top.  
You see that? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The date of that email was the 
2 n d of January 2016 and this appears to be, if one looks at 
the text – I am not going to read it all out – but it seems to 
be an email from or between Mr Chawla and the hotel in 
question to confirm the booking for you to stay at the 
Oberoi Hotel in Dubai.  Do you recall?  Did you have a trip 
to Dubai in January 2016 and did you stay at the Oberoi 
Hotel? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think I did, ja. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You think you did? 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it refers to, at the foot of the 
page...  In fact, the bottom email, there are a whole lot of 
different lines which do not always makes sense.  They are 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 144 of 301 
 
sort of electronic jargon, as it were.  But there is an email 
about three-quarters of the way down.  It says: 
“Dear Mr Mantsha.  Thank you for choosing the 
Oberoi Hotel in Dubai.   
We are pleased to confirm your reservation 
and look forward to welcome you to the Oberoi 
Hotel in Dubai. 
From Room Reservations...” 
 
And then at the foot of the page, it gives arrival 
date, Sunday, the 3 r d of January 2016.  Transfer, please 
10 
advise.  And then departure date, the 6 t h of January.  So it 
was a three or four day trip that you took to Dubai or at 
least stayed at the Oberoi Hotel during the trip to Dubai.  
Is that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And again, these arrangements were 
made by Mr Chawla on your behalf.  Is that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As a personal favour to you? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, not as a favour. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No? 
MR MANTSHA:   I paid for the arrangements. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You paid for this? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But I mean the actual making of 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 145 of 301 
 
arrangements was done as a personal favour to you? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, it was not a personal favour. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So why did Mr Chawla do it at all?  
He was not doing it in his capacity, you told us earlier, 
making arrangements for you as an executive in the Gupta 
family business empire. 
MR MANTSHA:   I think to repeat myself, Chairperson. I 
said he was running a side-show, a side-business for 
himself.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Side-show? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Even though, travel excellence 
...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   So it is not like he was doing favour to 
me.  He was not only arranging this things only for me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you not tell him we reimburse 
him but also reward him for his troubles?  In other words:  
I will pay you back the twenty-odd thousand or whatever it 
might be and I will put in an extra five thousand to pay you 
for your trouble? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, there was a smaller extra fee to 
him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  And so you paid for this? 
MR MANTSHA:   I paid for this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And how did you – did you reimburse 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 146 of 301 
 
him? 
MR MANTSHA:   I reimbursed him? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Personally? 
MR MANTSHA:   Personally, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Why did he pay the hotel for you to 
reimburse?  Why did he not just make the arrangements 
and when you get to the hotel or before you get to the 
hotel, like the rest of us in normal bookings, we pay?  We 
are the traveller.  We are the person who is going to reside 
in the hotel.  We pay the hotel, either before or at the end 
10 
of the stay.  Why did you have to pay Mr Chawla to do 
that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Because he was making arrangements 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...as good as your travelling agency do, 
all the arrangements, and pay whatever has to be paid for 
you and they give you the invoice and you pay them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you pay cash ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MANTSHA:   I did ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...again? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 147 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And so, presumable, you cannot 
prove that you have paid him back? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I do not understand when you say 
prove?  I can prove.  I paid. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, you – with your oral testimony, 
I understand you are giving evidence, but is there any 
other evidence that you can put forward to show that the 
Chairperson can place trust in your word? 
MR MANTSHA:   Except that he can confirm it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He could confirm it? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Of course, he is overseas.  We know 
that Parliament tried to have him give evidence and he 
seems to have been overseas for some considerable time.  
So the suggestion that you make...  Thank you very much 
for the suggestion.  We had thought about that but, of 
course, we would like to have the evidence of Mr Chawla.  
And if he is watching this online.  Please, Mr Chawla, you 
know where to contact us.  We would like to hear your 
evidence 
inter 
alia 
on 
whether 
you 
received 
the 
20 
reimbursement.   
 
And then we see on the following pages 482 and 
483 further emails.  It appears that Mr Chawla, actually, 
organised for a vehicle, a chauffeur vehicle to pick you up 
to – at the airport to take you to this hotel in Dubai.  Is that 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 148 of 301 
 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you recall that? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And did he pay for the travel cost of 
that as well and you reimbursed him? 
MR MANTSHA:   I did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Also in cash? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What these document show is very 
10 
detailed.  Email came back and forth, back and forth about 
all of these arrangements.  Nowhere in these emails have I 
found any reference to the amount that was – that you 
were expected to reimburse Mr Chawla, how you would do 
it, when you would do it and whether you did it, and if so, 
any detail.   
MR MANTSHA:   Can I answer that Mr Chair? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, well, I am putting it to you. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, firstly, I do not know where these 
emails come from.  I have explained how I transacted with 
20 
him, how we have dealt with one another.  So I am sure, as 
the Commission, you know where these emails – I mean, 
do not know where these emails are coming from.  And of 
course, I can only confirm what I have done.  I cannot go 
beyond what I have done ...[intervenes]  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 149 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I have already shared(?) that with 
you. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes.  So for you to put it to me that you 
cannot find an email that confirm what I am saying. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   As if I know where these emails are 
coming from.  I do not know. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Do 
not 
worry 
about 
emails 
...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   I am saying...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...in my mind. 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
MR MANTSHA:   I am saying to you, Mr Chair.  We can 
confirm what I am talking about. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  Do you have any emails of 
your own?  I mean, you must have access to your own 
emails and/or phone messages?  You, presumable, have 
your phone here?  Is there no evidence that you can come 
up with, either right now or else, perhaps after this hearing 
is over, you can send it to us as the Legal Team to say:  
20 
Here we are, Chairperson.   
 
I 
have 
actually 
got 
an 
SMS 
or 
Whatsapp 
message or an email or whatever.  To say:  Thank you for 
seeing Mr Abul(?), yesterday.  I confirm you told me I owe 
you R 28 000,00 odd for this air ticket.  Would it suit for 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 150 of 301 
 
you for me to come around your house on Sunday morning 
because I have got a whole lot of cash or whatever. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, but ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can you find anything like that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Mr Kennedy, we can sit and assume. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, I am asking you if you have 
anything like that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Of course, I was dealing with this person, 
more often face-to-face. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   I would talk to him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   
MR MANTSHA:   When I pay him, I would pay him interest. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I understand. 
MR MANTSHA:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The answer is you do not have? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, but again Chairperson, without being 
accused of trying to delay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   If a person them assumes that for certain 
20 
things to be proved there should be an email, there should 
be a telephone call.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MANTSHA:   I gave you an example of what we do 
every day with people that we know.  I come to you, I 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 151 of 301 
 
borrow money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  I understand that and I am sure 
he understands it. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He understand that part.  You might just 
have something and that is why he was asking, do you 
have anything.  So the answer is:  No, I do not have. 
MR MANTSHA:   No, I will not give you like that.  We were 
not dealing like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Kennedy. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  May I now move 
on to another transaction from the same bundle, page 428? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 428? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ja, 428.  It is a municipal account.  
You see by the City of Johannesburg Municipality?   
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that correct? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that is an invoice in your name.  
Is that correct?  L D Mantsha, P.O. Box 1127, Randburg.  Is 
that your name and postal address at the front? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 152 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it relates, it seems if we look at 
the right-hand portion near the top.  It refers to an address 
in...  I am afraid my eyes are too bad to read it.  I think it 
is...  Is it Main Street in Bordeaux? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And there is – and this seems to be a 
municipal account.  It says previous account, et cetera, 
interest on arrears, et cetera.  And it comes to R 14 000,00 
odd.  R 14 238,00 it seems.  Now did you own at that time 
or do you still own the property in Main Street, Bordeaux? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You do? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you did at this time.  And was 
this an invoice issued by the municipality for your personal 
account for amounts owing in respect of that property? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think without anticipating your question. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   These proof of residence ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MANTSHA:   ...was supplied...  Was supplied for the 
purposes of applying for a visa.  So it was given 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Applying for a visa? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 153 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  Thank you.  You have not 
expect(?) my question.  I just want to take you to the 
previous page 427.  There is an email from Yvonne and her 
email 
address 
at 
the 
top 
is 
info@lungisanimantshaattorneys.co.za. 
 
That 
is 
your 
official firm’s name, not so? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was she a legal professional or was 
she a PA?  What position did she hold? 
MR MANTSHA:   She is a PA. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   PA.  And that then was sent.  It says 
municipal account as the attachment.   
It says: 
“Please find the attached document for your 
urgent attention...” 
 
So you are saying that was sent on your behalf 
by your PA to – you will see it is actually going to Ashu.  
That is Mr Chawla.  For purposes of obtaining a visa. 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Not for payment of the municipal 
20 
...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   No, not at all. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  Thank you.  I am sorry, Chair.  
I am just trying to get to my next topic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 154 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I just want to deal briefly 
Mr Mantsha, if I may, with the meeting that took place at 
the 
Saxonwold 
residence 
of 
Mr 
Tony 
Gupta, 
that 
Mr Saloojee gave evidence on, in some detail.   
 
And Mr Saloojee has told the Commission that 
he had an impression, of course an impression does not 
necessarily facts, but his impression was that Mr Gupta 
was unhappy about his perceived resistance.   
 
That is Mr Saloojee’s perceived resistance, in 
particular relating to the Asia joint venture.  And you were 
10 
present at the meeting in Saxonwold.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   I was present Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  What was our impression?  Do 
you have any comment on Mr Saloojee’s impression?  
Because Mr Saloojee has said, his impression was, from 
what was said and in the tone in which it was said, 
Mr Tony Gupta 
was 
very 
unhappy 
about 
Mr 
Saloojee 
apparently resisting the efforts of the Gupta’s to pursue the 
Asia joint venture.   
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson, with respect.  It was 
20 
not in my impression for the following reason.  That 
meeting was not discussing VR related issues.  That 
meeting 
was 
discussing 
the 
agreement 
between 
Mr Saloojee and Mr Essa whereby Mr Saloojee undertook 
to help Mr Essa to acquire a company called LMT.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 155 of 301 
 
 
LMT is a company which was – I do not know 
whether they still owe 51% by Denel at the time, and 49% 
was owned by private shareholders.  The agreement 
between the two, as I understood, was that Mr Saloojee 
would assist Mr Essa by talking to the private shareholders 
of LMT to try to secure a sale of their shares to Mr Essa.   
 
So 
that 
meeting 
was 
a 
follow-up 
to 
some 
longstanding discussion as it appears to me... And it is the 
same Mr Essa and Mr Saloojee who together assisted one 
another to get Mr Essa to buy VR Laser.   
10 
 
What was discussed in that meeting.  Of course, 
Mr Essa saw LMT as a strategic acquisition for himself to 
be a serious player in the defence spaces.  And he was 
asking Mr Saloojee:  How far are you?  What is the 
reaction of the private shareholders?  Mr Tony Gupta did 
not really say much in that meeting.  So the person – the 
people who were talking a lot in that meeting, it was 
Mr Saloojee and Mr Essa.   
 
I was then asked, as the end:  What is your 
view?  So because, at that point, I did not even know what 
20 
LMT stood for.  I was knew.  So I did not want to embarrass 
myself.  I then said:  No, I have got no comment.  And the 
meeting ended...  So in short, I disagree that that meeting 
had anything to do with the Asia VR or anything like that.  
It had everything to do with LMT.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 156 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now you have said that in 
your statement.  If I can take you to it, please?  It is in the 
same bundle, page 331.   
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number again? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   331, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you have it? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now in paragraph 7, your heading is 
10 
at paragraphs 97 to 99.  That is the reference, as I 
understand it, to Mr Saloojee’s initial statement. 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Because he was specifically asked by 
the investigators of this Commission to comment on 
particular features of Mr Saloojee’s affidavit.  Correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply] [Microphone not 
switched on.] 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Oh, you will need to direct your...  
Are you asking for a comfort break? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you would like a comfort break? 
MR MANTSHA:   [Microphone not switched on.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 157 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:   [Microphone not switched on.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, that is alright.  We are going 
to break at four.  So let us take it now.  Ten minutes?  Let 
us say let us resume at ten to four. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I believe I 
10 
was at page 331 of bundle 8 and paragraph 7 is headed at 
paragraph 97 to 99 and you have confirmed - Mr Mantsha, 
thank you for that - that this relates to Mr Saloojee’s 
statement, his initial statement. 
 
Now I just want for the record to be fair to you to 
just record that in a later statement that you gave you 
made a slight correction of the detail and we thank you for 
that, how your typed statement reads subject to the 
amendment that I will deal with in a moment is: 
“I did not request to meet Mr Saloojee and I did not 
20 
direct him that the meeting would take place at the 
Gupta residence.  My recollection of the event is 
that Mr Essa convened the said meeting and he 
requested me to attend.” 
Etcetera.  Now in your later statement you have changed 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 158 of 301 
 
this to say: 
“I do not recall who requested this meeting.” 
So thank you for that correct.  But you have confirmed of 
course now also that there was such a meeting at the 
Saxonwold residence of Mr Gupta. 
MR MANTSHA:    Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now if we look – and here I am going 
to ask you just to put to one side the file that you are 
looking at now with your statement, just put that aside for 
a moment please and now can I just take you to Mr 
10 
Saloojee’s statement that you are commenting on?  It is 
bundle W4A and while that is being readied for the learned 
Chair can I just give you the page number, it is RS022.  
Sorry, Chair, I should have indicated to your registrar a 
moment ago. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, that is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So here of course there is only one 
set of page numbers, this time on the right hand side, if 
you look at RS022.  I am just going to give you the digits, 
22.  And if we look at the foot of the page, it says 
20 
paragraph 95, have you got that? 
MR MANTSHA:    Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It says this – this is Mr Saloojee 
speaking: 
“On 24 July 2015, Brown...” 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 159 of 301 
 
That is Mrs Lynne Brown – Ms, I beg your pardon, Lynne 
Brown the then Minister of Public Enterprises. 
“...convened a meeting with the incoming board and 
presented her strategic intent statement.” 
And then he attaches it.   
“At this meeting Brown also announced the new 
members of the audit and risk committee namely Ms 
Mpho Kgomongoe as Chairperson, Mr Msomi, Mr 
Mahumapelo and Ms Ntshaveni” 
Did you attend that meeting where the incoming board 
10 
including you, as Chairperson attended? 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And then he says, Mr 
Saloojee, paragraph 96: 
“Sometime in early September 2014, Mantsha...” 
That is yourself. 
“...requested 
a 
briefing 
meeting 
with 
me 
in 
Johannesburg.” 
Is that correct, you were about to take office or you had 
just taken office as Chairperson and you requested a 
20 
meeting with Mr Saloojee for him as Group CEO to provide 
a briefing, is that right? 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
Well, 
Chairperson, 
Mr 
Saloojee 
approached me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 160 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:    I think on two or three occasions before I 
started the work and we met I think at Park Hyatt or 
wherever the case may …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry, where? 
MR MANTSHA:    I think we met at Park Hyatt or wherever. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Park Hyatt, the hotel? 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes, the hotel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes? 
MR MANTSHA:    And it was trying to find one another. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, but presumably it made sense, 
10 
that you needed to get to know each other and he needed 
to inform you what was going on in Denel as CEO to you as 
Chairperson so that you could find your feet, as it were. 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes, but what I do not remember, it is 
where I called it or he called it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, that is fine.  But do you recall 
it was early September 2015?  Before the first board 
meeting? 
MR MANTSHA:    I think before the first board meeting we 
did meet – you see, normally the CE would meet the Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Of course. 
MR MANTSHA:    And, you know, canvass certain issues 
and say well, Chair, I need this resolution, I need that 
resolution. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 161 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:    To be made and, you know, I think we did 
meet in preparation of the board meeting. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think also – I am sorry, Mr Kennedy, I 
think a few minutes ago you said before you started work 
as Chairperson of the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:    You did meet with him about three or so 
times, is that right? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I think two times also. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  And that obviously 
makes sense because you want to get some inside 
knowledge 
before 
you 
start 
sharing 
your 
first 
board 
meeting where you might not know what is going on but the 
important bit is that I would like to focus on now is how 
this came about and where the meeting happened because 
Mr Saloojee’s version is that you requested a briefing 
meeting, you of course have said that he requested some 
of the meeting and he says you indicated that the meeting 
20 
would probably be at your office, at his office, that is 
yourself.  Where was your office at that stage, was that 
when you had reopened your attorney’s practice. 
MR MANTSHA:    Ja, my office has been always in 
Craighall. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 162 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In Craighall? 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  And then he says this. 
“He said...” 
That is yourself said. 
“...he would confirm the venue when I was on my 
way.  He did not specify the nature of the meeting 
and I did not think anything untoward about such a 
meeting.  On my way to the meeting...” 
This is paragraph 97, which is the first part of the passage 
10 
that you have commented on in your statement that we 
have just looked at. 
“On my way to the meeting he called and directed 
me to the Gupta residence in Saxonwold.  I was not 
surprised.” 
Now what I would like to ask you is this.  Is that correct 
that you phoned him or you said to him let us have a 
meeting and I will tell you where the meeting will be once 
you are on your way and while you were on your way he 
said meet me at the Saxonwold residence of Guptas. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, my answer to this, Chairperson, as 
far as his specific meeting is concerned, the answer is no 
and it is no because I had no contact of what was going to 
be discussed.  I did not even know who LMT was but I had 
a deal with Mr Saloojee to say wherever there is pressure 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 163 of 301 
 
– because when you hold this position, you know, business 
people lobby their business interest so you are always 
under constant pressure as the CE.  I said I will put a 
cover  on you so that you focus on what you have to do 
without interference of, you know, all this pressure.  So 
this meeting I would not have called for it because I had no 
knowledge of the issues to be discussed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, but you have confirmed that one 
meeting which you and Mr Saloojee attended took place at 
the home of Mr Tony Gupta in Saxonwold. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes, true. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now this was before you had chaired 
your first board meeting, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, again, Chairperson, I cannot tell 
you the date of that meeting at the Gupta’s residence. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    But all I can say, I was very new, I was 
trying to read everything about Denel.  I had not – at that 
time came across the subsidiary of Denel that is called 
LMT. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    So I was fairly very new, I cannot tell you 
when but I was [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I understand, I have got you.  Thank 
you.  Now but how did it come about then that you 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 164 of 301 
 
attended the meeting at the Gupta residence in Saxonwold, 
was that arranged by Mr Saloojee?  Is that what you are 
telling me? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, all I am saying, the – where I sit 
now, the probability is, as much as I say I do not recall, 
whether it was Mr Saloojee or Mr Essa. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:    But because the issues where between 
Mr Essa and Mr Saloojee, from where I sit, one of them 
could have arranged it.  I do not know who really arranged 
10 
it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And then what he says is this in 
paragraph 98: 
“Tony and Essa were also present at the meeting.” 
You have confirmed that. 
MR MANTSHA:    Ja, ja, they were present. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    
“At the meeting Tony specifically addressed the 
issue of Denel Land Mobility Technologies” 
That is the DLM.  Sorry, LMT. 
20 
“…and said that were interested in acquiring the 
business.  Denel had a 51% stake in the business.  
Mantsha asked me…” 
That is Saloojee. 
“…to look into the matter and to give him feedback 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 165 of 301 
 
on the way forward.  I indicated that this would take 
time and that such a transaction would have to go 
through several processes.  The meeting then 
ended.  I…” 
That is Saloojee. 
“…left 
the 
meeting 
knowing 
that 
I 
was 
being 
instructed to revert on how I would facilitate the 
sale.  I had no intention of doing so.  It is also 
important to point out that the body language and 
tone of voice of specifically Tony during this 
10 
meeting gave me the impression that he was 
extremely frustrated by me.  I realised that my 
strategy of fobbing them off was no longer working.” 
He has explained that elsewhere in his statement.  He kept 
resisting attempts by Essa and others to be pursuing 
projects. 
“It was clear to me…” 
He says. 
“…that 
my 
lack 
of 
cooperation 
was 
becoming 
problematic with him.” 
20 
Now you have indicated earlier you have a different 
recollection of the meeting. 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, I do, Chairperson, for this reason.  
This meeting, the impression I got, they were discussing 
about longstanding arrangement that they had in trying to – 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 166 of 301 
 
for 
Mr 
Saloojee 
to 
assist 
Mr 
Essa 
to 
acquire 
the 
shareholding of LMT in order to increase the strategic 
capacity of VR Laser.  So there was a background to that 
meeting which I was not privy to and the content of that 
meeting I was not privy to until such time where they were 
discussing all of it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    And I did not say anything in that 
meeting.  I was asked to say but I not and I have already 
disagreed that Mr Tony Gupta participated and said the 
10 
things that Mr Saloojee allegedly said.  It was mainly 
between Mr Essa and Mr Saloojee and the impression, that 
meeting happened in a very friendly atmosphere.  I did not 
hear anybody raising voice, I did not hear anyone shouting 
at one another, it might well be that there are issues 
between Mr Essa and Mr Saloojee that I am not aware of 
and maybe the history that I am not aware of but it was a 
very cordial meeting, there was no shouting, there was 
nothing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Can I just ask this.  You have 
20 
indicated earlier you have a different recollection as to who 
set up the meeting, you are not sure whether it was 
Saloojee or Essa but you are sure that it was not you.  You 
had not even attended even a single board meeting yet and 
I do not mean that critically, that is the fact, there was an 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 167 of 301 
 
orientation type of meeting and so forth before you could 
have a board meeting. 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Even before you have convened with 
your new colleagues of the board at the first formal board 
meeting, you were being asked by either Mr Saloojee, who 
was Group CEO now reporting to you or Mr Essa from the 
Gupta business empire to attend a meeting at Mr Gupta’s 
private residence in Saxonwold to discuss a particular 
matter that on your own version, you did not really have 
10 
any background on – and again I do not criticise you, it 
makes perfect sense because you just new on the job as 
Chairperson.  Why were you invited to the meeting at all?  
Did it not put you in a bit of an awkward situation?  There 
are now detailed discussions about the acquisition of a 
company called LMT, you did not even know who LMT, for 
good reason, and now it is all happening in somebody 
private residence talking about acquisitions and so forth 
that you have no background on.  It seems strange to me. 
MR MANTSHA:   No really strange, Chairperson.  In the 
20 
business environment, you know, business people lobby 
their interest all the time and as I said to you, Chairperson, 
the working arrangement that myself and Mr Saloojee 
opted for was to say because there is constant political 
pressure, business pressure from, you know, business 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 168 of 301 
 
people who are pushing their own interest.   
So where necessary, when you need a cover, I give 
you a cover and this was a meeting where I went with him 
in terms of my working arrangement with him and my role 
there was just to ensure that there is no undue pressure on 
Mr Saloojee because business people, they push their 
business interest and there is some time they push it very, 
very hard.  So I did not see anything out of attending that 
meeting because here is Mr Essa, who has got existing 
relationship with Denel and Mr Essa, in terms of my 
10 
information, was the only because business person who is 
black who is operating at the main, the hardcore of the 
defence industry.   
So, I said to you of course I did not know what they 
were going to do but it was not strange to me that I would 
go with my CE to a meeting of that nature.  We were not 
going to do anything that we are not supposed to do and 
for sure, the meeting ended, we left that meeting and of 
course I would assume that Mr Saloojee explore the 
discussion with those private shareholders. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know, Mr Mantsha, you may – you 
may have thought on your version that you were going 
there to protect Mr Saloojee against pressure from Mr 
Salim Essa or whoever but did you think about the 
possibility that you could be – you could have been 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 169 of 301 
 
brought to the meeting for you presence to act as pressure 
on Mr Saloojee? 
MR MANTSHA:    Not all, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    Not at all because Mr Saloojee was 
talking to private shareholders of LMT and there was no 
pressure I could have asserted to Mr Saloojee because his 
arrangement was purely with Mr Essa and from the 
discussion of that meeting there was no hard feeling 
expressed to Mr Saloojee by Mr Essa or by anyone in that 
10 
meeting. 
 
It 
was 
just 
a 
follow-up 
meeting 
what 
is 
happening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, let me tell you about some 
evidence that I have heard which on the face of it may well 
be interpreted as revealing a way of doing business that 
was adopted maybe by the Guptas or by the Guptas and 
their associates or particularly by, I think, Mr Tony Gupta.   
 
The evidence that I have had reveals that in the 
number 
of 
meetings 
where 
he 
was 
talking 
to 
some 
government person or SOE official, they would bring – he 
20 
would bring, for example, Mr Duduzane Zuma to the 
meeting but almost everyone of those person who attended 
such meetings with Mr Tony Guptas says Mr Duduzane 
Zuma had nothing of substance to contribute to the 
meeting, he was, apart from the pleasantries, he would just 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 170 of 301 
 
be there.  Tony Gupta would do most of the talking.   
Mr Jonas said so about Mr Zuma in regard to the 
meeting that he had with a Gupta brother who may well 
have been Tony Gupta on the 23 October 2015 when he 
says he was offered the position of Minister of Finance and 
some money.   
Mr Dukwana said the same thing about the meeting 
that he said he had at the Gupta residence with Mr Tony 
Gupta and he said Mr Duduzane Zuma was there where, 
according to Mr Dukwana he was asked to fire his own 
10 
HOD in the Free State and appoint Mr Richard Seleke and 
he says he was offered money on that occasion.   
Mr, I think, Kona who was Chairperson of the SAA 
Board at some stage and was Acting Group CEO of SAA at 
some stage also had a meeting with Tony Gupta at the 
Gupta residence where he says he was offered money, if I 
recall correctly.  I could be wrong on this occasion, 
Duduzane Zuma was there too but he did not say much and 
I think I could have another two or three people, so it is 
quite interesting.   
20 
 
And then, in regard to Denel, part of the evidence 
given by Mr Saloojee is that at one of the meetings that he 
had at the Gupta residence with Mr Salim Essa, they 
brought in Duduzane Zuma and I think on another occasion 
they brought in Minister Gigaba who was Minister of Public 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 171 of 301 
 
Enterprises at that time.   
He says even with regard to Minister Gigaba there 
seem to have been no particular obvious reason why they 
wanted him to be in that meeting because he did not have 
much to say, also with Duduzane Zuma, so it gives the 
impression as if they could bring certain people just to 
show you these are our connections.   
So I am saying I am wondering whether you thought 
that 
they 
might 
not 
have 
brought 
you 
as 
a 
future 
Chairperson of the board to say to Mr Saloojee look, you 
10 
know, we have influenced the Chairperson of the new 
board, he is somebody that we know. 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, I do not think so, for these 
reasons, Chairperson.  Mr Essa and Mr Saloojee had 
longstanding relationship and Mr Saloojee and Mr Essa had 
transacted before, long time when they actually acquired 
VR Laser.  Apparently my information was the proposition 
for Mr Essa to acquire VR Laser came from Mr Saloojee 
and that is the proposition which Mr Essa went for and they 
had a longstanding relationship of assisting one another in 
20 
the acquisition of strategic business in defence and I had 
no information of any animosity between the two and I had 
no any information of animosity between either Mr Tony 
Gupta and Mr Saloojee and the meeting was not Mr Tony 
Gupta’s meeting, the meeting was Mr Saloojee’s meeting.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 172 of 301 
 
As I said, it was cordial, it was discussed very well, there 
was no pressure really that I could exert to Mr Saloojee, Mr 
Saloojee was talking to private shareholders. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:    We had no influence as the board of 
Denel to get those private shareholders to agree to sell the 
shares to Mr Essa.  And Mr Saloojee himself, he had no 
authority to decide for those shareholders.  All he was 
doing was to handle those discussion on behalf of Mr Essa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Kennedy? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now can I take 
you 
back 
to 
your 
own 
statement 
where 
you 
were 
responding to Mr Saloojee’s affidavit and – sorry, Chair, 
just give me a moment?  So that is bundle 8.  Have you got 
that back? 
MR MANTSHA:    I do, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, it is at page 332. 
MR MANTSHA:    I do have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now this is part of your statement 
and you refer in your statement to – in some detail to the 
20 
points that you have already referred to that the topic 
discussed at the Gupta residence was the LMT, the 
possibility of acquiring the shares – of a shareholding of 
LMT to be sold to VR Laser but I would like to take you on 
page 332, the last three paragraphs.  You see the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 173 of 301 
 
paragraph that starts: 
“Mr Saloojee reported to Mr Essa…” 
Do you see that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Mr Saloojee?   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Reported to Mr Essa, page 332, third 
last paragraph. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I do see it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, if I can just remind you what 
you said in your affidavit. 
“Mr Saloojee reported to Mr Essa that he was still 
10 
talking to them...” 
That is the private shareholders of LMT. 
“...and would continue to discuss with the said LMT 
private shareholders to sell their shares to VR 
Laser.  I was asked at the end of the discussion if I 
had any comment and I replied that I had none 
since I did not even at that stage know what LMT 
stood for and what it does, and further, I had no 
background of the matter.” 
Now that seems to bear out what you told the Chairperson 
20 
a little earlier that you were a bit in a situation of some 
ignorance, and I do not mean that in a critical way, you 
were so new to the position, you did not even know who 
LMT were and anything about the transaction.  Now what 
you then say is this: 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 174 of 301 
 
“On my way out...” 
That is presumably out from the Gupta residence. 
“On my way out with Mr Saloojee, he then said to 
me Chair, I need your support.  I indicated to him 
that we would discuss the matter.” 
What did you understand his request to mean?  Why did he 
need your support?  Support for what? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, we had already discussed with Mr 
Saloojee how we should work.  So this statement was of 
course based on our earlier discussion that I must support 
10 
him in any instances where there is pressure. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    Or any instances where there is lobby. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    Where there is political interference and 
all sorts of things. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR MANTSHA:    So of course I understood that statement 
in the context of the working relationship that we were 
trying to do that I support my CE. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Try and sit closer to the microphone 
please? 
MR MANTSHA:    That I support my CE. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes and that is an admirable purpose 
but what it seems to suggest, I am putting it to you, it 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 175 of 301 
 
seems to suggest that you are in a way confirming part of 
Mr Saloojee’s evidence which was he gets to a meeting in 
Saxonwold, he feels he is being pressurised by Mr Gupta, 
admittedly he does not talk about specific used by Mr 
Gupta, he talks about voice tone and body language and so 
forth and the Chairperson will assess what weight can be 
attached to that but Mr Saloojee’s evidence has been I get 
brought to a meeting in Saxonwold, I am only told at the 
last minute where I am supposed to go, I land up in a 
Gupta residence and I am then dealt with in a way by Mr 
10 
Gupta, Tony Gupta, where he seems to be aggressive and 
very unhappy and pressuring him - Mr Saloojee – because 
he is obviously not playing the game as it were and so 
when you confirm that as he came out of the meeting with 
you he said to you I need your support, Chair.  He was 
already signalling to you there was a problem of the very 
pressure that you felt it was your duty to protect him 
against. 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, Chairperson, talking as far as that 
meeting is concerned, I did not see any undue pressure, I 
20 
did not see any pressure.  So his statement, as I said, it is 
relating to what we have done before. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   
MR MANTSHA:    And as I am saying to you, these parties 
were known to each other very well. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 176 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:    And it was not within the power of Mr 
Saloojee to force those people to sell their shares to VR, it 
was just for him to talk on behalf of VR to see if this can 
be [indistinct – dropping voice].  So the pressure out of it, I 
did not see it and I wonder on what basis this could have 
resulted in a pressure for something that was not within 
the control of either Denel, myself as the Chair and Mr 
Saloojee and even Mr Essa himself.  So I would not 
understand the basis of any pressure out of what was 
10 
being discussed at that time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So was his request to you, Chair, I 
need your support as something you did not understand? 
MR MANTSHA:    Well, I understood this in the context of 
the working relationship that we were trying to build with 
Mr Saloojee that I have got to support all the way. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But you yourself, a few minutes ago, 
said a number of times you saw it as part of your role as 
Chairperson to protect your CEO against heavy pressure 
from other people. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:    Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I do not mean from within your 
organisation, I mean from outside. 
MR MANTSHA:    You see, Chairperson, the business 
world, it is cut throat in the sense that the business people 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 177 of 301 
 
are out there to market whatever products they have and 
when you are serving in a state or the company where the 
people of this country have your respect, you have to 
adopt a particular approach, you cannot close a gate to 
people who want to engage with the state-owned and that 
...[indistinct – dropping voice] a lot of money.  There have 
been many meetings myself that I have attended with 
various business people who are pushing ...[indistinct – 
dropping voice] and understandably so because you know 
business people have to look at their own interests, but 
10 
you need to have as the Chairperson to draw the line 
where you go to support and protect your…[indistinct – 
dropping voice] from not doing a lot of those because it’s 
primary responsibility is to push…[indistinct – dropping 
voice].  So, this statement is within the context of what we 
have been trying to devise as working together and every 
pressure on him, I had to support.  Whether himself, 
internally feels the pressure or I don’t see it as a pressure 
or I see it as a lobby, or he sees it as a lobby but in this 
context, I wonder what the pressure was.  Unless if Mr 
20 
Saloojee was not – did not tell me other things that were 
happening between him and Mr Essa and any other thing 
probably happening between him and other people but the 
content of this, there was no pressure because everybody 
knew it was not within his control it was not within my 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 178 of 301 
 
control, there was no pressure I could give to him.  If the 
private shareholders were not interested to sell, they were 
not interested. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, you’ve indicated that you had a 
number of private meetings with Mr Saloojee when you’d 
just been appointed to basically fill you in on some matters 
and then we know that you were at the meeting in 
Saxonwold, you’ve confirmed it was early September 2015, 
but you can’t recall exactly when, I accept that and then 
you’ve confirmed that the very first Board meeting which 
10 
you Chaired was the 10 t h of September 2015. 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   According to Mr Saloojee’s affidavit, 
it appears that before you even had the – Chaired the first 
Board meeting you had attended the meeting at Saxonwold, 
you confirm that? 
MR MANTSHA:   You mean this LMT discussions? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, now what should the Chair make 
20 
about this point.  Does it not seem, perhaps, odd to you or 
odd to one that, you’ve just been appointed as Chairperson 
and here I’m interested in …[indistinct – dropping voice], 
you have – the first thing you do after being introduced by 
the Minister that you’re the new Board, that you’re the new 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 179 of 301 
 
Chairperson and so forth, the first thing you do is to hole a 
series of meetings with the Group CEO, now that’s not at 
all odd, that seems to me to make perfect sense but then 
before you even Chair your very first Board meeting, 
before you’re even interacting with your colleagues on the 
Board in a formal Board meeting you’re off to somebody’s 
private residence in a residential suburb of Johannesburg 
to talk about some transactions about which you know 
nothing, for good reason because you’re just trying to find 
your feet about LMT.  Does that not, perhaps, give weight 
10 
to the suggestion some people have suggested like Mr 
Saloojee, which is that, behind the scenes the Gupta’s 
were having a – and Essa, their associate, were having a 
massive influence on Denel’s affairs, in fact, interference 
in Denel’s affairs.  So, before you’ve convened a Board 
meeting, you’re now having a private meeting with Mr 
Gupta and Mr Essa at his house, Mr Gupta’s house, isn’t 
that, perhaps, a bit strange? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, all I can say is the Gupta’s 
or Mr Essa did not have influence in my Board or in myself. 
20 
Maybe the Gupta’s or Mr Essa had influence on Mr 
Saloojee because Mr Saloojee had already acquired – 
assisted them to – assisted Mr Essa to acquire VR Laser 
and VR Laser was already doing work with Denel at the 
time.  So, maybe he can talk of that influence they had on 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 180 of 301 
 
him but as far as the influence they had on myself or my 
Board, there was none whatsoever, there was no influence. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, now I’d like to deal 
further with the issue of how it came about that the Asian 
project, if I can call it that, the Asian venture came before 
the Board and Mr Saloojee’s involvement in it.  Mr Saloojee 
has given evidence that the idea of the Asian joint venture 
was raised first by Mr Ntshepe who reported to Mr Saloojee 
and he suggested it to Mr Saloojee and that Mr Saloojee 
firmly rejected this proposition and I’m quoting here from a 
10 
statement as provided to the Commission. Now presumably 
you weren’t involved in those discussions, it seems that 
those took place before you took office as Chairperson of 
the Board, is that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I’m not aware of those discussions. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see, now what Mr Saloojee says is 
that the next time it was raised was at the first Board 
meeting, by you, Mr Mantsha as Chairperson and Mr 
Saloojee’s evidence has been, and I’m simply putting it to 
you by way of fairness so that you can be reminded of it 
20 
and comment on it and if you disagree with it, you’ll have 
that opportunity.  Mr Saloojee said he found it strange that 
where he, as the Group CEO, had rejected the proposition 
of 
the 
Asian 
venture, 
it 
should 
be 
the 
brand-new 
Chairperson, yourself, who raises it at the Board meeting 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 181 of 301 
 
and – yes, just comment on that, did you raise it at the 
Board meeting? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think, again with respect Chairperson, I 
think this morning you furnished me with some copy of the 
minutes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And I think if you just look at the 
minutes…[intervenes]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I think let’s do that. 
MR MANTSHA:   That you have furnished to me. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, let’s do that, I can take you, 
right now to the minutes. 
MR MANTSHA:   So that matter was not raised by me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   By you? 
MR MANTSHA:   And let me go back, around February or 
so, there was a trip by Denel business Executives to India 
to try to explore that – the possibility of entering into that 
market…[intervenes]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Possibility of? 
MR MANTSHA:   Of setting up…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Entering that market. 
MR MANTSHA:   Entering the Indian market and of course 
at the time Mr Ntshepe was the head of Business 
Development at Denel, he was an Executive and this was 
the gentleman at the time of our appointment had bailed a 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 182 of 301 
 
book – an order book of round about 20 to 26million.  So, 
Mr Ntshepe was, from the evidence we had, a reputable 
business developer who was, at all times, exploring new 
markets within …[indistinct – dropping voice].  So, if that 
was raised by him, it is illogical that, Denel, under the 
leadership of Mr Saloojee would send a team to India in 
February to something that he, himself disagreed with. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, may I just – I want to try and 
assist, firstly to keep your evidence short but to show that, 
in fact the minutes is a good idea to look at the minutes 
10 
and we have actually obtained these minutes for the 10 t h of 
September 2015 and in fact they seem to bear out your 
version, obviously it’s for the Chairperson to make a 
decision in that regard but if I may just find it. In Bundle 8, 
do you still have Bundle 8 in front of you? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It must be one of the two in front of you. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, so it’s Bundle 8 and if I can 
ask you please, to turn to page 483.4. 
MR MANTSHA:   483.4? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That’s right, do you have it? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So, that is the first page of the set of 
minutes that we were able to obtain from Denel, finally for 
the Board meeting of the 10 t h of September, that’s the first 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 183 of 301 
 
one that you Chaired and indicates that you were present 
and that you signed, do you see your name, number one on 
the attendance register at page 483.4, Mr Mantsha do you 
have it? 
MR MANTSHA:   Page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I’m going to give you the page 
number again, 483.4. 
MR MANTSHA:   483.4? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, top left-hand numbers. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I do. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you have it, is that headed 
attendance register Board meeting 10 September 2015? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And I asked you, is that your name 
and signature, item number one? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, then we have the actual 
minutes that start from the following page, 483.6, you see 
that Mr Mantsha? 
MR MANTSHA:   Point? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   483.6. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I do have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now this is a lengthy minute of 
that Board meeting and it seems to have had a sort of open 
session as it were, later followed by a closed session in 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 184 of 301 
 
which members of the Board sat so-called in committee if I 
can take you to page 483.27, do you see that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said we should go to 483.7. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   483.27 Chair. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that is headed minutes of the in-
committee Board meeting and again your name is one of 
those present as Chairperson, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now I want to take you to the 
passage which, as I’ve indicated – in fact, it seems to bear 
out that it wasn’t you that raised the Asian project.  If I can 
ask you now to turn to page 483.31 and if I can just read 
that to you in 6.2, 
“Partnership in South East Asia, under discussion 
deliberation, 
the 
Board 
discussed 
the 
recommendation from the CEO to give the Executive 
a mandate to negotiate a partnership in South East 
Asia to explore the establishment of a stronger 
20 
foothold in the region.  In summary, the Chairman 
indicated that as the GCEO had explained during 
the preceding Board meeting, the business of 
defence in the South East Asian region was a good 
market and given the geopolitical issues, one which 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 185 of 301 
 
would be profitable to explore. The Board discussed 
the fact that a relationship with a well established 
partner was a good model to follow and also 
referred to various issues relating to Denel’s IP in 
similar relationships such as in the UAE, Malaysia 
etcetera, 
 
I won’t go through the rest of that column, the next 
column, headed, action resolution, 
“The Board resolved to approve a mandate to the 
Executive to explore possibilities to establish a 
10 
footprint 
in 
South 
East 
Asia 
subject 
to 
the 
conditions set”, 
 
So, this appears to support your evidence that, in 
fact, it was Mr Saloojee who was raising this, not yourself, 
in the Board meeting, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now – but Mr Saloojee has 
given evidence that, in fact, what happened was a little 
more complicated than the minutes might suggest, I don’t 
think the minutes were at that stage available to him but 
20 
what he’s evidence has suggested is this, the person who 
first raised it in the Board meeting on the 10 t h of 
September was in fact you not him and he found this 
strange and in effect really undermining, I think, was his 
suggestion.  He seemed to feel it was undermining his 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 186 of 301 
 
position.  Mr Ntshepe had come to him, Saloojee, behind 
the scenes and said, I propose we get involved in Asia.  Mr 
Saloojee responded to Ntshepe, no we don’t, I’m not 
impressed with that, I don’t think it’s a good project at all 
and then he comes to the very first meeting that you’re 
Chairing as the new Chairperson and you raise it and he 
says, well he didn’t want to raise it, he didn’t raise it, in 
fact he felt it was inappropriate but you raised it there was 
a lengthy discussion and at the end of it, you, under your 
leadership, the Board said, give Mr Saloojee a mandate to 
10 
pursue the Asian venture.  In other words, overruling Mr 
Saloojee’s own view as CEO that the Asian venture 
shouldn’t take …[indistinct – dropping voice], what do you 
say about that? 
MR MANTSHA:   That is contrary to what the official 
records of company is saying, the official records of the 
company says, we presented a report, he asked for a 
specific thing and the Board gave him.  So, whatever he 
said, whether Mr Ntshepe, whether myself, it’s not correct 
in terms of the records of the company it is not, I deny.  He 
20 
gave a report he presented a discussion and we discussed, 
and it made good business sense to us to do it and we 
resolved, and we gave them the mandate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remember whether meetings of 
the Board of Denel were also electronically recorded? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 187 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, they record the…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The proceedings. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, the proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, what Mr Saloojee says again, 
and again, it’s just his version and you must be given an 
opportunity to be directed to his version and given an 
opportunity to respond to it.  He says, that he was against 
the idea, he was basically, overruled, partly by yourself 
and also partly by the other Board members and it was 
10 
apparent that he was not happy with this and it was 
because of that, in other words, his resistance to the idea 
that the Asian venture should go ahead that, lo and behold, 
just two weeks later, less than two weeks later, on the 23 r d 
of September he is then suspended and it was because of 
that, that is his evidence, your comment? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson that is absolutely not true he 
presented and requested the Board to approve for the 
Executive to explore to go to that market…[intervenes]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you saying it was – I’m sorry to 
20 
have interrupted, are you saying that Mr Saloojee was in 
support of the Asian project or he was uncertain, or he was 
against it but said, look I accept it…[intervenes]. 
MR MANTSHA:   No, he was in favour…[intervenes]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just don’t interrupt me, but Mr 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 188 of 301 
 
Saloojee’s attitude was, well I know Mr Ntshepe is keen on 
it and if the Board is keen on it, I will accept that mandate 
and carry it out. 
MR MANTSHA:  No, he was keen on it, he submitted a 
report.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He was keen? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And – ja – and of course, once he 
was suspended, Mr Saloojee was suspended on the 23 r d of 
September he was replaced by Mr Ntshepe on an acting 
10 
CEO basis, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct and the rationale Chairperson, 
was the following, Mr Ntshepe was the person who led 
Denel, marketing drive over the years and he built an 
impressive order book.  This business depended on Denel 
going into the foreign market, for these reasons that a 
domestic consumption of defence material by South African 
Defence Force has increased significantly.  One can see all 
the budget vote of the Department of Defence; they keep 
on reducing the allocation to the defence for various 
20 
reasons.  So, the survival of the company remains, outside 
the board of South Africa Mr Ntshepe was leading that  and 
successfully managed to build a very impressive order 
book.  He was, I think at that stage, he was already at 
Denel for, close to 20 years, he was even at Denel before 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 189 of 301 
 
Mr Saloojee.  He knew the marketing of the business by far 
more than Saloojee and my information was, when Mr 
Saloojee was appointed as the Group Chief Executive, Mr 
Ntshepe was in the running, he was amongst the three 
names which was submitted to the Cabinet to pick who the 
Chief Executive Officer.  So, this was somebody who had 
already a very impressive record at Denel and a very 
senior Executive at the time, he was even senior, more 
than Mr Saloojee himself.  So, it was a logical choice to 
put somebody who has got a reputation in the international 
10 
market as the marketer because all the clients of Denel 
overseas, they knew him more than anybody else because 
he was the one interacting with them. So, that was a 
logical choice to make. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Now, while we are at 
these minutes, I’m going to take you to another passage in 
a moment, I just want to take you back to your earlier 
evidence that you were, if I recall correctly and I’m sorry 
it’s late in the day I may be unsure of the exact detail that 
you gave, if I understood your evidence correctly, you said 
20 
before the first Board meeting you happened to be in 
London and Mr Saloojee asked you please too help to 
make sure that he didn’t lose his job, that he was feeling 
under pressure, is  that…[intervenes]. 
MR MANTSHA:   Correction Chairperson, it was after our 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 190 of 301 
 
first Board meeting. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It was after the first Board meeting? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When was that? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think the London trip was towards the 
end of September. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But that must have been before he 
was suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because he was suspended around 23 
September. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, it must have been between the 10 t h 
of September and the 23 r d of September. 
MR MANTSHA:   The London trip – he was not yet 
suspended because that was the time when I raised the 
issue of Audit and Risk Committee not having access to the 
committee 
room. 
 
I 
think 
we 
departed 
to 
London 
immediately after the first Board meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The meeting of the 10 t h? 
MR MANTSHA:   The meeting of the 10 t h but the 
20 
investigation about this transaction was going on. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see, thank you and so it was after 
the first Board meeting but before the second Board 
meeting because at the second Board meeting, as the 
Chair points out on the 23 r d of September, that’s when he 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 191 of 301 
 
was suspended. 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mhlontlo and Ms Africa. 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay now, can I just ask you to 
clarify, why was he raising concern that he might be facing 
dismissal, he might lose his job?  Had you told him that, 
he’s job is now on the line, that you were unhappy with him 
or that other people were making allegations against him or 
what? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I did not tell him his job was on the 
line, but he was clever enough to know that, for him to 
proceed with the acquisition of LLSA contrary to the 
approvals given by Minister of Finance, Minister of Public 
Enterprise and that Audit Committee was investigating the 
matter as mandated by the Board.  He actually saw that, 
that moment was bound to happen for him to be taken out 
of Denel, so he could see himself. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now that, of course, must have taken 
place before the Audit and Risk Committee meeting of the 
20 
22 n d of September, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   In the meeting of the 10 t h of the Board, 
there was a very serious debate when the Board realised 
that they’re saying we must pay four hundred and fifty in 
two weeks are you guys serious about this, how did it 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 192 of 301 
 
happen that it comes to this, you know…[intervenes]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I’m not asking about who said what. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I’m trying to get the sequence, 
simply the dates that I’m asking you. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So, your London discussion with 
Mr…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, Mr Kennedy, I’m sorry, I think I can 
assist.  In his affidavit Mr Saloojee says he arrived back 
10 
from London on Saturday 19 September 2015, so you must 
have gone there around…[intervenes].  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you and with respect that 
point seems to bear out the basis of the question.  That 
must – your discussion in London must have been before 
the Audit and Risk Committee met on the 22 n d and then 
gave them an order, the Audit and Risk Committee gave 
them an order to submit representations why they shouldn’t 
be suspended the next day, is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Now, if I can recall correctly, the 
20 
Executive had already met, the Audit and Risk Committee, 
I think even prior to the first Board meeting, it’s normally 
the case because you need to have sub-committees of the 
Board to meet before the main Board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Don’t you, at your first Board 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 193 of 301 
 
meeting decide who’s going to be appointed to the sub-
committees like the Audit and Risk Committee? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, the sub-committees are appointed 
during the induction. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see. 
MR MANTSHA:   So, when there was a Board induction, so 
the committee was set-up and of course the Audit and Risk 
Committee 
is 
the 
committee 
which 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
shareholder …[indistinct] gets appointed by the Executive 
authority. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR MANTSHA:   So that committee was…[intervenes]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, that is the Minster? 
MR MANTSHA:   The Minister, that committee was in 
existence. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR MANTSHA:   And that committee had met the Executive 
in preparation of this specific ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And that committee, after the first Board 
20 
meeting, was mandated to, by all means, ensure that there 
is no default by Denel in two weeks time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
So, 
they 
were 
making 
all 
the 
efforts…[indistinct – dropping voice] and in the process to 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 194 of 301 
 
investigate the conduct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Of Mr Saloojee? 
MR MANTSHA:   Of Mr Saloojee…[intervenes]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I’m sorry to interrupt, that’s where 
they came to the view that he had misled the first Board 
meeting? 
MR MANTSHA:   Exactly. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, so we’ve got the sequence 
clear.  Now, at the meeting of the 10 t h of September, do 
you recall if there was any discussion about Mr Saloojee’s 
10 
performance thus far, was there, at that stage, your very 
first Board meeting, any discussion that Mr Saloojee had 
been acting inappropriately? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, of course that matter never arose. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, now if I can take you in the 
same minutes to page – and I’m sorry the numbers are a 
bit complicated, 483.34, do you have that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Paragraph 8 in the second column 
under, items, says, “Extension, contract of the Group Chief 
20 
Executive Officer”, do you have that? 
MR MANTSHA:   I do. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
And 
then 
under, 
discussion 
deliberation it says, 
“The Chairman, that’s yourself, it’s in the neutral in 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 195 of 301 
 
the minutes so it’s the minute taker who’s possibly 
worthy of criticism here, the Chairman indicated 
that the GCEO’s contract was set to expire in 2017”, 
 
Now that is factually correct, we know from our 
earlier evidence that you gave that, it in fact ended 31 s t 
January 2017. 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then it says, 
“Although this was some time away, because of 
course here we’re dealing with September 2015, 
10 
given the seniority of the position it was necessary 
to commence with the process now, he, that’s 
presumably yourself Mr Mantsha, mentioned the 
following in this regard.  The GCEO had done well 
thus far and has turned the company around”, 
 
Do you recall, in fact, saying that? 
MR MANTSHA:   H’m I did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   How were you able – I’m not trying to 
be critical or funny but how were you able, at your very 
first Board meeting that you were Chairing, where you’d 
20 
only been appointed just a few weeks before and had only 
a few meetings with Mr Saloojee, privately and also the 
one at the Gupta residence, how were you able to form a 
view as to how well the GCEO had done thus far? 
MR MANTSHA:   As I said, I had one on one’s with Mr 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 196 of 301 
 
Saloojee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Him taking me through the milestone, I 
think I’ve just indicated here that, at the time of our 
appointment the order book was in the region of, either 
twenty five or whatever 30billion and this was a group - Mr 
Ntsepi was the head of marketing.  So of course you have 
to go - to credit them for that.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You go to? 
MR MANTSHA:  You go to credit them for that.  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  
MR MANTSHA:  For building such an order book, and the 
example here Chair, I have already indicated to you that 
me and Mr Saloojee go together very well.  We liked one 
another.  We agree on the way of working.  When this 
matter was being raised, I was trying to save the board to 
see what we are trying to achieve between myself and Mr 
Saloojee. 
 
So you can see these statements are verifiable to 
him. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, that is why I have raised them.  
MR MANTSHA:  And it is exactly what I was trying to say, 
to say I liked this man.  I wanted to see this man continue 
to work with him because I think we striked a very good 
note of working together.  I really liked him.  So, and I 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 197 of 301 
 
even told you earlier today that even when he cried to 
[indistinct]. 
 
I never slept at night because I really liked him and 
where necessary, I promised to support him and this 
statement from me, is informed of that strong relationship 
that we were trying to build together and the discussions 
that I had had with him, and at this time you know, from the 
induction you are given a full pack of the annual reports 
and all the other activities.  
 
So by this time, before we even go to the first board 
10 
meeting, we had a picture of what was happening and here 
I am trying to say look, this is the right guy.  So his 
contract is going to expire.  So you know, let us try to in a 
way indirectly, let us try because you see the Chairman 
was to follow up with the minister on the matter.  
 
Because he had told me that there was like some 
verbal arrangement of some sort that it would be extended.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry, verbal arrangement between 
him and? 
MR MANTSHA:  And the minister.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I see. 
MR MANTSHA:  So that is why there is a statement to say 
the Chairperson is going to follow up the matter with the 
minister.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 198 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  So this is just an indication of how 
believing I was in him, that I would have been the last 
person to want Mr Saloojee out of Denel.  I tried all I could 
but it was not possible, given the fact of what he presided 
on before we came into Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  On the LSSA transaction? 
MR MANTSHA:  Indeed.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  I am not going to take you 
through the text on the next page.  I am just going to 
summarise it.  Page 483.35, the next three bullet points.  
10 
But basically what you seem to be recorded as saying, and 
sorry is that your signature further down? 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja, it is. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  To confirm the approval of these 
minutes.  You confirm to the fact that the board has 
sufficient time.  You had about 16 months left before the 
end of his contract, but were you referring to the fact that 
we have still got time to consider it, but we must get the 
process going earlier rather than later.  
 
We do not want to leave it too late, is that right? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja.  This is one of the matter that he 
[indistinct] as his Chairperson individually to say look 
Chairperson, I need to be sure about my future as we work 
together and he then asked me to try to resolve this matter 
as early as possible.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 199 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  And of course I did not see any reason not 
to at the time.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  If I can take you back to the last 
bullet point on the previous page, you were referring not so 
much necessarily to Mr Saloojee’s own desire to have 
some certainty in his life, which would obviously make 
sense to him and to you.  That if you can get some sort of 
plan going it would be good to have.  
 
But you also made an additional point that was 
10 
incumbent 
on 
the 
board 
to 
prevent 
disruption 
in 
management and to retain the skill set required.  
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So may I sum up my understanding of 
what you were saying there?  You were saying he only has 
a termination looming in 16 months’ time, end of January 
2017.  But we do not want to be in a situation where 
suddenly his contract ends and we do not know who is 
going to be appointed and maybe we lose the continuity 
and his skill set and so forth, which will have a disruptive 
20 
effect on the management of the corporation. 
 
Particularly at a time where it was under some 
stress.  Is that a fair reflection of what you are saying? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well, what is meant here is that the 
stability of the leadership of the company is important to 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 200 of 301 
 
investors, to people we do business with, to the lenders.  I 
was actually making a call here that this matter needs to 
be resolved well in time.  
 
In terms of my private discussions with Mr Saloojee, 
I was convinced that he has to be supported to continue to 
serve beyond the expiry of the contract, meaning he should 
get another five years or so after 2017.  So earlier I told 
the commission that from the investor point of view and the 
lender point of view, and the market that a company like 
Denel operated, it is very critical that you have got this 
10 
kind of strategy, and I was actually trying to promote what 
we had discussed privately. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  As I understand the 
minute, effectively what was decided was simply that you 
would take the process forward with the minister.  You 
would 
set 
in 
motion 
this 
process 
that 
you 
were 
recommending.  
 
There was no decision there and then let us appoint 
Mr Mantsha, sorry Mr Saloojee for another term from 1 
February 2017.  You were far from that date and you did 
20 
not need to take that decision then.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:  No, what was right is that Mr Saloojee 
informed me and informed us because this is the board, 
that there was a verbal arrangement.  I think he alluded to 
it somewhere in these papers, that he would continue 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 201 of 301 
 
beyond 
the 
expiry 
of 
his 
contract, 
and 
that 
verbal 
arrangement was made between him and the executive 
authority. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, but I am sorry to interrupt.  I am 
not asking about his arrangement with the minister.  I am 
asking about what the ultimate outcome of this board 
meeting was, simply did you decide we are definitely 
committing 
to 
having 
him 
re-appointed 
subject 
to 
a 
minister ’s approval from 2017 or did you decide instead it 
looks like we are going to be going to a favourable 
10 
decision for him and but let us not leave it too late, let us 
start the process and you would then discuss it with the 
minister.  
MR MANTSHA:  That is correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is it the latter? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, because the very last bullet 
point on page 483.35 in this item, says: 
 
“The board appoints the CEO subject to the 
minister ’s approval.” 
20 
 
As I understand that, it was not that you were 
saying we are now appointing him from February 2017, it 
was simply recording no doubt you must have told your 
colleagues, when we appoint we do not have the final say.  
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 202 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is always subject to the minister ’s 
approval, and let us start the process going with the 
minister to see whether he will approve an extension from 
February 2017. 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But that will take some time.  
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay, thank you.  Now you have made 
the point to the Chair a moment ago that this bears out 
that you had no animosity to Mr Saloojee at that stage.  In 
10 
fact you spoke highly of him based on your limited 
exposure to him already. 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, and but of course we know that 
13 days later, not even two weeks, almost two weeks later 
you had a very different view of him.  In fact you were 
satisfied by the audit and risk committee you had convened 
the previous day in addition to what process had been 
followed previously, where they recommended to the board 
and you accepted the recommendation to suspend Mr 
20 
Saloojee, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And on top of it what you have said in 
evidence a number of times on the previous occasions and 
you mentioned it again today, when the Chairperson raised 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 203 of 301 
 
it with you, that you said in fact on the 23 r d we could have 
actually fired the three including Mr Saloojee on the spot, 
because they had done some terrible things.  
MR MANTSHA:  Ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So what I would like you to comment 
on is what, why did you change your view of him quite 
radically and I am not criticising you here, on the 10 t h of 
September you are saying Saloojee is a great guy.  It really 
looks like we should appoint him for a further period after 
his term ends in January 2017. 
10 
 
Two weeks later on the 23 r d you were saying with 
your board colleagues he is terrible, we could have fired 
him on the spot but let us follow a process and suspend 
him and subject him to a disciplinary inquiry.  What was the 
radical change in view? 
MR MANTSHA:  So Chairperson, this shows the objectivity 
that the Chairperson has and the objectivity which the 
board has.  So the question is what had changed from the 
10 t h of September to the time on the 23 r d, when we then 
suspend him. 
20 
 
What was changed of course was Mr Saloojee 
presided on a transaction which brought Denel to its 
financial means without following the approval protocol.  
He opted for a brazing finance for six months without an 
approval and that meant that myself and my God we will 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 204 of 301 
 
then be blamed for triggering a gross default across the 
state owned company because we could not mix our 
financial obligations in truth.  
 
That was catastrophic.  That of course changed my 
position towards him.  it did not mean I hated him, it only 
mean I look at the matter objectively and I said as much as 
I support this man, but for him to get into this transaction 
without authorisation, to a point where we are now on the 
financial brink, it was not correct for him to do and 
therefore action had to be taken against him.   
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Mr Mantsha, and we do not 
need you to repeat your evidence earlier.  I just want to 
confirm it for the record, that what Mr Saloojee has said to 
the commission was that what changed your mind to act 
against him, what he believes was unfairly on the 23 r d of 
September was that  by then it had become apparent to 
you that he was resistant to the idea of the agent venture.  
 
You have denied that fact, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  I deny it Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now in the same bundle can I ask you 
20 
please to turn back to page 422?  Chair, may I just ask so 
that I do not use up too much time or whatever, I mean I 
am trying to be as quick as I can.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But I am aware that you apparently 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 205 of 301 
 
have scheduled another session to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Once we are finished.  May I just 
indicate where I am. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, please.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I think I am very close to the end.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is just a couple of bits and pieces 
that I am wrapping up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am going to ask you please to allow 
us just five minutes for me and my learned junior to confer 
because I would like her input on any points that we may 
still need to wrap up.  So I think that we should finish 
probably by about quarter to six.   
 
Will that then be in order for you with your other 
commitment?   
CHAIRPERSON:  The other work stream is here already I 
think.  I see hands and I think I have seen Mr Anoj Singh’s 
counsel and attorney.  Can they hear me where they are?  
20 
Are they outside?  I would like also that we finish with him 
especially when we are left with so little ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I would like, I think let us take the five 
minutes break for you to confer with your team. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 206 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And then when we come back, they will 
be in and then I can also just talk to them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But I think I would like us to finish with 
him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I just suggest I take him to this 
page now because ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It seems to follow on from the earlier 
discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine, ja.  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that I promise will just be a 
minute or two and then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We can take the adjournment.  Thank 
you.  Mr Mantsha, do you have 422?   
MR MANTSHA:  422, yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, and that is on the South African 
government letterhead or logo, and it in fact seems to be a 
media statement. 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that is issued by the then 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 207 of 301 
 
Minister Lynne Brown.  It says: 
 
“Minister Lynne Brown appoints the new board 
of Denel.” 
 
We see at the bottom of the following page, 423, 
that it was issued by the Department of Public Enterprises, 
from her department.  Now this is the notice that actually 
announced to the public the confirmation that you had been 
appointed as part of the new board.  
 
You as Chairperson and the others are mentioned 
as well, and their biographies are summarised as well 
10 
there.  
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now what I am interested in, pursuant 
to what we ... I am sorry, I should have mentioned under 
the heading it is dated the 24 t h of July 2015.  What I am 
interested in just to conclude the line that we took you 
through earlier, about the performance prior to your arrival, 
you see that the fourth paragraph of the text on page 422 
starts with the quotation I would like to thank.  
 
You see that? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  “I would like to thank the outgoing for ...”  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, you do not need to read the rest, 
I will do that.  
MR MANTSHA:  Ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Have you got that paragraph? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 208 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes, I do.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, I would like to read it to you: 
 
“I would like to thank the outgoing board led 
by acting Chairperson Martie Janse Rensburg 
for an outstanding job.  They handed over a 
company that is truly on a path to positive 
sustainability.  I commend them for their 
professionalism and ensuring the handover 
report was of such a quality that it will be a 
critical guide to the new board.  I encourage 
10 
the new board to continue working closely with 
the executive team, to solidify the company’s 
operations with a strong emphasis on issues 
relating to transformation within the company, 
skills development and strategic partnerships 
in South Africa.” 
 
Now there are a couple of points I just want to 
extract from that.  The one is it bears out your very point 
that it was government policy to try and improve the level 
of transformation in the arms industry within the country, 
20 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And, but what I am particularly 
interested in, is that the minister gave in glowing terms a 
tribute to the outgoing board before you then took over as 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 209 of 301 
 
Chairperson and commended them for their professionalism 
and then asked you as the new board to work closely with 
that same, with the executive team that of course remained 
once the board’s composition was changed.  
 
Correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja, it appears so Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright, thank you and then we have 
heard, the commission has heard the evidence of Mr 
Saloojee as to why Denel than in the following two years 
reached a position of difficulty.  You have given a 
10 
completely different version and no doubt you stand by 
that. 
MR MANTSHA:  Can I just explain this Chairperson? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MANTSHA:  The minister was not even aware of these 
circumstances around this transaction, because she was 
never told that the terms of five years were changed and 
now we have to pay in, so she did not know.  So I think 
with the information which she had, and less I am saying to 
20 
you with the information which I have, everything appeared 
okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair, may this be an appropriate 
time to take the five minute adjournment? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 210 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, maybe before we do I see they are 
in, that is counsel for Mr Singh and the evidence leader, Mr 
Seleka.  I just want to share this with you, both of you and 
you, and of course your client and your instructing 
attorney. 
 
We wish to finish with Mr Mantsha.  He has been to 
the commission to give evidence I think on at least no less 
than two previous occasions if I am not mistaken or is it 
one?  I think it is more than one.  This is the third 
occasion.  
10 
 
We would like to finish with him.  Mr Kennedy thinks 
that he might need up to quarter to six to be able to finish, 
because we have your work stream coming up I thought I 
must consult you.  Is it fine if we finish before we start with 
your side, with your work stream?   
 
Yes.  Mr Seleka, it is fine with you?  Okay, alright.  
No, that is fine.  So let me just adjourn for five minutes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, we adjourn.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair may I thank you for the 
opportunity to confer with my learned colleague Ms Mokoene 
I want to pay tribute to her for all the – what she has given 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 211 of 301 
 
and particularly with the last two issues that he is prompting 
me quite rightly to raise with the witness.  I also want to 
thank my learned colleagues for the next hearing for their 
patience. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I still think that quarter to six will 
hopefully suffice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Subject to how long the witness wants 
to talk. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Matsha I want to deal now with the 
topic of the PFMA process for getting approval from the 
relevant Minister or Ministers for the – the transaction that 
was aimed at generating business In Asia which you 
obviously required specific approval. 
 
And if I can start please with the same bundle 8 that 
we were looking at just a moment ago at page 468.   
CHAIRPERSON:  468. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now Mr Mantsha do you have 
20 
468? 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja I am getting there – 468.  Yes 
Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now that is a letter on the Denel 
letterhead sent – addressed to the then Minister of Finance 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 212 of 301 
 
Mr Nene, is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then if we go for a moment to page 
473, the last page of the letter we see your name as the 
Chairperson of the Denel board and is that again your 
signature and it seems to have been dated on the 30t h I 
believe it is of October 2015, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes it seems so 30t h. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you recall sending this letter to the 
Minister of Finance requiring specific approval or giving her 
10 
pre-notification for purposes ultimately of getting approval 
under Section 54.2 of the PFMA? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now I just want to draw your attention 
to a couple of paragraphs that you have given.  Presumably 
you would have given – sent this notice benefiting from the 
input of – of senior executives at the time.  Correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And at that stage of course by then 
October 2015 Mr Saloojee as CEO, Mr Mhlontlo as CFO for 
20 
the group were on suspension.  
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Correct.  Now you give the – at page 
469 you give a rationale as we see at the foot of the page 
469 the rationale for the formation of Denel Asia and this 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 213 of 301 
 
includes on the following page 470 a reference to operation 
access to operational funding.  The very top bullet point.  
You see that? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that was an important point that 
you felt needed to be stressed as one of the reasons why it 
was – made sense for Denel to be forming the venture for 
the Asian project, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja I think the topic where you reading. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  Is actually the motivation of the … 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry could you just sit closer to the 
microphone. 
MR MANTSHA:  00:04:19 with VR Laser. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja so I think it is flows from that heading. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Indeed. 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So where – thank you for that 
clarification and in fact when one sees that bullet point that I 
20 
have just taken you to access to operational funding there 
you were referring to VR Laser Asia being able to provide 
some operational funding which would mean that Denel itself 
would not have to fund at least the initial part of the project 
you had the assistance, the input of VR Laser in that regard.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 214 of 301 
 
Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:  In terms of the agreement VR Laser was 
putting R100 million on the deal. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  Denel was putting its manpower, its 
scientists, its engineers and the intellectual capacity to 
build. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  Whatever would be required yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And in fact you seem to make 
10 
those points that you have just referred to under the heading 
a few lines down Financing. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You see that? 
MR MANTSHA:  I see Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And what you have said to the Minister 
Nene in the first bullet point: 
“VR Laser Asia will be responsible for all 
operational costs for a period of five years 
estimated at R100 million.” 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   
“Project funding as and when required will be 
provided by shareholders." 
Am I right in saying that you were submitting to the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 215 of 301 
 
Minister a justification for why this Asian venture made 
sense operationally and financially and one of the important 
points was that the operational costs – the entire operational 
costs for the period of five years was already committed by – 
to by VR Laser Asia, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then of course project funding 
would be provided by shareholders which would include 
Denel as and when required, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes I think after five years. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MANTSHA:  Of the initial period. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then you deal in this – on the same 
page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Kennedy I just want to 
understand the distinction between project funding and the 
R100 million.  I assume in the execution of any project there 
would be operational costs and those would not be borne by 
VR Laser Asia. 
MR MANTSHA:  No those – Denel… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Those would be borne by… 
MR MANTSHA:  Denel will not pay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:  The project – the execution of the project 
for the first five years. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 216 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So those operational costs that fell out by 
the execution of that particular project would be borne by VR 
Laser Asia – those that fell within the execution of the 
project then by the shareholders which included Denel. 
MR MANTSHA:  No Chairperson it is not correct.  What this 
is trying to explain is that for the period of five years there is 
R100 million committed by VR and thereafter the – the 
project financing will be done by shareholders which of 
course included Denel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So does that mean that VR Laser would be 
10 
responsible for all operational costs for the first five years? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And after five years the shareholders 
which included Denel would be responsible then for all 
operational costs? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes the – the understanding to inform this is 
after five years because every time when we entered into 
this we were chasing some you know big deals which were 
happening and in terms of our assessment done within the 
Indian market the intelligence were there was within this five 
20 
years.  Denel Asia would have been a success story on its 
own and it would be able to fund its own operational costs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  And can I take you 
on the same page 470 to the next paragraph which is headed 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 217 of 301 
 
Financial Viability you say: 
“In light of the R100 million investment by VR 
Laser Asia and Denel Asia over a five year 
period for operating costs the operation 
financial – operational financial risks to 
Denel are minimal, correct?” 
MR MANTSHA:  (no answer). 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then you say it will – can I just ask 
on that point – would it be safe for us to assume that without 
the investment from Denel – sorry from VR Laser your 
10 
operational finances would have been at risk? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well without finance from VR Asia Denel 
was not even going to go to contemplate to have Denel Asia. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  We did not have money to do so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Indeed.  But what seems to be the 
other side of that very coin is that if it had not been for VR 
Laser’s input Denel’s operational finances would have been 
impacted seriously. 
MR MANTSHA:  Look if VR Asia not VR Laser. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Denel finances would never have been 
impacted because Denel would not have made a decision. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  To go there without financial. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 218 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Because if you did not have their 
financial sponsorship Denel would then be committing itself 
to operational costs that it did not have available. 
MR MANTSHA:  I am saying to you Denel was under my 
leadership.  The board was never going to make a decision 
to go to India without having a financial partner. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  There is no money to do that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry can you just indicate whether the 
answer is yes or no to the proposition I had put.  If it was not 
10 
for VR Laser’s commitment for this R100 million funding 
Denel would have been exposed to financial risk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  I think – I think you 
misunderstanding Mr… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Maybe I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Kennedy yes.  If VR Laser did not – VR 
Laser Asia did not come on board the – you would – Denel 
would not have gone into this market. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And therefore it would not have exposed 
20 
itself to any costs. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Indeed – precisely -  precisely because 
it could not have exposed itself to more costs because it was 
financial constraint, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 219 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And was it not necessary to first 
ensure that the financial investment was secured? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson in the business world how 
you transact you sit down, negotiate transaction, every party 
is there to support their own interest in the transaction, then 
said look I am committing R100 million, we sign, you default 
to put R100 million, there is no deal.  So that is how it is 
done. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Was there in fact provision for 
the financial investment to be secured? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  Of course yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MANTSHA:  The whole process of Denel Asia was based 
on the fact that there must be that R100 million. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Exactly. 
MR MANTSHA:  That would enable us to fly. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And was that secured in terms of the 
agreement that you were – that you had made provisionally 
subject to the statutory approval? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes there were in agreement to that. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Okay thank you and then the 
next point that you make in under financial viabilities: 
“Overall there is currently potential business 
amounting to US Dollars R9.2 billion – US 
Dollars   9.2 billion over the next five years 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 220 of 301 
 
that 
offers 
Denel 
lucrative 
opportunities 
within this region.” 
Now do you again with benefit of hindsight stand by the 
indication that you gave to the Minister of Finance at that 
stage that in fact there was… 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  There was potential business of almost 
10 billion US Dollars. 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct Chairperson. You see how this – 
this submission of course it is crafted by the 00:13:32. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  They craft these submissions after a proper 
due diligence is made – after they have discussed in their 
management committees the business development has 
made input and as you know business you take a chance.   
 
At that time that market was the most growing market 
in the world. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The Asian arm market. 
MR MANTSHA:  The Asian market specifically the Indian 
market. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MANTSHA:  They were spending and their requests for 
information in terms of lot of the equipment that Denel 
produced.  So we – there was a business case to say this is 
going to happen I stand by it what is written. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 221 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  Now what I would like you 
to turn to now please is page 445.  Have you got that? 
MR MANTSHA:  I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That is a letter we see from the Ministry 
of Public Enterprises and in fact signed on page 446 by 
Minister Lynne Brown. 
MR MANTSHA:  4426? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  446 ja that is where you find the 
signature.   
MR MANTSHA:  You said 445? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No I asked you to start with the letter.  
The letter is two pages long it starts at 445. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes I have it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you confirmed you had that and 
then I took you to 446 the next page of the letter where it is 
concluded with a signature apparently from Minister Lynne 
Brown.  Correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And so this was a letter addressed to 
you by the Minister of Public Enterprises because you are 
20 
the addressee on page 445, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now I just want to take you to – so it is 
headed PFMA Section 54.2 Pre-notification on the Proposed 
Formation of Denel Asia.  This is part of the process leading 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 222 of 301 
 
up to the pursuit of a project which will involve a joint 
venture with the company which will involve overseas 
transactions and possible financial implications.  Is that 
right? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And now the Minister you will see at the 
foot of the page there is a paragraph that starts just before 
abcd, you see that? 
MR MANTSHA:  Before abcd? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  445 last paragraph there is some sub-
10 
paragraphs abcd, do you see that? 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Just above that the preamble reads 
this: 
“In order to protect Denel’s status as the holding 
company the application should include amongst 
other things  
a. A comprehensive detailed business case to 
enable the Minister to express an opinion on 
the joint venture transaction. 
20 
b. A comprehensive due diligence report on the 
financial regulatory legal requirement and 
regulatory laws governing foreign owned 
entities in Hong Kong.” 
Let us just stop for a moment.  That is of course is 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 223 of 301 
 
because the corporate vehicle that was to be used for this 
joint venture must be registered in Hong Kong, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   
“ c. Funding plans all the transaction documents 
including the MOU and cooperation agreements. 
d. The process followed to select VR Laser as a 
partner of choice.” 
And then there are a whole number of other requests that the 
Minister is made to you as Chairperson.  Do you recall 
10 
receiving this request? 
MR MANTSHA:  I did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And was this series of information that 
is requested in those paragraphs that I have just read to you 
was this in fact provided?  Was – was… 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The additional information… 
MR MANTSHA:  It was provided. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That was provided by you or who? 
MR MANTSHA:  By the board. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  By the board.  Fine.  Now please turn 
to page 391.   
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  This is a further letter from Denel and 
you seem to be the person who signs it at the foot of the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 224 of 301 
 
page, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that is dated the 11t h December 
2015. 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that is addressed to the Minister of 
Finance who by that stage was Mr Des Van Rooyen, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And we say the dates of the letter at 
the top typed 10 December but you signed it on the 11 t h of 
10 
December and you say in paragraph – sorry and that is 
accompanied by the formal application that we see from 
page 392.  Correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  This is a summary. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is a summary right. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes it is not the formal application.  The 
formal application included. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MANTSHA:  A lot of documents. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  And then in paragraph 2.1 on 
20 
page 392 this is what you say you give reasons why the 
transaction was not proposed in the 2015/16 corporate plan 
and these include Denel’s previous back – blacklisting in 
India.  Correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 225 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now in light of the financial risks that 
were 
prevalent 
and 
in 
the 
absence 
of 
the 
financial 
investment promise in other words a VR Laser Asia not come 
up 
with 
the 
money 
that 
it 
has 
promised 
where 
this 
opportunity has sufficed for concluding the transaction in 
circumstances where it was not budgeted. 
MR MANTSHA:  No I have – I repeat my answer. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:  If there was no money from VR Asia. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  We were not even going to propose this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now where there was no provision 
in the corporate plan for this transaction would it not have 
been more reasonable to ensure that a proper financial due 
diligence was conducted? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson a proper financial due 
diligence was conducted.  The Minister of Finance and the 
Minister of Public Enterprises they were given due diligence 
reports which would 00:20:18 by parties here and parties in 
that jurisdiction.  But let me repeat what I said in my opening 
20 
Chairperson.   
 
We dealing with a business that has to survive on its 
own.  It has got no guarantee of state work so it is not like 
we all pay Eskom for electricity so there will be revenue 
coming from all of us.  No not even South African Defence 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 226 of 301 
 
Force is obliged to buy material from this company.   
So these are some of the things that I have 
highlighted to say the regulatory environment in which a 
business like this operates where it has to go and fight with 
many different companies with big budgets.   
The regulatory environment is also contributing to 
00:21:18 the company development.  So what we trying to 
explain here is to give a rationale why this was not in the 
previous corporate plan and the rationale was we were 
banned so we could not have gone to a market where we 
10 
were blacklisted because we were declared that we were 
corrupt.  We were using corrupt means to enter into that 
market.   
So we were banned we tried to get into that market 
for be – I mean 20 – 25 years before I even came there.  And 
that ban was just resolved.  As I indicated on my evidence 
earlier so that is why there was this decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you say the due diligence report was – 
I mean due diligence was conducted and a report was 
furnished to the two Ministers? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes Chairperson when you do the PFMA 
process it is a very elaborative process.  So you have to 
satisfy the two executive authorities because you are asking 
a permission.  So all the documents and things that the 
Minister requested to have she had all of it. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 227 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let me just ask at some stage you 
made an – your board made an application to the High Court 
would that report have been included in those papers there 
by any chance?   Do you remember or is that something you 
do not remember? 
MR MANTSHA:  No I think – I think some of the reports of 
due diligence reports I think the – in the evidence of Mr 
00:22:59 . 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:  I think some of it is included. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:  But again Chairperson this is – this is the 
information within the company and with respect to the 
process Chairperson I am not here to make judgments on 
anything.  I expect that this information will be before here 
and we talk on the basis of the document.  That is why in 
some of my replies I attempted to attach some documents 
which I had. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:  So in short what I am saying to you this is a 
20 
very elaborative process where you have to satisfy the 
executive authority with documentation. The technocrats in 
the Treasury and then the Department of Public Enterprises 
to go through it and satisfy themselves that yes you make a 
case or not. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 228 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine it is just that I was 
under the impression that one or other witness had said the 
– they had no such due diligence conducted.  I may have 
been mistaken but I was under that impression. 
MR MANTSHA:  No thorough due diligence was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which was done. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Why was the then litigation?  If you 
satisfied all of these requirements to the satisfaction of the 
10 
then Ministers of Public Enterprises and Finance why did you 
– why did you find it necessary to litigate? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well the basis of the litigation Chairperson 
was with respect to National Treasury and the basis of that 
litigation was that if you read the PFMA Section 54 I think 
the last provision it then says to you if you submit this 
document – the request and 30 days expires and you do not 
have the answer you must assume that permission is given.  
But as a diligent board because Treasury was not coming 
back.   
20 
We then decided to have a declaratory order to say in 
terms of that Section there is full compliance because there 
was just no engagement from National Treasury.  And as I sit 
here today I now know why there were no engagements just 
listening 
to 
the 
evidence 
which 
was 
given 
to 
this 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 229 of 301 
 
commission.   
This was the time of in terms of the evidence before 
this 
commission 
offers 
to 
certain 
people, 
changes 
of 
Ministers and all of that and unfortunately we were viewed 
within that context because of their association with the 
parties who are implicated in those kind of activities.  I now 
understand why there was just a dead silence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe something – I think something 
that may have been mentioned by one or other witness or is 
that – it was interesting that Minister Nene was dismissed on 
10 
the 9t h of December 2015 and on the 10t h you wrote that 
letter to the new Minister – Minister Mr Van Rooyen the letter 
that we were looking at dated the 10t h of December 2015.  I 
think some witness quite of – kind of find – found that 
interesting because – oh Nene is dismissed the following – 
the previous day and then the first day of the new Minister 
here is a letter sent.  But… 
MR MANTSHA:   But… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I say nothing more than just that. 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja.  Chair with respect I suppose that 
20 
thinking is not objectively made because this chronology of 
this history of this transaction when it is done so it did not 
start when Minister Van Rooyen was appointed and as you 
know you know the work of these companies, the work of 
government has to go on whoever the Minister is.  So it had 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 230 of 301 
 
nothing to do with Minister Van Rooyen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Then if we can turn 
please to page 391 – sorry I think we have already done that 
– yes sorry it is 413.  Just a point of clarification this is part 
of the submission that you made to the Minister and you 
provide an income statement in 12.4.  Now what we would 
just like clarification on please is whose income statement is 
that?  Is that Denel’s income statement?  Is it VR Laser 
South Africa’s?  Is it of VR Laser Asia?  Is it something for 
10 
the – reflecting an income statement on income and 
expenditure in the past or projected for the future?  What is 
it? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson I think if you read this 
page start by saying Denel Asia forecast probabilities and 
market interests are promising.  The business opportunity in 
deduce risk via partnership constitute a logical next step to 
them for entry into a new market.  See Appendix F which 
sets out market end of the 00:29:24. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  So when you read in terms of the norm I am 
speaking under correction. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MANTSHA:  It seems these were probably the projection 
of income. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 231 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  That the business was going to happen. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Because normally an income statement 
is a statement reflecting income that you have received and 
expenditure that you have incurred for a particular period in 
a past but this you are explaining is in fact what would be 
projected as the expected or likely income and expenditure 
of the Asian Joint Venture.  Is that what you are saying? 
MR MANTSHA:  Chairperson I am not – yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   As we speak, I am trying to read what is 
here ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, that is fine. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...to make what it is. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Fair enough.  We just want your 
clarification on that. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then on this submission that you 
made to the Minister.  It does not appear that there is any 
clear indication of the point at which VR Laser would make 
20 
its investment or first injection of the operational costs, 
money.  Can you recall if that was in fact submitted? 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
With 
respect, 
Chairperson. 
 
The 
agreements between Denel and VR Asia was submitted to 
the respective authority and those agreements spell out 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 232 of 301 
 
how that investment would be made by VR and the 
obligation that Denel had towards Denel Asia.  So all of 
those documents were submitted. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  The Commission, of course, 
has heard evidence in relation to other controversial 
transaction on which you, no doubt, have no personal 
knowledge but for example the – the example that has 
been given to me, it relates to Estina where assurances 
were given to the Minister there that there would be huge 
benefits to be derived but ultimately, of course, the 
10 
outcome may have been very different.   
 
Is that not something that is a matter of concern 
to you here that assurances were given in very broad terms 
in the submission to the Minister and ultimately you did not 
persuade the Minister to approve the transaction based on 
those assurances? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson, I think we are 
venturing into a very dangerous area.  What was said by 
other people about certain...  has got nothing to do with 
the decision we have made.  We have made the decision 
20 
based on thorough work that was done and we were 
convinced that this was the best way to go and we 
concluded on that.  So ask me about Estina.  I have no 
detail of Estina. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, I am not asking you about the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 233 of 301 
 
facts of Estina.   
MR MANTSHA:   I do not know what was agreed with 
Estina.  And Mr Salim Essa, as far as I hear, he is not part 
of the ...[indistinct].  And Mr Salim Essa was the only 
shareholder of VR Laser.   So, to ask me, to say:  Look, 
certain promises were made in certain projects and in 
certain transactions and was not made.  I think – I cannot 
deal with those matters. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mantsha, I think you may have 
misunderstood my question or perhaps I put it badly but 
10 
what I indicated was that you presumable could not deal 
with that.   
 
The reason why I raised it is simply that the 
Commission in its wider scrutiny of various allegations, it  
seems to us to have a concern, a possible concern, as to 
or 
would 
like 
to 
have 
satisfactory 
evidence 
as 
to 
assurances that were given to the ministers at the time in 
relation to projects on the basis that they looked incredible 
promising but ultimately they never materialised.   
 
Your evidence, as I understand it is.  When you 
20 
gave projections, assurances or – yes, projections or 
assurances to the Minister in relation to the Asian venture, 
you believed that they were properly motivated and would 
have been vindicated in due course, would have been 
achieved later if the transactions had been approved and 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 234 of 301 
 
then implemented.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, it is correct Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you. 
MR MANTSHA:   I sit here.  I am talking to the Chairperson 
of the Commission.  As I have indicated a number of times, 
the Chairperson is experienced in matters like this.  The 
Chairperson will listen to the evidence and will follow that 
evidence.   
 
The mere fact that certain things were said by 
other people, I do not see it as a basis of making 
10 
conclusion without looking at this specific evidence that I 
am talking about.  So I think that would be unfortunate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, no, I...  That is...  There is 
nothing wrong with what you say but I think Mr Kennedy 
may be saying what he says about Estina, knowing that you 
might not be able to comment but simply because, for 
example, the Commission might be hearing that suggests 
that certain persons seem to have featured in various 
transactions under different work streams and sometimes it 
might appear as if a pattern can be seen.   
20 
 
To say:  Oh, this is what happened and how it 
happened there.  Here, maybe it looks like there are 
similar features and you can see certain personalities that 
are common. But you yourself might be able to say:  Look, 
I do not know anything about that.  We made our decision 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 235 of 301 
 
based on what was before us. 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   I made a point that Mr Salim Essa, as far 
as I know, is not related to the Estina matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   And this is the person we are dealing with 
here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mantsha, just a 
10 
couple of further points in the papers.  Can I ask you to 
turn, please, to page 443?   
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed, Chairperson,. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now this, halfway down is an email 
from Keromomong(?) Umshlongo(?) [spelt phonetically], 
paragraph – and some fair justice to the pronunciation of 
her first name, and that, according to her email address, 
shows that she is from – in fact, further down, it says she 
is from the Registry – her or she is from the Registry for 
the Ministry of Public Enterprises.  Do you see that? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I do.  Are you on 44? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   443, second half of the page. 
MR MANTSHA:   443, yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it is an email sent by Mr or 
Ms Mshlongo on the 23 r d of November 2015 and it is 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 236 of 301 
 
addressed to yourself.  Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In fact, at your attorney’s firm email 
addresses as well as an email address at Denel and there 
are copies to Denel officials such as Mr Ntshepe.  Do you 
see that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what she says is: 
“On behalf of Minister Lynne Brown, Minister 
of Public Enterprises, kindly find attached 
10 
letter on the above-mentioned subject for your 
attention...” 
 
And the subject we see in the heading, subject, 
FMA 
Section 
54(2), 
pre-notification 
on 
a 
proposed 
formation of Denel Asia.  So that was the process that we 
were looking at a moment ago, not so? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When you were making a submission, 
the Minister Brown then sent a letter back to you saying I 
need the following information.  Is that right? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now the question is.  Look, 
please, at page – the previous page 442. 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The very top email in this chain.  You 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 237 of 301 
 
appear to have forwarded the Minister ’s correspondence 
with yourself which was copied to various Denel officials.  
You appeared to have forwarded a copy.  You see the top 
email? 
 
It 
is 
from 
Dan, 
info@lungisanimantshaattorneys.co.za, et cetera.  That is 
from yourself. 
MR MANTSHA:   I see Chairperson, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it appears from this, that you 
forwarded the Minister ’s letter to you, which was a letter 
from the ministry responsible for Denel as a state-owned 
10 
enterprise, concerning your application to the ministry for 
approval authority or pre-notification as a preliminary step 
under Section 54(2) of the PFMA.  You forwarded that to, 
again, the very same Mr Ashu Chwala that we were 
discussing earlier.   
 
And of course, we have seen from the earlier 
evidence was part of the Gupta business enterprise.  Can 
you explain why you forwarded a Minister ’s official letter to 
you in our official capacity as Chairperson of a state-
owned enterprise, Denel, to a senior official of the Gupta 
20 
business empire? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson, this letter was 
forwarded as per the instruction of Mr Essa, who at the 
point, he was with this individual.  So he asked us to 
forward to that address because he was at that address.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 238 of 301 
 
And the reason why it was forwarded to Mr Essa via 
Mr Chwala’s email address.   
 
It was simply because this matter relates to the 
partnership that as Denel we were making(?) with him.  
There are direct questions from this letter from the Minister 
which require his input to us in order to satisfy the 
Minister.   
 
He had interest in the matter.  He was a partner 
in the matter  So he had every right to see what was 
happening and to assist in reply.  So it was forwarded to 
10 
that address as per his instruction for his attention. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  Was it not the Gupta business 
of – involving particularly Mr Essa?  That was not part of 
the process to give pre-authorisation notification to the 
Minister under the PFMA.  The PFMA places the obligation 
on a state entity concerned, in this case Denel. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, the – if you look at the provision 
that we are talking about.  When you enter into a 
partnership you must request for a permission from the 
Executive Authority.  And what is happening here?  You 
20 
have got Denel and you have got VR Asia entering into the 
partnership.   
 
So Denel had every right to know what the 
Minister was saying as much as the potential partner had 
every right to know what the Minister was saying at the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 239 of 301 
 
time.  And to try to do everything possible to satisfy the 
Minister ’s request. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I can take you now, finally, to page 
468.  That is your letter to Minister Nene, the then Minister 
of Finance that we looked at earlier.  Correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you recall we dealt with that 
earlier? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
And 
that 
was 
dated 
the 
10 
29 t h of October 2015.  That appears also to have been 
forwarded to Mr Chwala if one looks at the emails that you 
sent on pages 466 and 467.  Would your explanation be the 
same that this was all part of correspondence that they 
should have been privy to? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, Mr Essa. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you would deny any suggestion 
that this is an indication that Mr Essa part of the Gupta 
empire was unusually involved and play d a very active 
part in what should have been, in one perspective, a 
20 
matter just between the state entity concerned and the 
department and the Minister of Public Enterprises? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, it is not correct.  This matter related 
to Mr Essa, Denel Asia.  So he had every right to know 
about this matter.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 240 of 301 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  May I just have a 
moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And I thank 
Mr Mantsha for giving evidence and also for his legal team 
for their role in this.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Thank you very much 
Mr Mantsha for availing yourself.  And to your attorney as 
well for being able to come and to be here until this time.  
Thank you very much.  You are now excused. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, thank you very much Chairperson.  I 
would have loved to, probably, do a re-examination on one 
or two issues but I understand Chairperson that the people 
are waiting outside.  But I think I have made the point 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...relating to, you know, the payments of 
the settlement ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...what was considered.  I think it is up to 
20 
the Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, no.  If you would like that, I 
am sure that would not take long and then and that we 
could arrange maybe for a very brief time.  Do you have 
any idea how long you may be? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 241 of 301 
 
MR MANTSHA:   No, I – it was just specifically one issue 
when I said, the potential ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MANTSHA:   We are also trying to... potentially  
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Do you want me to ...[intervenes] 
that just now? 
MR MANTSHA:   ...which could have paid a lot of money 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   ...which could have paid a lot of money. 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   And what I raise later was, as explained 
in the board minutes of detail, was the so-called verbal 
undertaking by the Minister to renew the contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Saloojee’s one. 
MR MANTSHA:   So there were a lot of things that we have 
taken.  Unfortunately, the other side of the record is not 
here but let me take this opportunity Chairperson to thank 
20 
you and thank you Mr Kennedy.   
 
You see, unfortunately, we could have said a lot 
here.  And of course, to the distinct board members that I 
served with who have done extremely very well under 
difficult circumstances and the Executive.  But I thank you 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 242 of 301 
 
for the opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And thank you very much Chairperson and 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but my ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   ...all the best. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  What I want to do is.  If you do feel 
that there are some matters you would have like to clarify, 
I would like to make sometime for you to get that 
opportunity.  So I am checking maybe on another day 
10 
because my sense is that it would not take long.  Is that 
right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe an hour or something? 
MR MANTSHA:   I will consult with the legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You will consult.  Okay alright. 
MR MANTSHA:   And if there is any need Chairperson 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   ...we will ask for you indulgence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   But thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, be in touch with the legal team.  
Obviously, there is not much time left.  So you would have 
to come to them quite quickly.  I have a sense that it would 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 243 of 301 
 
not be a lot of time.  Maybe we would not need more than 
hour.  Is that more or less... 
MR MANTSHA:   No, I think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You will confirm that. 
MR MANTSHA:   I am a creature ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughs] 
MR MANTSHA:   ...getting advice from my legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   So. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay you will advise the legal team of 
10 
the Commission and indicate how much time you think 
might be needed, what issues, if necessary. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, they might well say:  Look, you do not 
need ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You might say you are find, you know? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just do not want you to feel that in the 
rush to finish everything, something you wanted to clarify, 
you were not given a chance ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   No, Chairperson, I am not thinking like 
20 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  Thank you very much 
Mr Mantsha.  And thank you to your attorney.  You are now 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 244 of 301 
 
both excused. 
MR MANTSHA:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Thank 
you 
Mr 
Kennedy 
and 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair.  That completes the 
evidence for today for the Denel stream. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   There is an indication that the Chair 
may want one further witness to be called in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But subject to that, that is the 
evidence that we – the Denel team would want to lead 
before you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, thank you very much.  And 
thank you very much to your team.  The investigators as 
well who have been in Denel.  Thank you very much.  But 
as you say, there is a possibility of another witness but for 
now this is going to be Denel evidence. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you very much.  You will be 
20 
excused.  I will take a short adjournment to enable the next 
work stream to set up and then we will continue with the 
Eskom work stream. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  We adjourn. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 245 of 301 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good evening, Mr Seleka, good evening 
everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Evening, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are ready, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good evening, Mr Singh. 
MR SINGH:   Good evening, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The oath or affirmation you took 
10 
yesterday will continue to apply today. 
MR SINGH:   Noted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Yes, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.   
MR SINGH:   Mr Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR SINGH:   I am not sure what Mr Seleka is going to 
lead. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR SINGH:   But I thought we needed to start with the 
20 
affidavit that we promised to deal with yesterday.  Mr 
Yeboah Amankwah’s affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, yes, that is also …[intervenes] 
MR SINGH:   We promised to Chair that we had referred 
this affidavit from yesterday. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 246 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not remember the name but I 
remember there was some reference to some affidavit, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  It is a very name, Chair.  But 
what I wanted to do, Chairperson, just before we get to 
that affidavit was to explain – what my learned friend was 
saying, it is a redacted statement of Dr Weiss that they 
got.  I have ascertained that that was a different work 
stream.  When Dr Weiss called last year he was called by a 
different work stream. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The money flow work stream, ja. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is correct. And I know that the 
practice is that you give a witness either the affidavit 
insofar as he is implicated or you refer them to the 
relevant paragraphs where they are implicated, so they 
would have followed that practice.  As I indicated to the 
Chairperson, I do it differently, I give the entire affidavit to 
the witness to avoid these type of things.   
 
So similarly with the affidavit which Mr Anoj Singh 
is referring to, the affidavit does not implicate Mr Singh but 
there is evidence in it that I think is relevant to place on 
20 
record as part of the evidence that the Commission has 
obtained and my intention was to read certain paragraphs 
from that affidavit that shows certain information.  Whether 
Mr Singh is able to comment on that or not, it really 
depends on him and if he wish to deal with it he can do so 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 247 of 301 
 
in writing by way of an affidavit.  I see that he has it 
opened and he would like to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, reference to it must come at the 
right time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the context of what the story is. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is important. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I do not know what the right time is 
10 
but if now if the right time, all I am saying is, might not 
have much to refer to it now outside of the context. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In which it should be referred to.  Or if 
you set out what the context is, then refer to it, that will 
happen. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  I would prefer to do it in due 
course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because, you know, we have a limited 
20 
time this evening and we …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  I think because of the 
limited time, if you are able to do it this evening, do it.  All 
I saying it must be – you must have the context when you 
get to it. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 248 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If it is no possible to do it today within 
the context in which it must be done, obviously it must be 
done as soon as possible. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sure that should be fine with you, 
Mr Singh. 
MR SINGH:   Well, Mr Chair, the context of the affidavit, as 
I understood Adv Seleka’s line of thinking yesterday was to 
close off the corporate plan portion. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, by the way, yesterday you wanted to 
close off a certain issue. 
MR SINGH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR SINGH:   This relates to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are in a position to do that now 
today? 
MR SINGH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, Mr Seleka, he has just 
reminded me that you had asked him a question and he 
20 
was keen to respond to it and, as he put it, close off that 
issue but his counsel preferred we should not do that, so 
he seems raring to go but I am not saying do that now, I 
am just saying remember that you had asked him a 
question, he was keen to answer it, it was not answered 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 249 of 301 
 
because his counsel said they needed time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in terms of the transcript, whoever 
reads, we come to the point and then they see that now 
today we go on to something else it will look strange. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Mr Singh you can refer us to the 
page number there. 
MR SINGH:   Mr Chair, I have …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have it loosely? 
MR SINGH:   Sorry? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have it loosely? 
MR SINGH:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not in the bundle? 
MR SINGH:   No, no, not in the bundle. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Chairperson, I think what Mr 
Singh has done is taken the copy that we got and just have 
regard to that, so maybe with your permission if you can 
keep his copy next to him because I think he made his own 
[indistinct] on it and then make reference to the bundle.  If 
we can work with it in that way. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I do not have it here in my bundle, 
Mr Seleka, is it not? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is in the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is in the bundle? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 250 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Eskom bundle 14(c). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Eskom bundle 14? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   14(c). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 702.174. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Safroadu Yeboah-Amankwah, nè?  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [indistinct], Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Challenging.  Okay.  I guess we start 
with the question you had put to him that he wanted to 
10 
answer and close off the issue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  There was not a specific question 
in relation to the affidavit, Chair.  What I did for Mr Singh 
was to put versions coming from this affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which then he could comment on them 
if he had something to say because the affidavit does not 
necessarily implicate him.  So the affidavit would show, if I 
may, Mr Amankwah would indicate – let us go to paragraph 
5.2.  So Chair, let me start, just for context purposes.  
20 
Paragraph 1.4 of Mr Amankwah’s affidavit.  He says: 
“I am a senior …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 702.176. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 251 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Singh you are there? 
MR SINGH:   Paragraph 5.2? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 1.4. 
MR SINGH:   1.4? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So Mr Amankwah tells the reader 
who he is: 
“A senior partner at McKinsey company currently 
based in Washington.  From November 2011 to 
August 2018 I was a senior partner in the South 
African office.  From September 2014 to August 
10 
2018 I was the location manager of McKinsey’s 
South Africa office.” 
And then he goes on, mentions certain things about 
himself. 
Then 
on 
page 
702.185, 
paragraph 
5.2, 
Chairperson, it is under paragraph 5 with the heading: 
“The Corporate Plan Project” 
And 5.1 says: 
“In mid-2015 Eskom faced operational and financial 
challenges that were negatively impacting the South 
African economy.” 
20 
And he gives the examples.  And 5.2 says: 
“Historically McKinsey had been less involved in 
drafting 
Eskom’s 
corporate 
plan 
and 
annually 
compiled document that Eskom is required to submit 
to 
National 
Treasury 
in 
compliance 
with 
its 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 252 of 301 
 
legislative 
duties 
because 
Eskom 
had 
internal 
resources and personnel who were experienced in 
such matters.” 
So these were some of the things I was drawing to Mr 
Singh’s attention, then he carries on to say, Mr Amankwah: 
“However, McKinsey was asked to become more 
involved in drafting Eskom’s corporate plan for 
financial years 2016/2017 and 2017/2018, yes, 
when Eskom had a new management team with less 
experience 
and 
institutional 
knowledge 
about 
10 
Eskom.  The new management team therefore 
sought out McKinsey’s objectivity and years of 
experience supporting Eskom to assist them.” 
And Chair, when one reads this portion with the affidavit of 
Dr Weiss, you see that the new management in particular 
is being referring to Mr Anoj Singh and Mr Brian Molefe. 
 
So the one point from here was that there is 
acknowledgement on the part of a senior official of 
McKinsey that Eskom in fact had internal resources and 
personnel who were experienced in these matter of the 
20 
corporate plan and so Mr Singh could then comment on this 
because this does not really implicate him.  Should we take 
it step-by-step like this, Mr Singh?  Can I do so? 
MR SINGH:   Maybe it would better if you… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Should I complete it? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 253 of 301 
 
MR SINGH:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay because – let us go to paragraph 
5.8 on the next page, page 702.187. 
MR SINGH:   What paragraph, Sir? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   5.8.  So there he says: 
“The corporate plan was finalised on 26 February 
2016.  As part of instilling the plan for approval, 
McKinsey helped draft a presentation about a 
corporate plan for submission to the Department of 
Public Enterprises.” 
10 
Now hear Mr Singh, that date is significant and it is 
significant for the reason of the documentation which is a 
correspondence between you and McKinsey which I shared 
with you just before we started. 
 
Chair, may I introduce the documentation?  I had 
said I may not refer to it today but now that we are dealing 
with this, maybe it is significant that I do so.  I have 
shared with my learned friend and Mr Singh a letter which 
Mr Singh had addressed to McKinsey on the 19 February 
2016 and McKinsey’s response to his letter.  I will refer to 
20 
it now for a different purpose because of the significance 
of that date of the 26 t h and I beg leave to hand it up.  I see 
the orderly is not here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me give approval for your junior 
to bring it. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 254 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I said your junior can bring it.  Ja. He 
could come straight – oh, she, here she is.  That is what 
happens – just the whole day whenever you are needed 
you are here and you are out for one minute then you are 
needed.  Okay, now what is this, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The first page of 
this document is a letter on Eskom’s logo or letterhead, it 
is a letter dated 19 February 2016, it comes from Mr Singh.  
It is addressed to Dr Alexander Weiss of McKinsey and 
10 
company.  In this letter, Chairperson, the subject line is: 
“Top Consultants Programme, Risk-Based Contract 
Proposal and Negotiations.” 
Now that specifically relates to this MSA that we started 
going into last night.  The letter reads: 
“Eskom understands that the intended BEE partner 
to McKinsey an Co is Regiments Group.  We also 
further note that Regiments Group is in the process 
of transition and that the ultimate BEE partner 
would 
be 
Trillian 
Group. 
 
Eskom 
would 
like 
20 
McKinsey to provide a response relating to an 
article published on page 9 of the Financial Mail 
regarding 
allegations 
associated 
with 
Mr 
Mohammed 
Bogart, 
a 
former 
employee 
of 
Regiments.  Further to the above, Eskom seeks a 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 255 of 301 
 
response to key issues raised by myself at a 
meeting 
with 
McKinsey 
that 
took 
place 
on 
9 
February 206 relating to the objectives of the 
abovementioned proposed contract.  The issues are 
as follows.” 
Now you would see Chair that proposed proposal are used 
in this letter which is the on the 19 February 2016.  I have 
told Mr Anoj Singh that on the face of this letter – I am 
saying this just to get it out of the way and Mr Singh will 
deal with it, on the face of the letter dated 19 February 
10 
2016 it shows that he would have known that the MSA was 
not yet signed, on the face of the letter.  And then he deals 
with – he sets out the issues that he wishes to have 
addressed, they are number 1 to 5 and then on the next 
page he says: 
“Your urgent response within 7 days on the above 
issues will be appreciated.  The signing of the 
proposed contract…” 
There is the word again. 
“…is contingent upon the receipt of satisfactory 
20 
responses to the above request and he signs that 
letter.” 
On the next page, Chair, is a response from McKinsey.  
That response is dated 25 February 2016.  The letter 
addressed to Mr Anoj replies specifically to his letter of the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 256 of 301 
 
19 February 2016.  Now this date then is what is 
significant for what we have just read in Mr Amankwah’s 
affidavit because one, Mr Amankwah’s version, by the 26 
February 2016 the corporate plan is finalised and he would 
go on to say in this affidavit that by the end of the month it 
was approved by the Eskom board and National Treasury.  
Here in this letter of reply on the 25 t h, the day before the 
finalisation of the corporate plan the Chairperson would 
see that McKinsey is still saying we are not prepared to 
subcontract with Trillian until we have certain criteria met 
10 
because they are still subjected to a global review 
assessment, they cannot deal with us yet and that what 
you see in this letter.  So it says: 
“Dear Mr Singh, Top Consultants Programme.  Many 
thanks to you letter dated 19 February regarding 
our 
proposal 
to 
serve 
Eskom 
on 
this 
critical 
programme and your request that we respond to the 
Financial 
Mail 
article 
referring 
to 
Regiments 
Capital.” 
And that is important again because that state entity they 
20 
were dealing with at the time. 
“We have also described our overall thinking on 
involving BEE firms in our support to you on the Top 
Consultants Programme.  Our approach to involving 
supply development partners on our support to 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 257 of 301 
 
you.” 
Is says: 
“As discussed with you and set out in our proposal 
to you we are committed to working with site 
development 
partners 
on 
the 
Top 
Consultants 
Programme.  Our partnering approach which is 
grounded in our professional practices and risk 
management 
philosophy 
is 
designed 
to 
ensure 
that…” 
The he gives three bullet points.  In the interest of time I 
10 
want to move on, Chair.  The last paragraph on this page 
says: 
“We will put in place checks that ensure that 
assurance 
on 
each 
of 
these 
dimensions 
was 
maintained 
through 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
programme with an option to modify or terminate 
arrangements of material issues arose.” 
Then you turn the page: 
“Reflections on issues raised in Financial Mail 
article.” 
20 
I will skip that because that deals with – well, let me read 
it, Chair, let me read it.  It says: 
“We have been informed by Mr Eric Wood that 
Regiments Capital Management advisory business 
is 
transitioning 
ownership 
to 
Trillian 
Capital 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 258 of 301 
 
Partners.  Our diligence processes for partnering 
and subcontracting include, amongst others, that we 
are fully apprised of the composition of our partners 
including with respect to.” 
Now, Chair, that statement is important, written on the 25 
February 2016.  They are only then being informed that 
there is a transition to take place.  Then he says: 
“Partner including with respect to shareholding of 
holding 
companies, 
ultimate 
beneficial 
shareholders, related parties and …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry.  Well, they do not 
say who the – they only record that they have been 
informed but they do not say when they were informed, is it 
not? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, they do not say exactly 
when. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The have been informed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   They are writing this on the 25 t h but 
20 
you will see how they deal …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What would be true… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that they put the actual transitioning 
in the present tense. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 259 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that one could justifiably understand 
that irrespective of when they had been informed at the 
time of writing the letter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This letter, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They understood the transitioning to be 
still in the process and not to be completed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   There is an aspect which becomes 
10 
even more significant, Chair, if we carry on.  It says: 
“This is to provide assurance that…” 
Oh, I was reading: 
“…that we are fully apprised of the composition of 
our partners including with respect to shareholding 
of holding companies …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where are you reading now? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am now on the first bullet points on 
the second page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Under the heading: 
“Reflections on issues raised in Financial Mail 
article.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 260 of 301 
 
“… shareholding of holding companies, ultimate 
beneficial shareholders, related parties and group 
companies, future significant lenders, executive 
management 
team 
and 
other 
key 
main 
dependencies for both the company and group 
companies.  This is to provide assurance that 
among other considerations neither Eskom nor 
McKinsey have exposure to politically exposed 
persons.  In the case of supply development 
relations 
in 
South 
Africa 
we 
are 
additionally 
10 
required 
to 
ensure 
that 
partners/subcontractors 
meet 
three 
additional 
criteria, 
majority 
black 
ownership, majority black management and staff or 
a clear and committed plan to deliver this outcome, 
capability and capacity to execute work and deliver 
benefits that commensurate with the share of the 
fees earned.  We can confirm that we will not be 
able to commence…” 
Not to continue, but to commence. 
“…a 
relationship 
with 
Trillian 
or 
any 
other 
20 
partner/subcontractor until these criteria have been 
met and approved by our global risk and legal 
teams.  We have requested the above information 
from Trillian and have been assured that this will be 
made available to us before 1 March 2016.  We 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 261 of 301 
 
have also expressed our concern to Mr Wood about 
the article and he has assured us that he will issue 
a satisfactory response to the above date.” 
Now the important part again, Chair, is that that statement 
which they made: 
“We can confirm that we will not be able to 
commence a relationship with Trillian or any other 
partners until these criteria have been met and 
approved by Global Risk and Legal teams.” 
And ultimately the letter which we read last night, the one 
10 
of the 30 March 2016, makes reference to this too, 
correspondence.  And then they finally informed Eskom 
that they are terminating relationship with Trillian.  So 
when – on the face of this documentation and specifically 
the dates, with the date of the 26 February 2016 which Mr 
Amankwah says was the final date or the date when the 
corporate plan was finalised, the picture emerges quite 
clearly that one cannot make the conclusion that Trillian 
was involved in the corporate plan when McKinsey was 
writing at this stage saying we cannot commence a 
20 
relationship with them until they have met this criteria and 
Mr Singh of course can comment on that.  Let me carry on.  
Back to the affidavit of …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Singh, are you still fine with him 
carrying on before you comment? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 262 of 301 
 
MR SINGH:   No, no, it is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want him to finish? 
MR SINGH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR SINGH:   I am making notes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then, Chair, we go to page 702.212. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, when McKinsey says in this letter 
that they will not have partnership or relationship with 
…[intervenes] 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do they say Trillian or Regiments?  Oh, 
it is Trillian. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:    
“We can confirm that we will not be able to 
commence a relationship with Trillian or any other 
partners until these criteria have been met and 
approved by Global Risk and Legal teams.” 
Is this meant to say they would not have that relationship 
20 
with them under the MSA or does this also refer to the 
corporate plan? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This refers to the MSA, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   To the MSA. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 263 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Okay, continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And if you turn the last page you will 
see that the letter is signed at the very last page by 
Alexander 
Weiss 
and 
another 
gentleman 
who 
is 
the 
Managing Partner, being Africa.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So but Chair, and Mr Singh will explain 
this Chair because we have gathered the evidence from 
various affidavits that show that there was no partnership 
between the two companies, McKinsey and Trillian, while 
10 
McKinsey was subjecting Trillian to this global review 
assessment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that also will impact on the 
Corporate Plan as said by other witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then I was going back to the affidavit 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you going to go there before Mr 
Singh comments, or ... 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, he was saying I should proceed. 
MR SINGH:   Please proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that – ja you will have a mouthful to 
deliver.  Are you – it is better you do it as and when I raise 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 264 of 301 
 
a point, not raise a point but put a version. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but all that which you want to read is 
in support of a particular point business, is it not? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So one point or maybe two? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, for instance, here we have seen 
two points.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One is that…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe Mr Singh comment now if he 
10 
later on read something else then we can take it from 
there. 
MR SINGH:   Mr Chair, the affidavit of Mr Amankwah is 
structured in such a way that he deals with stuff in the 
back, so if we are going to deal with it I would suggest we 
take Mr – sorry Advocate Seleka’s points and then I deal 
with it holistically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay continue then Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then I would refer Mr Singh to - should 
we …[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   We need to, you need to me whether you 
want me to admit this and be slotted in somewhere or you 
want to do that later about the submission? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 265 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can I do so later Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   In due course. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In due course, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not forget. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will trust that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You cautioning me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, she assures us she will not forget.  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well I will not Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then at paragraph and I am trying my 
best to go to the most relevant ones. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The only thing bad about not admitting it 
now is that somebody will read the transcripts and will say 
that you are quoting written from my document but it is 
they do not know how to identify that document and where 
it is to be found. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed Chair, indeed. Let us admit it, 
20 
let me do it now Chairperson and I will make it part or beg 
leave to have it made part of this Eskom bundle 14[c]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it is going to be - because if it is 
two letters, isn't it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is two letters. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 266 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is going to be two exhibits?  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me see, and ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it possible to arrange for the top one 
will also be like the bottom one. You see it is horizontal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it would be vertical then it will be 
easier, when one is paging through and ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will do so. I will beg leave to have 
10 
them 
admitted 
as 
two 
separate 
exhibits 
for 
present 
purposes to be marked the first one Exhibit 33.1 which is 
the letter dated 19, February 2016 from Mr Anoj, Mr Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, right and the second one? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The second one is exhibit U33.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   U30? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  33.2 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so the other one is U33.1? 
ADV SELEKA SC: You are correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought you said Exhibit 33.1, and I 
20 
was not sure whether there shouldn’t be ...[indistinct – 
dropping voice] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, Exhibit U33, and we will paginate 
them accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 267 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We will paginate them from the last 
document in this bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, they, well where we are going to slot 
them we should be able to say what pages that will so that 
will help the whoever reads, so the letter of Mr Anoj Singh, 
Chief Financial Officer of Eskom to Dr Alexander Weiss of 
McKinsey and Company dated 19 February 2016 will be 
admitted as an exhibit and marked Exhibit U33.1 and the 
letter from Dr Alexander Weiss, Director of McKinsey as 
well as Mr Georges ...[indistinct] Managing Partner  of 
10 
McKinsey and Company dated 25 February 2016 and 
addressed to Mr Anoj Singh, Group CFO, Eskom will be 
admitted as an exhibit and marked as Exhibit U33.2. 
 
Okay, and where should they be slotted? 
ADV SELEKE SC:  Thank you.  They will go into – or they 
will go S pages ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   My registrar will note and then she will 
slot them in, but for the record you can just say where they 
would go. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   As pages 877.156. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the first letter? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is the first letter Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which has ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Two pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Two pages.  
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 268 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So is point 156 and point 157.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC: And then the next letter will start from 
page 877.158 to 877.163. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see that we are at nearly twenty past 
seven before Mr Singh answers one question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry.  
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Chairperson I think we must try 
10 
and push as far as we can at this point with this particular 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but it will depend on the situation, 
we don’t want to ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  No, I think we must try and deal 
with this particular issue today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Then, 
back 
to 
the 
affidavit 
Chairperson, page 702 went to 12, paragraph 20.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now paragraph 20.1, oh on 20 the 
heading is Trillian, 20.1 reads there has been significant 
public confusion surrounding the interactions between 
McKinsey and Trillian at Eskom.  This is something I would 
like to put right in the interaction set out below. At the 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 269 of 301 
 
outset however, it is important to note the following 
general observations relating to Trillian.  First Trillian held 
itself 
out 
in 
correspondence 
with 
McKinsey 
as 
the 
successor to the consulting business of Regiments, which 
had already undertaken work at Eskom.  
Second, McKinsey never made any payments to 
Trillian and never had a contract with Trillian. The reason 
why McKinsey never contracted with Trillian as a supplier 
development partner is discussed further below, is that 
Trillian failed McKinsey’s due diligence in February -  
10 
March 2016. 
And that is that is one significant point, emerging 
again Chair from - well the outcome of what they say was 
the global review, risk assessment they were doing in 
respect of Trillian.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Shall I proceed?  Third, on the next 
page? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think here the you made first before 
now, what did you say.  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The second - it relates to the second 
point he's making there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  If you go back to 702 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   20.2? 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 270 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Point two, that is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Whereas the second, McKinsey never 
made any payments to Trillian and never had a contract 
with Trillian . 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The reason why McKinsey never 
contracted with Trillian as a supplier development partner 
is discussed further, is that Trillian failed McKinsey's due 
diligence process in February, March 2016. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That on the face of it would suggest that 
they didn’t have a contract with Trillian even in regard to 
the ...[indistinct] plan. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And he goes to say other things, the 
next page, third, the third point, a comparison between 
what Trillian personnel advised McKinsey at the time, and 
what has now emerged years later, indicates that Trillian at 
the time repeatedly withheld from McKinsey information 
20 
about 
Trillian 
through 
ownership 
structure, 
and 
its 
connections to a Gupta family associate, Mr Salim Essa. 
Then 
the 
fourth 
point, 
the 
McKinsey 
did 
not 
authorise any payments made by Eskom to Trillian. Any 
payments by Eskom to Trillian were made by Eskom after 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 271 of 301 
 
McKinsey 
informed 
Eskom 
that 
Trillian 
had 
failed 
McKinsey’s due diligence, and he refers to a letter that that 
we have traversed last night, a letter of the 9 t h of February 
2016, with conditions that were not met.  
Well, I can read that because he does say that, in 
brackets he says: 
“As discussed further below, McKinsey's 9 February 
2016 letter did not provide authorisation for Eskom 
to pay Trillian as the conditions set out in the letter 
had 
not 
been 
met. 
 
This 
fact 
has 
been 
10 
acknowledged by Eskom and its Counsel.” 
And 
there 
they 
are 
referring 
to 
the 
litigation 
that 
subsequently was instituted between McKinsey and Eskom. 
So the takeaway home - the takeaway point there Chair is 
really on the second point Mr Amankwah is making, that 
there was never an agreement between McKinsey and 
Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in the next paragraph in 20.1 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The talk about having worked with 
Trillian. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Initially it was anticipated that 
Regiments ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  So they might not have had a formal 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 272 of 301 
 
contract, but they seem to have worked together.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   According to paragraph 20.1.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So one does not know exactly what this 
person is talking about because on the one hand he says 
they have never had a contract but then now he says we - 
they worked together Trillian at Eskom. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair you will bear in mind the 
evidence of Miss Goodson in respect of which Trillian had 
sub-contractors on the 1st of March 2016. And they got 
involved in certain of the projects that are envisaged under 
the NSA that was to be continued, and he talked about sub 
E-gateway, another sub-contractor, but she also mentioned 
employees or some – some independent contractors were 
brought from India and Arab Emirates, serving in certain 
20 
projects of - envisaged in the MSA.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, but what is clear is that there was 
no formal contract between the two entities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 273 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I think I could stop there because the 
further paragraphs he goes into the details of what he has 
summarised. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. Mr Singh? 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair, thank you. Mr Chair I think in 
addressing the first point, we have to go back to page 
702.185.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Point? 
MR SINGH:  Point 185, and I will also deal with point 186, 
at the same time.  Mr Chair I think the first point to the 
10 
note here ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, did you say we must go to page 
702.185? 
MR SINGH:   Point 185. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the page? 
MR SINGH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR SINGH:  And I have been – advocate Seleka referred 
us to paragraph 5.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MR SINGH:   As being the first issue that he would like us 
to respond to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To postpone? 
MR SINGH:   No, to respond to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, to respond to ja, just speak up a bit. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 274 of 301 
 
MR SINGH:   Mr Chair the first point that I would like to 
raise is that Mr Amankwah albeit has given us his brief 
resume regarding his experience in the McKinsey office in -
in Johannesburg, I must record that he actually did not 
have any hands-on experience at Eskom, because I never - 
I actually think he may have actually come to Eskom once 
if I recall, but that is the first point to be made Mr Chair. 
In terms of 5.2 Mr Chair, the context within which 
the point was led by Advocate Seleka I think, loses its 
merit, because it is read in without the full context. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I say this, Mr Singh?  
MR SINGH:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you are able to say this is the point I 
am making, and I am going to the page or paragraph to 
show support for that point that would help. 
MR SINGH:  Okay sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, if you are able to do it that way. For 
example like saying it is not true that there was no 
agreement between - there between McKinsey and Trillian, 
here is what I want to refer to in regard to that kind of 
20 
thing. I mentioned that because in that letter they as 
McKinsey, McKinsey in their letter to you repeated the - 
they give the impression or say so expressly that there was 
no agreement with them and Trillian.  So if you say no, you 
don’t accept that, and you want to refer somewhere to 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 275 of 301 
 
support that, that would help.  
So if we know the point first, then we go to the 
material, that will help. 
MR SINGH:   Sure sir.  The point that, in taking your 
guidance Chair, the point that Advocate Seleka tried to 
make was that Eskom had internal resources to develop 
the corporate plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR SINGH:  And I am basically saying I do not agree with 
that Mr Chair because the comment that has been made, is 
10 
not read in the context of the rest of the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR SINGH:  So if you look at for example the rest of the 
paragraph 5.5 point 5.2, basically you see that the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [talking over one another]. 
MR SINGH:  Eskom was facing - if I just read Mr Chair it 
starts with in addition, Eskom was facing a dual challenge 
of rising costs and load shedding affecting the economy 
and required a comprehensive strategy on how to deal with 
20 
these challenges in a way that would support the South 
African economy.  
The 
corporate 
plan 
developed 
with 
McKinsey 
created a fundamental shift in approach for Eskom moving 
to, from a cost effective path to a designed cost strategy 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 276 of 301 
 
with a tariff path that would be more supportive of the 
South African economy.  
This required providing global expertise on energy 
markets, since sharing levers for improvement based on 
international 
utility 
experience, 
ongoing 
change 
management within the organisation and expertise on 
implementing the plan turnaround. 
5.3, McKinsey's mandate under the corporate plan 
was to develop a strategy that would help Eskom recover 
from its challenging financial crisis, cost rates and revenue 
10 
and its precarious operational situation preventing load 
shedding.  McKinsey started work on the corporate plan in 
October 2015, in close collaboration with the Eskom team, 
and then Mr Chair in 5.4, paragraph 5.4, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 
6, which goes onto the next page he deals with the 
elements of the corporate plan.   
The Corporate Plan Project served as a viable 
strategic plan to chart a path for Eskom’s return to support 
of economic growth.  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Are 
you 
reading 
from 
paragraph 
20 
...[intervenes]  
MR SINGH:  This is paragraph 5.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just so that I have got, ja.  Continue. 
MR 
SINGH: 
 
Because 
it 
was 
informed 
by 
industry 
benchmarks 
and 
supported 
by 
Eskom 
management, 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 277 of 301 
 
Eskom’s Board and key stakeholders such as Department 
of Public Enterprises.  
5.6 he goes on further to say that there were 47 
McKinsey consultants and experts devoted to over 8 300 
hours to the project, and he goes on to explain that he 
interacted with certain key stakeholders within Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Within? 
MR SINGH:   Within Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So Mr Singh let me ask you before you 
go further ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR SINGH:   Can I complete?  I have got two more 
paragraphs. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, but I need - you can take your 
point on point zero, I don’t forget. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because you had yours ready. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, yes, alright, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So are you saying you are denying Mr 
Amankwah allegation that Eskom had internal resources 
and personnel who were experienced in such matters?  
20 
MR SINGH:   Yes, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Are you denying the allegation that 
McKinsey started work on the corporate plan in close 
collaboration with Eskom’s teams? 
MR SINGH:   No sir.   Mr Chair the reason why I denied 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 278 of 301 
 
these allegations, Mr Chair firstly is because of the 
evidence that I have led before the commission regarding 
the quality of the previous year's corporate plan, which I 
have led extensively before the Commission.   
Secondly, Mr Chair, if you read - have regard for 
paragraph 5.9 which states Eskom has also argued in the 
Eskom review proceeding, that the corporate plan work was 
done internally at Eskom and that the contract was not 
entered into lawfully.  
Let us leave the part around the lawful part but then 
10 
it goes on to say McKinsey disputes these assertions. 
Whilst McKinsey worked closely with Eskom personnel on 
all parts of the Corporate Plan, McKenzie was responsible 
for the integrating of these inputs and ensuring the plan 
was 
completed 
according 
to 
the 
suggestions 
of 
the 
...[indistinct – dropping voice], as well as the board as well 
as the public enterprise.  
So Mr Chairman, the context of the allegation that 
Eskom had the resources to conduct or compile the 
corporate plan, versus what you see at 5.9, is at odds with 
20 
each other, as well as the way Mr Amankwah sets out the 
extent to which McKinsey had deployed resources to 
complete the Corporate Plan.  
So that is the point in terms of where we deal with 
the issue of paragraph 5.2. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 279 of 301 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  May I ask you as you proceed where do 
you - are you going to answer it? Where do you put Trillian 
in that scenario? 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair the allegation was, Eskom had 
internal personnel to do the work so I address that per the 
paragraphs I have referred to.  The issue of Trillian I think 
we will now pick up. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MR SINGH:   Then I think you went with paragraph 5.8. Mr 
Chair.  Mr Chair this related to the corporate plan being 
10 
finalised on the 26th of February 2016, and this issue 
relates the letter that Mr Seleka had read into the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The letters that we have just dealt with? 
MR SINGH:   That we have just dealt with Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair in terms of the letter itself, and the 
implications there, I have been advised that we should 
request that we should deal with this later, once we have 
had an opportunity to look at the letter in the context of the 
20 
rest of the information that that we have been able to ask. 
But having said that, Mr Chair, I can deal with, very briefly, 
the issue of the letter, I think the letter makes it quite clear 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter being the McKinsey letter to 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 280 of 301 
 
you or your letter to them? 
MR SINGH:   I think, both Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR SINGH:   That it was an obvious point ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   This is why I want to specify so that 
whoever reads if they want to go and look at the letter you 
talk about they know which one, 
MR SINGH:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR SINGH:  An obvious point is, Mr Chair, that the letters 
10 
obviously referred to the MSA. And we will, I will deal later 
with the fact that there is a distinction between the MSA 
and the Corporate Plan.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR SINGH:   So that is in terms of 5.8 and then Mr Chair, 
then we needed to go through paragraph 20.1 and I just 
want to check if I have any additional notes between 5.8 
and 2.1 that I would like to bring to the attention of the 
Chairperson.  Mr Amankwah does deal with the MSA Mr 
Chair, and in the interest of time, and given the fact that 
20 
we wanted to close the corporate plan, and I think we will 
deal with the corporate name issues now and if there is a 
need to come back to the affidavit relating to the MSA we 
will come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Seleka is the one who knows 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 281 of 301 
 
exactly what points he wanted you to deal with, so he – Mr 
Singh is saying ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He would like to deal with the Corporate 
Plan and close that off and again but to the extent that he 
needs to deal with the MSA that can be dealt with later.  It 
think he – that is what – that is what you are saying Mr 
Singh? 
MR SINGH:  That is correct Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  I think he must be saying that 
10 
because of the issue we discussed in chambers about the 
need to do only an hour. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes.  I am not sure whether that is the 
reason Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe it is not the reason. 
MR SINGH:  Well Mr Chair if I do deal with the issues of a 
MSA 
CHAIRPERSON:  MSA 
MR SINGH:  As it is alleged to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR SINGH:  Then it would be contrary to the fact that you 
wanted it to be in context. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR SINGH:  Of how we – how we dealing with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So it is a different reason. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 282 of 301 
 
MR SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So Mr Seleka is right?  It is a different 
reason.  Okay.  Okay. 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you are now going to deal with the 
corporate plan. 
MR SINGH:  Yes Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SINGH:  In terms of paragraph 20.1 Mr Chair.  I think 
10 
that was the next … 
CHAIRPERSON:  20.1 at page 702.213. 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  And that is the – and that was the next one that 
Mr – Advocate Seleka wanted me to deal with.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Seleka the point about the 
corporate plan are simply about who rendered the services 
Trillian or Regiments? 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the real point. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes and who was paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja what is common cause was paid this.  
Ja.  So you – okay I just wanted to make sure we are – that 
we are all on the same page as to what point you are – you 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 283 of 301 
 
seek to deal with under the corporate plan issue. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  As it relates to the paragraphs that I was 
referred to by Advocate Seleka 20.1.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not have 20.1.1. 
MR SINGH:  20.1 and then I think in bracket (1) Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.   
MR SINGH:  Right.  First Trillian held itself out in 
correspondence with McKinsey as a successor to the 
10 
consulting business of Regiments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I do not think you reading from 
the same paragraph that I have as 20.1 at page 702.213. 
MR SINGH:  Sorry Chair I think it is 702.212. 
CHAIRPERSON:  212. 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR SINGH:  I think there is two 20’s – two paragraphs 20.1. 
CHAIRPERSON: Oh. 
MR SINGH:  And then the… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay so that is just – let us continue.  
So the first 20. 
MR SINGH:  The first 20.1 
CHAIRPERSON:  20.1. 
MR SINGH:  Yes Mr Chair. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 284 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
MR SINGH:  I think in terms of the 20.1(1) I think again here 
Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well do not say bracket 1 because 
whoever reads the transcript will not find bracket 1. 
MR SINGH:  1 in brackets. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Except 
for 
your 
convenience. 
 
The 
paragraph 20.1 that is at page 702.212. 
MR SINGH:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
10 
MR SINGH:   
“First 
Trillian 
held 
itself 
out 
in 
correspondence 
with 
McKinsey 
as 
a 
successor to the consulting business of 
Regiments which had already untaken work 
at Eskom.” 
 
Mr Chair this paragraph – this paragraph basically is 
consistent with the letter that we had admitted into evidence 
earlier. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us break this up.  What – what is said 
20 
here – one of the things that is said here is that Regiments 
had undertaken consulting – or had undertaken work already 
at Eskom and not Trillian.  That – they do not say Trillian 
they say Regiments but they say Trillian – they understood 
that Trillian – or Trillian held itself out in correspondence 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 285 of 301 
 
with McKinsey as the successor to the consulting business of 
Regiments which had already taken work at Eskom. 
 
As I understand it they are saying it is Regiments 
who had done the work at Eskom. 
MR SINGH:  Ai – Mr Chair that part I agree with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You agree with that part. 
MR SINGH:  I am just saying that the suc... – the issue of 
Trillian being a successor to Regiments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  Is consistent with my letter. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay so… 
MR SINGH:  In terms of why it was constructed the way it 
was constructed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  Okay.  Ja. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Sorry in terms of?  Sorry I missed that.  In 
terms of? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think he is talking about the what he has 
referred to as the secondment. 
MR SINGH:  No, no Sir.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh no that is – okay. 
20 
MR SINGH:  No the letter that we just admitted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the one that … 
MR SINGH:  Into evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Oh okay.   
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 286 of 301 
 
MR SINGH:  Advocate Seleka referred to Regiments Group. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me have a look at those letters – that 
letter? 
MR SELEKA SC:  Ja.  Ja and Mr Singh’s… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you accept – you would accept Mr 
Singh will you not that the second part is not consistent with 
at least your evidence at some stage namely that is 
Regiments which had done the work? 
MR SINGH:  Well Mr Chair this is – it basically this is at a 
point in time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SINGH:  I am saying the way that I understand Mr 
Amankwah’s affidavit is that this at a point in time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  So he is giving. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course. 
MR SINGH:  So he is giving – he is obviously giving you a 
sequence of events as it how – as how it unfolded. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SINGH:  The second point is… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I want to look at the – at your letter.  
You said the first part. 
MR SINGH:  Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is consistent with your letter.  I want to see 
where in your letter you – you say something that you say is 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 287 of 301 
 
consistent with this.   
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair there it is a – if you look at the first 
bullet point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm the first one? 
MR SINGH:  Yes.  The first one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   
“In relation to the above Eskom requests a 
formal response on the following items.” 
MR SINGH:  Narrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  First bullet point: 
10 
“Eskom 
understands 
that 
the 
intended 
BBEEE partnered to McKinsey and Company 
is Regiments – Regiments Group.  They also 
further note that Regiments Group is in a 
process of transition and that the ultimate 
BBEEE partner would be Trillian – Trillian 
Group.” 
MR SINGH:  So that is the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the part you say. 
MR SINGH:  That is what I am saying to be consistent. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is consistent.  Okay I understand.  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  Thank you Mr Chair.   
“Second McKinsey never made any payments 
to Trillian and never had a contract with 
Trillian.” 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 288 of 301 
 
I do not think anyone disputes that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SINGH:   
“The reason why McKinsey never contracted 
with Trillian as a suppliers development 
partner as discussed further below is that 
Trillian 
failed 
McKinsey’s 
due 
diligence 
process in February/March 2016.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Okay I am sorry.  I am saying I am 
sorry.  The first sentence of paragraph 20.1.2 okay maybe I 
10 
was wrong when I said do not say bracket (1) I think I 
misunderstood.  I think you – I thought you were – you had 
put your own (1) for your convenience but now I understand 
what you are referring to. Okay 20.1(2) you say the first 
sentence nobody disputes that?  Is that right? 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and that sentence has two points. 
“One is McKinsey never make any payments 
to Trillian. 
2. McKinsey never had a contract with 
20 
Trillian.” 
Okay that is not in dispute.  Ja continue. 
MR SINGH:   
“The reason why McKinsey never contracted 
with 
Trillian 
as 
a 
supplier 
development 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 289 of 301 
 
partner as discussed further below is that 
Trillian 
failed 
McKinsey’s 
due 
diligence 
process in February/March 2016.” 
Mr Chair I think the wording of February/March 2016 
is a convenient way for – to be put because the letter that 
we just read and admitted into evidence suggests that at 25 
March they were still – 25 February they were still going 
through a due diligence process which ultimately led to them 
informing Trillian at the 16 March that they would not be able 
to continue as their BEE partner any longer and informed 
10 
Eskom on the 31s t of that – so February/March Mr Chair in 
my view is very convenient in the way it is formatted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So  
MR SINGH:  And that is formatted in that manner Mr Chair to 
include the corporate plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To include? 
MR SINGH:  The corporate plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Corporate plan. 
MR SINGH:  Because the corporate plan was finalised in 
February. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. Yes.   
MR SINGH:  So there was no due diligence outcome in the 
month of February. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  So are you saying factually you 
dispute that Trillian failed the McKinsey due diligence 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 290 of 301 
 
process in February/March 2016?  Do you go that far or you 
simply say look I do not know factually whether that is true 
but it does seem quite convenient. 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair I think I am – I think I am putting it 
more stronger than that Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are (speaking over one another) 
MR SINGH:  I am saying factually it is that based on the 
letter that we have just admitted on the 25t h McKinsey admits 
that they still conducting a due diligence process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us go to that – letter is dated 25 
10 
February 2016.   
MR SELEKA SC:  Chair may I help? 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is assigned where they say that are still 
– okay – on. 
MR SINGH:  It is the one that says… 
CHAIRPERSON:  They say on the second page  
“We can confirm that we will not be able to 
commence our relationship with Trillian or 
any other partner or sub-contractor until 
these criteria have been met and approved 
20 
by our global risk and legal team.  We have 
requested the above information from Trillian 
and have been ensured that this will be made 
available to us before 1 March 2016.  We 
have also expressed our concern to Mr Wood 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 291 of 301 
 
about 00:12:01 and he has assured us that 
he will issue a supplementary form.  Based 
on this our relationship with Trillian remains 
under review by our committees.” 
So the point you are making is that as at 25 February 
McKinsey is saying we are still reviewing or considering the 
issue of whether we should have a relationship with Trillian 
and we have asked for some information that is 25 February.  
That is -  that point might be fine but only up to 25 February 
is it not?  If we talking about March it does not cover much 
10 
because you – we would not know whether they got all of 
this information in the next few weeks.   
MR SINGH:  Well Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course there might be another part 
somewhere which tells us. 
MR SINGH:  Ja but it – I think Mr Chair by now it is common 
cause. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  That McKinsey informed Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR SINGH:  That they had – that they had failed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  And they will no longer partner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SINGH:  Officially on the 16t h March. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 292 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the 16t h – oh so about three weeks 
later. 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SINGH:  And officially then informed Eskom alternatively. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  On the 31s t of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay so therefore … 
MR SINGH:  From February you will not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There was on their version by 31s t of 
10 
March they had no relationship with… 
MR SINGH:  Well 15t h of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By 16 t h of March ja. 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They had no relationship with – and they 
had decided that they were not going to continue. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR SINGH:  Because at – per this letter Mr Chair they were 
still expecting information from Trillian on the 1s t of March. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
MR SINGH:  So they could not have made a decision in 
February. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja they made it after. 
MR SINGH:  They made it after. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 293 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  And the point that I am making is that I am 
factually 
disputing 
February 
because 
February 
is 
conveniently inserted to give the impression that they had 
failed in February to cast doubt on the corporate plan work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the corporate plan – the corporate 
plan – this letter is about the MSA is it not?  Or is it about 
both the corporate plan and the – and the MSA letter (talking 
over one another). 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair the letter both mine and McKinsey’s 
10 
letter refers to the MSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes okay.  Now insofar as the MSA is 
concerned there is – what you are saying is on their letter 
and whatever other correspondence by 16 March they said 
they had no relationship with Trillian and end of March they 
informed Eskom.  But your – you used that not in relation to 
MSA for present purposes you use it in relation to the 
corporate plan. 
MR SINGH:  Yes Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
20 
MR SELEKA SC:  Ja thank you Chair.  Mr Amankwah does 
specify the dates later in his affidavit and Mr Singh I just 
want to mention those dates.  They addressed a letter for 
McKinsey he says:  15 March 2016 and then the letter to you 
was 30 March – remember the one we looked at. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 294 of 301 
 
 
I know the 31s t is the meeting – a steering committee 
meeting you have. 
MR SINGH:  Steering committee will have it. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Ja so the letter had already been given.  
So it is 15 March and 30 March and then there is a meeting 
on the 31s t of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the – what is the point you make about 
the absence of the relationship between McKinsey and 
Trillian under the MSA that relates the corporate plan?  
Remember we are talking about the corporate plan now but 
10 
you are relying on a letter that talks about the MSA, what is 
that point that you want to make because under the 
corporate plan remember sometime maybe 30 minutes ago I 
asked Mr Seleka what was the point about the corporate plan 
and he confirmed that the point was who had provided 
services. 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair McKinsey relies on the fact they had 
that Trillian had failed their due diligence process and 
therefore they were never – the – supplier development 
partner.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SINGH:  But I am saying for the corporate plan they were 
never subjected to a due diligence process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean? 
MR SINGH:  Trillian. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 295 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Trillian. 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Right. 
MR SINGH:  Albeit that they were working together. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but they say in – they say or maybe 
some of the affidavits that they never had any contracts with 
– with Trillian. 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair we will deal with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Because you see I think I want to 
keep my focus on the issue and that is the issue of whether 
10 
there was a contract and who the contract was with, whether 
services were provided and who provided the services.  I 
want to keep my focus on that as we deal with the corporate 
plan. 
MR SINGH:  I will certainly deal with that in that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Okay.  Continue. 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair in terms of (3) which is on the next 
page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which is 20.1 sub 2. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Chair before – I know Mr Singh will not 
20 
lose the point because he knows where it is but I think the 
statement he made this requires some clarification Mr Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.   
MR SELEKA SC:  Ja. Insofar – because insofar as you say 
Trillian was never subjected to review under the corporate 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 296 of 301 
 
plan.  Then you go on to say all the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That the due diligence process. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that is what he said.  When you say 
under review you are talking about the same thing. 
MR SELEKA SC:  The same thing Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SELEKA SC:  So they were not subjected to that risk – 
global risk assessment review in respect of the corporate 
plan. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SELEKA SC:  But then he adds something to do the 
effect that even though McKinsey worked with Trillian. 
MR SINGH:  Yes Sir. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Is that what you are saying Mr Singh? 
MR SINGH:  Yes. 
MR SELEKA SC:  But that is not correct.  Then we can leave 
it on record like that. 
MR SINGH:  Why would… 
MR SELEKA SC:  Because – because we have established 
20 
from your own affidavit that you approached Eric Wood of 
Regiments who was working on the corporate plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But remember Mr Seleka this affidavit by 
Mr Amankwah. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Amankwah. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 297 of 301 
 
MR SINGH:  Amankwah 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you remember there was a part where I 
said well he now talks on the basis on the basis that in effect 
although there was no – they did not have contracts that is 
McKinsey. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With  
MR SINGH:  Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I cannot remember whether Trillian or 
Regiments but some work – they worked together at Eskom.  
10 
Do you remember there was that paragraph. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Sir. 
MR SELEKA SC:  But that – that is Chair – that is under Mr 
Singh should explain to you that is under the MSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is under the S – MSA. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh not under the corporate plan. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Not the corporate plan Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  That is.. 
20 
MR SINGH:  That is – Mr Chair that is not something for me 
to explain that is Ms Seleka’s view – Advocate Seleka’s view. 
MR SELEKA SC:  No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if it – if you do not tell him you do 
not agree I will think you – you are agree with him. 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 298 of 301 
 
MR SINGH:  Hence I am saying Mr Chair I disagree with Mr 
Seleka’s point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Okay continue. 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair in terms of (3) Mr Amankwah raises a 
concern regarding Trillian employees who had withheld 
information about the true shareholding and structure of 
Trillian in their interaction with McKinsey.  And later in their 
affidavit Mr Chair we can - we can– go to that but you will 
see that that is actually give the first to Ms Goodson.  So 
that is the comment in terms of paragraph 3. 
10 
 
In terms of paragraph… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – but how – I would expect you to have 
nothing to do with sub 3 because is that not an internal 
matter or not a matter just between Trillian and McKinsey. 
MR SINGH:  Not as Chair raise it because it is an issue for 
the commission in terms of the fact that you placing reliance 
on Ms Goodson’s testimony and Ms Goodson’s affidavit.  And 
Mr Amankwah is raising a concern regarding her knowledge 
of the shareholding and the manner in which she either did 
or did not disclose that to McKinsey at the time. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what – what comment did you give? 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair I am saying that Mr Amankwah is 
raising 
a 
concern 
regarding 
Trillian 
employees 
who 
repeatedly 
withheld 
information 
from 
McKinsey 
about 
Trillian’s true ownership structure.  So he is saying that they 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 299 of 301 
 
have now discovered years later that Trillian employees at 
the time had knowledge of the true ownership structure of 
Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SINGH:  Which they did not disclose to them and my 
comment Mr Chair is to add to this paragraph is that the 
person that Mr Amankwah has – is referring to is Ms 
Goodson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR SINGH:  Okay and he further names her in the affidavit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SINGH:   Okay I can take you to that paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.:   
MR SELEKA SC:  Ja that – the timing is – the time is not 
going to.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I. 
MR SELEKA SC:  I think Mr Singh should deal with what 
pertains to him. 
MR SINGH:  Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No just hang on one second.  Your 
20 
situation … 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Chairperson I would prefer it if we 
adjourn at this point. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no. no that is fine.  That – let us 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 300 of 301 
 
adjourn ja okay.  Let us adjourn.  But can we talk about next 
– next week Monday and Tuesday can we use those 
evenings?  Your – Monday and Tuesday are your days is it 
not? 
MR SELEKA SC:  They are Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Except that Monday we have a witness 
equally heavyweight as Mr Anoj Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so you think you will take – you will 
take – but we need to have – we need if we can to try and 
10 
finish with somebody.  I – we would like you to finish with 
that one. 
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes.  That is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  With Monday’s one. 
MR SELEKA SC:  That is what we aim to do so that if we 
need to go into time – more time in the evening we could do 
so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.  
MR SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then on Tuesday you are supposed to 
20 
have who? 
MR SELEKA SC:  Minister – Mr Zwane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja Mr Zwane.  Okay alright.  Can we talk in 
chambers for one minute before we let you go about next 
week?  I think let us do that.  Thank you very much we will 
26 MARCH 2021 – DAY 369 
 
Page 301 of 301 
 
adjourn now and next week we on Monday we will deal with 
Eskom and Mr Koko will give evidence.  Tuesday is 
supposed to be Mr Mosebenzi Zwane and ja – we adjourn.  
Thank you to everybody for staying until this time.  We 
appreciate everybody’s cooperation.  Thank you.   
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 29 MARCH 2021 
 
