 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 303 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 231 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 3 of 231 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 10 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Kennedy, 
good 
morning everybody.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes we are thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.  Good morning Mr 
Mhlontle. 
MR MHLONTLE:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The oath you took yesterday continues to 
10 
apply today.  Alright.  You may proceed Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  With your leave we 
dealt with in some detail with the circumstances of Mr 
Mhlontle’s resignation after a process.  Perhaps logically it 
would make sense for us to – to deal with that although it 
comes in the latter half of his second affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We can deal with all of that; complete 
the picture and fill in a few details. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then thereafter we will get back 
to the first affidavit and deal with some of the transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Mhlontle I would like you please in 
the bundle and just for the record it is Bundle Denel7 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 4 of 231 
 
Exhibit W20.  Mr Mhlontle will you please look at page 587. 
MR MHLONTLE:  I am at 587. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You deal under the heading the 
suspension and later your resignation with the events that 
led up to what you told the Chair about yesterday which 
was the negotiations which took place parallel to the 
disciplinary process that never ultimately happened.  The 
preparations for the disciplinary hearing and how you 
ultimately were persuaded to take a – a package by way of 
a settlement.  Now I would like to go back a few steps to 
10 
deal with the – with the suspension.  You refer to your 
broad agreement with Mr Saloojee’s evidence already 
given in this commission concerning the circumstances of 
the suspension.  Is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLE:  It is indeed correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then you refer to the fact that at 
a certain stage Denel started dealing with you individually 
with Mr Saloojee and Ms Africa and you were no longer 
dealt with as a – as three person group. 
MR MHLONTLE:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you have already corrected on 
the record paragraph 5.3 which deals with an orientation 
and you have corrected the date 24 July 2015. 
MR MHLONTLE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you have referred there to the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 5 of 231 
 
orientation and a special session relating to the LSSA 
transaction and then at the foot of the page the first 
meeting of the new board of directors.  But what I would 
like to take you now to is page 588 paragraph 5.7 where 
you deal with a meeting that took place on the 22 
September 2015 where you met together with Saloojee and 
Africa – Ms Africa with the Audit and Risk Committee.  Now 
I would like you to explain what happened at that 
committee meeting.  What did you understand when you 
called to attend this meeting that it would dealing with? 
10 
MR MHLONTLE:  During the course of the day on Tuesday 
we were advised that we would need to meet with the Audit 
Committee later that afternoon.  And there was no agenda 
per se what they will deal with – that would be I had a 
distinct sense that Mr Saloojee had a sense of what was 
going to be engaged on as to why that was the case I had 
no knowledge.   
And then the meeting took place; we were called 
one by one.  We were presented with a letter that seemed 
to have been written based on the presentation we had 
20 
given around the transaction of LSSA and making various 
allegations.  And we were then given 24 hours to which we 
would have to furnish reasons as to why we should not be 
suspended.   
And I guess what was expected was that against 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 6 of 231 
 
each point we would provide reasons as to why the alleged 
issues happened the way they had been tabulated and we 
– we sought legal counsel in between before the 24 hours 
was up.   
And we went with a broad response to the Audit and 
Risk Committee that saying given a – a more time we are 
happy to go through each point and clarify.  But I think 
what is important Chair is the fact that even on a one on 
one or on a meeting with Audit and Risk Committee I had 
put forward to them to say that as far as I am concerned 
10 
issues of governance are not handled that way.   
We cannot have a board that is six weeks in office – 
it has had one presentation and the next day is making all 
host of allegations.  Even if those issues could be valid 
one would – would put the questions to the board; the 
board would – I mean to the management and management 
would respond and it is only upon the Audit and Risk 
Committee or board not being satisfied with the responses 
that it could – it could even be putting out a word along the 
line of suspension. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this is now at the meeting of the 22 
September 2015 and the meeting is that of the Audit and 
Risk Committee not of the whole board. 
MR MHLONTLE:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the first meeting of the board had 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 7 of 231 
 
been on the 10 September 2015, is that right? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the meeting of the 20 – so the 
meeting of the 10 September was the first board meeting. 
MR MHLONTLE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So before the 10 t h – between the 10 t h and 
the 22 n d September no further board meeting had taken 
place or had – had it taken place? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Correct except that Ms Saloojee had 
gone overseas. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MHLONTLE:  At UK with the Chair of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MHLONTLE:  And had been no – no board meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes there had been no board meetings.  
So – so the Audit and Risk Committee was this its first 
meeting on the 22 n d do you know? 
MR MHLONTLE:  It – it would – the meeting – there was a 
meeting before that which was specifically. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MHLONTLE:  Backdated on the LSSA transaction 
where we made a presentation of give or take 20 slides. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MHLONTLE:  Or that says here the company – here is 
a 
background 
of 
the 
company. 
 
These 
are 
the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 8 of 231 
 
circumstances under which it was bought.  Here is a PFMA 
approval and all the processes we had followed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MHLONTLE:  And the presentation was obviously high 
level ensuring that the board – the Audit and Risk 
Committee was fully appraised of what had taken place in 
terms of decision and there was one element that needed 
to be fulfilled by the new board which was that of bringing 
an equity partner on that transaction.  So it was quite 
important that we have a presentation. So there had been 
10 
one – one Audit and Risk Committee specifically to talk on 
the transaction.  This was almost like a second one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And can you remember the date when 
that first Audit and Risk Committee meeting was? 
MR MHLONTLE:  It is sometime in September.  I think 
maybe the 9 t h? 
CHAIRPERSON:  After the 10 t h or even before the 10 t h? 
MR MHLONTLE:  I think before the 10 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay.  And did you say you or 
the executives made presentations to – or a presentation 
20 
to that meeting? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Is that presentation different 
from what I thought was – okay ja I can see the – that is 
the presentation you talk about in paragraph 5.3.  Is that 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 9 of 231 
 
right?  Of your – at page 587. 
MR MHLONTLE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  During the orientation of 24 July 2015 the 
CEO mentioned that a big transaction concluded in April 
2015 under the previous board was LSSA.  I think 
somewhere 
in 
those 
lines 
you 
talk 
about 
doing 
a 
presentation. 
MR MHLONTLE:  Quite right Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So – so was there a presentation to 
the Audit and Risk Committee and a presentation to the 
10 
board or only to the Audit and Risk Committee? 
MR MHLONTLE:  The presentation was to Audit and Risk 
Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Committee.  Oh did you say on the 9 t h? 
MR MHLONTLE:  I suspect it would have been but it was 
before the – before… suspect it would have been but it was 
before the – before… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before the 10 t h? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Before the board of the 10 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright.  Well – so well it is 
20 
another feature that seems to be similar to the Eskom one 
because in Eskom too a new board – I think there were 
only two if not one who had come from a previous board.  A 
new board that would not be expected to very familiar even 
with the business of Eskom and with the personalities 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 10 of 231 
 
[00:10:27] in executive positions in their first full meeting 
other than the induction on the 11 t h made a decision to 
suspend executives – four executives.  
So here from what you have said there had only 
been one board meeting on the 10 t h and there had been an 
Audit and Risk Committee before the 10 t h.  Second Audit 
and Risk Committee meeting on the 22 n d they are talking 
about asking you to explain is it not?  They are already 
talking about whether you should not be suspended, is that 
correct? 
10 
MR MHLONTLE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  Mr Mhlontle in paragraph 
5.6 you deal with the board meeting of the 10 t h September 
you did not notice any material concern on the side of the 
board.  There was some questions noted and responded to 
in writing on the 14 t h September 2015 in a memorandum.  
So were you alerted during the meeting – the board 
meeting of the 10 t h September that there were any 
concerns on the part of the board members or the members 
20 
of the Audit and Risk Committee who formed part of the 
board that there were any irregularities on your part 
concerning the LSSA deal that you were reporting back on? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Not at all; not at all. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now then you have taken the Chair to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 11 of 231 
 
the Audit and Risk Committee that happened on the 22 n d 
September and you refer to a letter.  Can I ask you in the 
bundle please to look at page 657?  The letter as we see 
from the last page at page 661 was addressed to you by 
Mpho Kgomongwe the Chairperson of the Audit and Risk 
Committee, is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLE:  That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And it says in the text of the letter at 
the top on page 657  
“You are requested to provide reasons why 
10 
the Audit and Risk Committee should not 
recommend to the board for your urgent 
suspension and disciplinary action to be 
taken against yourself.  The Audit and Risk 
Committee held meetings as mandated by 
the 
board 
to 
consider 
what 
transpired 
during 
the 
board 
meeting 
of 
the 
10 t h 
September 2015 where information surfaced 
amongst 
other 
things 
that 
the 
Chief 
Executive Officer and the Chief Financial 
20 
Officer misled the new board, the Minister 
of Public Enterprise and the Minister of 
Finance and further the PFMA and Denel 
MOI was contravened.” 
Had any of that been said to you in the meeting on the 10 t h 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 12 of 231 
 
September 2015? 
MR MHLONTLE:  None of this was said on the 10 t h 
September board meeting.  None at all.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Then it says in paragraph 2. 
“It appeared that the reason 
given by 
yourself motivating for the board approval 
to allow you to conduct – sorry to conclude 
a sale of 49% or 50% of the DVS with an 
equity partner was false and fraudulent.” 
Was that raised in the meeting of the 10 t h September? 
10 
MR MHLONTLE:  Despite the fact that that statement in 
itself is incorrect it was never raised at any point.  The 
approval PMFA approval by the Minister requires that there 
be an equity partner to that extent. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Then paragraph 3. 
“In the opinion of the Audit and Risk 
Committee your conduct, actions, omissions 
in respect of the transaction between LSSA 
and Denel SOC Limited contravened the 
following 
legal 
requirements 
– 
sorry 
20 
instruments.” 
And then it sets out various requirements of the PFMA.  
And then paragraph 4 it says: 
“The 
Audit 
and 
Risk 
Committee 
after 
assessing what you have told” 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 13 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry Mr Kennedy.  Just 
on a light note.  3.1 says: 
“Section 50 of the PFMA requires the accounting 
authorities of a public entity to  
a. Exercise the duty of almost care.” 
I think they meant utmost care. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Fortunately are not here to defend the 
Chairperson of the Audit and Risk Committee so use of 
10 
English or the typing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – I guess maybe when you do 
things in too much of a rush these things happen. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then paragraph 4 Mr Mhlontle. 
“The 
Audit 
and 
Risk 
Committee 
after 
assessing what you have told the new board 
documents submitted to the Minister of 
Finance 
and 
the 
Minister 
of 
Public 
20 
Enterprise it is clear that you did not act 
with fidelity, honesty, integrity and in the 
best 
interest 
of 
the 
public 
entity 
in 
managing the financial affairs of the public 
entity.” 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 14 of 231 
 
Now – and then there are various other allegations 
made against you.  For example in paragraph 8  
“You have contravened Section 54.2C of the 
PFMA 
by 
failure, 
refusal, 
omitted 
to 
disclose the fuller material financial aspects 
of the acquisition of LSSA by Denel to the 
Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
Public Enterprise. 
9. You have amongst other things failed to 
comply with conditions of approval from the 
10 
Minister of Finance etcetera” 
Now Mr Mhlontle this does not appear to have been 
said these are the allegations and we would like your 
comment on them.  If we go back to paragraph 1 it appears 
to be a judgment that is made by the Audit and Risk 
Committee that you misled the new board.  And that you 
made false and fraudulent claims.   Paragraph 2.  And then 
paragraph 3 it refers to an opinion that the Audit and Risk 
Committee 
had 
come 
to 
that 
your 
conduct, 
actions, 
omissions contravened various legal instruments and the 
20 
like.  What did you understand the real purpose of this 
letter to be? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Well I have articulated in – I think in 
earlier before we got to this reference that the initial point 
I made to the Audit and Risk Committee was there would 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 15 of 231 
 
be instances where the – where the Audit and Risk 
Committee or any sub-committee of the board may not fully 
understand 
the 
rationale 
or 
the 
reasoning 
behind 
a 
particular decision.   
But it expected that either at the board meeting or 
Audit and Risk Committee meeting to raise the issue with 
executives or raise the issue in between meetings and the 
executives would then respond to issues at hand.   
I registered my – my – not disappointment but being 
taken aback by the fact that there is even this letter the 
10 
board had gone or the Audit and Risk Committee had gone 
to an extent of being able to produce this kind of letter 
almost couple of weeks after it had started or come into 
office.   
And I was saying, look if you have got questions we 
can still answer.  I – I even stated at the end of this as I 
have written in this letter that I have huge difficulties to 
acknowledge receipt of this because I felt it has not been 
thought through.  Are you either then the information that 
the legal counsel sort of after reading this kind of came to 
20 
of saying, look somebody is trying to create a prima facie 
case for you to be suspended.  I had not really – I was not 
reading too much to it.   
I mean I looked at it.  I even laughed with the audit 
– with the members of the Audit and Risk Committee I 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 16 of 231 
 
says, look you have written quite serious allegations but 
which I believe are baseless and we should be able to 
answer them provided we are given an opportunity but I am 
concerned about this letter. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Then on page 660 near the end of the 
letter after various allegations that you had misled the 
Ministers and National Treasury and Nedbank etcetera.  
Then says paragraph 18 at the foot of page 60. 
“Audit 
and 
Risk 
Committee 
intend 
to 
recommend 
to 
the 
board 
that 
you 
be 
10 
suspended with immediate effect pending 
further investigation into the above and 
your 
disciplinary 
hearing 
which 
will 
commence as soon as the investigation is 
completed Audit and Risk Committee will 
further recommend that you be suspended 
with pay and further that your period of your 
suspension 
should 
not 
exceed 
three 
months.” 
Now you already dealt yesterday with the fact that 
20 
your suspension in fact took longer than – than a year 
during which period the disciplinary inquiry had yet to 
commence on the merits, correct? 
MR MHLONTLE:  My suspension took eleven months 
obviously far beyond three months that is covered in the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 17 of 231 
 
letter indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Then paragraph 19 says: 
“You were further notified that you should 
provide the Audit and Risk Committee with 
reasons why the Audit and Risk Committee 
should not recommend to the board for your 
suspension.  Your  reasons should be 
emailed etcetera.” 
Now just stop there.  It appears that from the earlier 
paragraphs of the letter that the Audit and Risk Committee 
10 
had already decided that you had misled the board and the 
Ministers and Nedbank and all the others about whom 
reference is made in the body of the letter.  Do you have 
any comment as to the offer that was now being made to 
you to give the Audit and Risk Committee reasons why they 
should not recommend to the board your suspension? 
MR MHLONTLE:  The response we had to with the Audit 
and Risk Committee was we – was that we think if they 
have issues they should be able to raise those issues in 
the normal course of business.   
20 
Beginning to refer to suspension and beginning to 
impact the employer employee relationship to early in the 
process was – was something that we were not expecting 
and we were expecting to build a relationship with the 
board like we had a relationship with the previous board.  
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 18 of 231 
 
Having a relationship is a business is a relationship – 
constructive 
relationship 
as 
intended 
to 
protect 
the 
business forward.   
So if we come to the point where they were 
intending to recommend to the board for our suspension 
pending an investigation but also at the same time making 
a whole host of allegations obviously something was amiss 
in that.   
Either you got issues which is going to be – you are 
going to have a confirmatory investigation which would not 
10 
take that long or you do not have issues.  But we were in 
this difficult process.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now in your affidavit you refer to 
concerns you raised with the Audit and Risk Committee 
about the process that was being followed compared with 
your normal – the normal practice of discussions between 
different formal meetings.  What does that relate to? 
MR MHLONTLE:  The concern I raised with the Audit 
Committee was the fact that… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry just hold on a moment.   
20 
MR MHLONTLE:  The concern that I had with the Audit and 
Risk Committee was the direction the whole issue was 
about to take and I could sense – and I was cautioning the 
Audit and Risk Committee to say where there are issues 
they are not normally handled in this way.   
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 19 of 231 
 
They would have to – you come in here; you are 
board – we are board members over and above being Audit 
and Risk Committee if you got issues you should be able to 
channel your questions via the CEO, the executives have 
to respond to those questions.   
You would normally have special – even special 
Audit and Risk Committee or special board meetings to 
deal with issues that the board it does not fully appreciate.  
And I – my concern was where this was going which 
eventually went the same – the very direction that I was 
10 
concerned about.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you then or have you since 
understand or have you since understood what exactly was 
– you were being accused in having misled the board or 
having 
misled 
the 
Ministers 
of 
Finance 
and 
Public 
Enterprises, Nedbank and other stakeholders? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Chair there were eleven months in which 
Denel had to demonstrate to me and my colleagues as to 
how they might have misled any party in the process.  And 
as I indicated yesterday there were three interactions 
20 
where it was person to person with myself included was a 
mediation in February; was a preliminary discussion in 
April; there was another preliminary discussion in July 
which is ten months down the line and lastly obviously was 
the interaction relating to [00:25:44].  And I – and we 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 20 of 231 
 
constantly 
stated 
that 
any 
aspect 
relating 
to 
this 
transaction we can answer. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now – now if you look again at page 
661 which bears the name and apparently signature of 
Mpho Kgomongwe someone has written below that 
“He did not sign the acknowledgement of 
the receipt of the letter and he indicated 
that he needs to skip over it – sleep over it 
I beg your pardon – sleep over it and he will 
respond tomorrow at the meeting at 1700 
10 
hours.” 
Now you have mentioned earlier that you were told you had 
24 hours to respond.  If you can look at paragraph 19 it 
specifically says that you invited to attend a board meeting 
or scheduled for 1700 hours that next day the 23 r d 
September wherein you are invited to present your reasons 
why the Audit and Risk Committee should not ask the 
board to suspend you.  So you had – you had about 24 
hours to respond to the Audit and Risk Committee and also 
to make representations to the board itself why you should 
20 
not be suspended.  Is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLE:  That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now is that your handwriting at the 
bottom where it says: 
“He did not sign an acknowledgement of 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 21 of 231 
 
receipt of the letter” 
Or was that somebody else? 
MR MHLONTLE:  I suspect it was Mpho’s handwriting 
Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And is it correct that you would not 
sign to acknowledge receipt of the letter? 
MR MHLONTLE:  I was take – so taken aback by the – this 
letter that I had to reflect and think what does it mean if I 
acknowledge receipt of this.  I thought I would not use the 
word irregular but it was out of the ordinary.  I had 
10 
employer – employee/employer relationship and without 
any prior interaction to that would have indicated any 
misgivings to all of a sudden be given a letter like this.  I 
apologise I declined to sign it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you respond during the Audit and 
Risk Committee meeting on the 22 n d as to whether you felt 
that there was actually anything wrong with the LSSA 
transaction? 
MR MHLONTLE:  At that meeting engagements were verbal 
certainly not minuted but I stated to the Audit and Risk 
20 
Committee that there is nothing wrong with the transaction. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And after the meeting – after you 
were given a copy of this letter that you would not sign for 
did you then respond to the letter? 
MR MHLONTLE:  As – I think I would have covered 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 22 of 231 
 
somewhere in my affidavit. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MHLONTLE:  The point that we wrote a joint letter with 
Mr Saloojee, Ms Africa and myself that we broadly pointed 
out that there was no need for suspension.  Suspension 
often arises under certain circumstances.  We felt that the 
issues at hand could be addressed. We asked that we be 
given more time as much as the board it might have taken 
six weeks to figure out this kind of letter we would need 
more time – more than at least more than the 24 hours to 
10 
frame ...[indistinct] and also, it was quite clear that we 
would have to consult legally for some backing because the 
direction in terms of where this was going, was quite clear. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now what happened on the 23 r d?  Your 
affidavit refers to a meeting that you attended again with the 
Audit and Risk Committee before the board started.  Is that 
correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes, on the 23 rd meeting, there was a 
meeting at 17:00 with the Audit and Risk Committee, which 
we had already an hour or so before that, we had sent our 
20 
broad response and the Audit and Risk Committee was 
pointing out that it is a pity that they gave us an opportunity 
to respond to these allegations.   
 
And because we have not responded, it would proceed 
to engage to the board to make the recommendation that we 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 23 of 231 
 
be suspended.  On that day, later on, the members of the 
board, some of the members of the board, joined the 
meeting.  We were called into the meeting on by one.   
 
We were told that the Audit and Risk Committee... we 
were given an opportunity by Audit and Risk Committee 
which we have not responded and therefore we would be 
suspended.   
 
But interestingly, that there is a document that got 
served in that session that had already or was already 
appointing who would act in my position.   
10 
 
Gave me a little background of the individual and 
already framing who would be acting in the position of the 
CEO highlighting how many years he had been with the 
company, et cetera, et cetera.   
 
And last point is, the fact that the individual who would 
be acting as the CEO was in the building even...  I mean, 
this went on into the night.  We were effectively suspended 
around ten.   
 
The individual was in the building and when he joined us 
at some stage because we were sitting outside the board 
20 
meeting, he stated that... we asked why he was hanging 
around.   
 
He said:  No, he is hanging around because the chair 
had told him that there would be a big announcement.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Who are you referring to there? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 24 of 231 
 
MR MHLONTLO:   The... Zwelakhe.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Zwelakhe? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Zwelakhe...  Mr Zwelakhe Ntshepe.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ntshepe? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And was he then in fact appointed as 
Acting Group Chief Executive Officer when Mr Saloojee was 
then suspended? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And who were you replaced by in an 
10 
acting capacity as Group Chief Financial Officer? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Mr Odwa Mhlwana. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I just want to take you back.  You 
said that the Audit and Risk Committee said it was a pity that 
you have not responded with reasons why you should not be 
suspended.  Have you given reasons why you should not be 
suspended and if not, why not? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Well, we were seeking to extend the, I 
suppose, the grace period we had been provided, which we 
were given 24-hours.  We said:  Look, you certainly...  Look, 
20 
six week in which to frame and put forward all of these 
issues.   
 
We are asking you to afford us five days in which we will 
think through a response.  Certainly, where we sit to the 
extent that the responses are all...   
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 25 of 231 
 
 
Can be a verbal engagement with the board, we are 
quite happy to do so but if we are going to comprehensively 
respond to all the points that you are making, we need a bit 
of time.   
 
And we went out to point out that there is not a need for 
our suspension.  We felt it was prematurely.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So on the 23rd you had this meeting 
with the Audit and Risk Committee.  You referred to that 
being followed by the full board meeting.  Correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   By...  I am not certain that all the 
10 
members of the board joined but certainly the majority of the 
members of the board joined. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But it was a meeting of the board as 
from the Audit and Risk Committee that already met 
separately. 
MR MHLONTLO:   I would sum it to that way. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And were you suspended at the end of 
that meeting? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I would like to take you please in 
20 
the bundle to page 677.  This is the letter from the attorneys, 
Zorina(?) Olele(?) at page 677.  And it appears that Ms Olele 
was acting at your attorney as well as that of Mr Saloojee 
and Ms Africa.   
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 26 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What was the purpose of this letter?  It 
was sent on the 25t h of September, is that right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   It is. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what was the purpose of this 
letter? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The way I read the letter is that by 
enlarge he is asking for a fair and reasonable opportunity... 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, can I take you to paragraph 3 
10 
then?  Is that what ...[intervenes]  
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja, I am actually looking at paragraph 3.  
Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  So they have requested, that is 
yourselves. 
MR MHLONTLO:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   A fair and reasonable opportunity to do 
this, to make representations including a brief extension until 
the 30t h of September 2015.  Also taking into account the 
24t h of September was a public holiday.   
20 
 
And that they are entitled to seek legal advice and be 
represented for the MOI.  And then it refers to the attitude of 
the Audit and Risk Committee.   
 
And then there is a complaint in paragraph 5 about...  
You are having a fundamental problem with the logic and 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 27 of 231 
 
fairness of the attack on their credibility and procedural 
rights. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then it sets out reasons.  And then it 
refers to paragraph 68...  Page 680, paragraph 8.   
“Regrettable and all the circumstances, our clients 
are compelled to come to a conclusion that neither 
the A&R Committee, nor the board members present 
at their suspension have any interest in observing 
procedural fairness or learning the objective facts 
10 
and accepting the principle of innocent until proven 
guilty.” 
 
Did that reflect your opinion at the time? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Precisely.  Thank you.  Ja, it is. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Have you changed your opinion as you 
sit now or is that still your opinion? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Many years since this happened.  I have 
moved on.  It is just a pity I have had to go through this 
process.  And it is behind me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then in paragraph 9, your attorney 
20 
says on your behalf: 
“Going forward in the motivation for suspension, the 
A&R Committee indicates that legal counsel will be 
further engaged to complete the investigation.” 
 
9.1: 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 28 of 231 
 
“Given that the committee and the board clearly 
seeks our client’s dismissal and clearly have already 
drawn their own conclusions and quite apart from 
the untested merits of the matter, concluded there is 
already a breakdown of trust, which our clients 
deny.   
They, too, intend to be legally represented at the 
disciplinary inquiry and welcome the expeditious 
finalisation of the matter.” 
 
I just want you to dwell for a moment on the assertion by 
10 
your attorney that it appear that the Audit and Risk 
Committee and the board had already made up their minds 
that you were guilty and should go or that the relationship of 
trust had already been broken and this was before any 
disciplinary inquiry being started, is that right. 
MR MHLONTLO:   It was. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it is correct that you did, in fact, 
then get legal representation not only through your attorney, 
Ms Olele but has she briefed on your behalf senior counsel, 
Mr Graig White  Pringle.  Is that correct? 
20 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And then she refers in 
paragraph 10 to a letter dated the 23 r d September in which 
already proposed – it referred elsewhere in your affidavit 
Mr Mhlontlo – were you already proposed final and binding 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 29 of 231 
 
arbitration in terms of Section 188(a) of the LRA since they 
are confident that there are no merits to the allegations.   
 
Now just to indicate for the benefit of lay people who 
may not know.  Section 188(a) of the LRA is a process in 
terms of which the CCMA can appoint an independent 
arbitrator to conduct a disciplinary inquiry rather than an 
employer conducting its own internal inquiry.  Is this what 
you were requesting? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And why have you proposed that this 
10 
process 
should 
be 
conducted 
through 
an 
independent 
arbitrator? 
MR MHLONTLO:   This arose because of the way everything 
had unfolded and... kind of gave the impression that there is 
a foregone conclusion somewhere to get rid of us, if one 
takes into account that we were given sort of 24-hours to 
respond, given that our opinion for what we deemed as a 
reasonable time to respond was not accepted.   
 
Given that we were then suspended but just before we 
were suspended, we were given an option to take three 
20 
months package.  It was quite clear that the process, it may 
not as fair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then your attorney continues still in 
paragraph 10: 
“Such a process will also test the bone fides of the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 30 of 231 
 
charges and the board’s willingness to expedite the 
matter.   
It is not appropriate to take a further 90-days to 
investigate.  
We request that you consent to the following.” 
 
And then your attorney makes a request for example that 
a final charge sheet be send to you by no later than the 
2n d of October.  And then there is a request for appropriate 
presentation time.   
 
I think four requests that independent senior counsel be 
10 
– who is an expert in employment matters be appointed a 
chair.  And then there is reference to Section 188(a) again.  
Was the investigation by Denel, was it in fact completed 
within the 90-days? 
[Speaker is not clear] 
MR MHLONTLO:   I am not certain.  All we are aware of what 
happened was, the charge – the updated charge sheet was 
sent to us on the 18t h of December.  Whether that was 
informed by investigation or not, I am uncertain.   
 
But also as I alluded to yesterday.  The meeting of the 
20 
22n d of April 2016, sort of in the bundle included a letter that 
suggested that by the 17t h, at least, the investigation was not 
concluded and that investigation had been undertaken by 
Dentons law firm.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you were, in fact, contacted by 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 31 of 231 
 
Dentons, you say in your affidavit, during the course of their 
investigation.  Is that correct? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is correct. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Right.  Now if I can ask you to turn to 
page 686?  This is a further letter from your attorney, 
Ms Olele dated the 1 s t of October. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 686? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And I am not going to through all of the 
10 
contents.  It can be read with its own contents.  It indicates 
inter alia that you challenge the lawfulness and fairness and 
the necessity of a suspension.  Is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it also indicated that your 
procedural rights have been violated.  Is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it also asks for a response to the 
earlier letter of the 25t h of September that we have just 
looked at earlier in some detail of which there had not yet 
20 
been a response.  Did you cooperate with the Dentons’ 
investigative team? 
MR MHLONTLO:   We cooperated fully. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I would like you please to take – I 
think you go to page 663 earlier in the bundle.  That appears 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 32 of 231 
 
to be a letter received on the 18 t h of December 2015 and 
apparently signed by Mr Mantsha who, at that stage, was the 
chairperson of Denel.  If you see on page 668, his name is 
typed in and what appears to be a signature, appears.  Have 
you received this letter? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes.  Yes, we did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And is this effectively a charge sheet? 
MR MHLONTLO:   It is effectively a charge sheet, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think I did not hear the page correctly 
10 
Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It starts at page 663. 
CHAIRPERSON:   663? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the signature appears on page 
668. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you...  Were there any 
explanation given to you that despite your attorney’s request 
20 
that the charges be finalised within a brief period or the 
investigation be finalised within a brief period, why only 
three months later, approximately, two-and-a-half months 
later on the 18 t h of December were you given this charge 
sheet? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 33 of 231 
 
MR MHLONTLO:   There was no explanation.  In fact, it was 
almost close to three months, given that we were suspended 
on the 23r d, almost like three days before or four days before 
the – it is three months, ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you have referred in your affidavit 
and you have given evidence yesterday also about requests 
for documents from Denel.  What documents were you or 
your legal team requesting from Denel for purposes of 
preparing for the disciplinary inquiry? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The normal process would be a bundle of 
10 
evidence 
comprising 
of 
this 
letter 
cross-referenced 
to 
various documents that the employer is relying on to make 
their 
case 
and 
which 
is 
a 
standard 
in 
the 
sort 
of 
employer/employee 
sort 
of 
disputes 
or 
disciplinary 
processes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If you look at page 667, paragraph 4.  
It indicates that: 
“Denel views the allegations very seriously and 
because they are so serious, if you are to be found 
guilty at the disciplinary inquiry, Denel will request 
20 
that a strong action be taken against you which may 
include dismissal.”   
 
So you were aware, were you Mr Mhlontlo, that this was 
of a serious nature and could lead to your dismissal? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes, I was. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 34 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I just ask?  Apart from your 
dismissal, if you were found guilty of the charges that you 
had mislead the board and you had mislead two ministers of 
the National Cabinet and you had mislead National Treasury 
and other entities, if you had been found guilty of those 
offences, apart from justifying your dismissal from Denel, 
would that have had any consequences for your future? 
MR MHLONTLO:   As I stated yesterday.  I am a CA who for 
the longest of time, I was in practise as an accountant.  I am 
assuming the legal processes, maybe, do not really end up 
10 
anywhere, at the very least, I would lose my CA sort of 
membership and it would impact my career.   
 
So it was important and we insisted along all the way 
that Denel must prove its case.  It was critical and important 
for us to go through the process.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you mentioned yesterday also that 
what then happened was that instead of the disciplinary 
process starting at an early stage, there was a mediation 
process.  Correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   That is correct.  There was a mediation 
20 
process on the 8t h of February. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I take you to page 691, please? 
MR MHLONTLO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   This is a document headed:  Points to 
be 
raised 
by 
executives 
during 
the 
mediation 
of 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 35 of 231 
 
8 February 2016.  Who is – is this a document that you and 
your colleagues, Mr Saloojee and Ms Africa prepared? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes, correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what was the purpose of this 
document? 
MR MHLONTLO:   It was sort of a document that was guiding 
us in terms of what points we wanted to put across to the 
mediator which we understood the mediator would be 
engaging us and the representatives of the board  So these 
were the points that we went through.   
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now...  But did you actually table this 
at the mediation? 
MR MHLONTLO:   We did not table it but we read this at the 
mediation.. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, just speak up a bit please. 
MR MHLONTLO:   We read. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Oh, you read it out? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja, we read it out ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the mediation was chaired by 
outside senior counsel, is that right? 
20 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now I would like to...  I am not 
going to go through the detail but on page 694, you set out a 
conclusion and your paragraph 20 reads: 
“From our perspective, the issues before us are, 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 36 of 231 
 
therefore, not about what we extensively had or had 
not done but rather what the intention and actions of 
this new board have been.” 
 
What do you mean by that?  Denel have raised what 
appears to be serious allegations of misconduct including 
effectively misrepresenting things to the board and to the 
ministers and National Treasury and the like.  These were 
serious allegations.   
 
Why were you saying this?  This does not really seem to 
actually have to deal with what we extensively have or have 
10 
not done but rather the intention and action of the new 
board.  What did you mean by that? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The concern that we had was, the new 
board, that it come in.  The new board that in being in office 
roughly six weeks or so has summarised what we had 
presented to them as management in the normal course into 
what would term it maybe more prima facie case.  
 
And it was very clear and communicated to us all the 
way that the intent is that we just exist(?) the business.  On 
day one of the meeting which was more of a coordinating 
20 
because that intend was made very clear.   
 
At the meeting of, around the 19t h of January, where 
A&R met with the attorney of the employer and met with 
Advocate Kassim who was to chair our disciplinary and 
purgatory process, a representative of the employer made it 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 37 of 231 
 
very clear that the outcome they are wishing to achieve is 
that we must exist.   
 
So it was quite clear.  So we – that point talks to how 
the process had happened and what we were reading to the 
intend of the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now the clear intent on the part of the 
board that you should be exit, that was stated before the 
disciplinary inquiry had been started, let alone finish.  Is that 
right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Before there was even suspension itself, 
10 
the fact that we had an option to accept – resign after(?) 
three months, was made clear in the interactions between 
our attorneys and the attorneys of the employer, that point 
was made clear.  So hence we made this particular point.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you believe...  Was your impression 
and believe from how you were treated, that the board was 
genuinely concerned that you had committed misconduct by 
misleading the board or are you suggesting that there were 
some other hidden motive? 
MR MHLONTLO:   In our view, is that charges were written.  
20 
It did not really matter whether there was substance behind 
those charges or not, to achieve a specific outcome.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was there substance to the charges 
Mr Mhlontlo? 
MR MHLONTLO:   We will deal with them in the – in my 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 38 of 231 
 
affidavit and we continue to maintain there is no basis for 
the charges.  There was no basis that then to continue 
...[indistinct]  
[Speaker not clear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is then in your statement for purposes 
of the mediation at page 694.  You deal in paragraph 21 with 
your desire that the new shareholder...  Sorry, that: 
“The 
shareholder, 
the 
new 
Minister 
of 
Public 
Enterprises, be transparent and accountable for 
what has happened in Denel after her appointment 
10 
of the new board”.   
 
Which minister was that? 
MR MHLONTLO:   It Minister Lynne Brown. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And why were you making this point? 
MR MHLONTLO:   There had been a press coverage before 
that, first time, where the minister had gone to press and 
said she had not been briefed as to our suspension.  So 
hence were making this particular point.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then you say in paragraphs 22 and 23: 
“We have a clear and unequivocal view that we were 
20 
unfairly suspended.   
We want in no uncertain terms to be reinstated and 
for a public apology to be made that acknowledges 
our innocence, our integrity and our commitment to 
Denel. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 39 of 231 
 
We are ready and prepared to pursue the process to 
its logical conclusion. 
We 
want 
to 
reiterate 
that 
we 
are 
committed 
employees of Denel. 
We have always conducted ourselves with integrity 
and in the best interest of Denel, its employees, 
SANDF and our country.” 
 
When you said here Mr Mhlontlo that we are ready and 
prepared to pursue the process to its logical conclusion.  
What were you meaning there?  Is that the disciplinary 
10 
process? 
MR MHLONTLO:   In the employer/employee disputes or 
issues.  The starting point is a disciplinary process.  So in 
our view, is that we were going to go through a disciplinary 
process.  The mediation was one aspect of it.  In the event 
that mediation is not successful, obviously, we must go into 
a disciplinary.   
 
But we went into mediation with one clear outcome we 
would to achieve – wanted to achieve.  It was to mediate so 
that we can go back to work.  If it is not mediated and it is 
20 
not successful, then we would go to disciplinary where we 
were happy to subject ourselves to the process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now your affidavit then deals – I am 
not going to go into detail Chair – but your affidavit deals 
with the process that followed.  That mediation session – the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 40 of 231 
 
mediation did not produce any outcome in the sense of any 
agreement or any resolutions.  Is that right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what followed then was a series of 
correspondence that is referred to in your affidavit dealing 
with repeated requests for documents and the convening of 
the disciplinary hearing.   
“Ultimately, 
I 
understand 
that 
the 
disciplinary 
hearing was to be chaired by Mr Terraria Rector 
Mafukitze(?).” 
10 
 
Is that right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then, if I can take you to page 
711.  That is ruling from the chair, correct? 
MR 
MHLONTLO: 
 
 
[speaker 
not 
clear 
– 
away 
from 
microphone] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In fact, his ruling indicates that it is 
dated the 12t h of July.  Sorry, it is dated the 13t h of July but 
relates to a hearing on the 12t h of July.  But it also indicates 
in paragraph 1 at page 711 that: 
20 
“There was initial hearing on the 22n d of April which 
dealt with a preliminary issue which was argued by 
both sides counsel.” 
 
Is that right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 41 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it related to the production of 
documents requested by you from the employer.  Correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So as at April 2016, you or your 
attorneys were still asking for documents from Denel. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Am I correct in understanding that you 
were now facing a disciplinary hearing separate from that 
from Mr Saloojee and Ms Africa? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And then the chairperson says 
in paragraph 1 to 3.  He says that he made the following 
ruling after the hearing of the 22 nd of April at the foot of the 
page: 
“Within seven business days of this ruling the 
employer shall produce copies of the following 
documents.” 
 
And then he sets out the various documents that have to 
be provided which included reference to the Dentons report.  
In relation to that in paragraph 14, he made the following 
20 
ruling. 
“Insofar 
as 
the 
Dentons 
report 
is 
concerned, 
Mr Bana...” 
 
Is that senior counsel for Denel who was involved in the 
disciplinary hearing? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 42 of 231 
 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
“...he stated on record that the report was not the 
basis of the charges and therefore was irrelevant.” 
 
He further stated that: 
“The report was not yet ready.  The employee was 
[noise interference] by Dentons and gave whatever 
information he had to give.   
I do not think that the report’s relevance has been 
proven.  It is speculative that it would service 
10 
evidence of the employee’s innocence.   
The employer can only be ordered to make available 
such documents as are in its possession.” 
So he ruled that the employer should provide some 
documents that you have requested but the Dentons’ report 
he was not satisfied that it needed to be provided, is that 
correct?   
MR MHLONTLO:   It is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At this stage of this ruling, Mr Mhlontlo, 
you had not come into possession of the letter from the 
20 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
board 
to 
the 
company 
secretary 
instructing her to get Dentons to substantiate the charges, 
that had not happened yet? 
MR MHLONTLO:   That had not happened as yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Yes, Mr Kennedy? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 43 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now these documents that were 
ordered to be produced by the employer, did they get 
supplied to you? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The reason why the session on the 18 
July could not really got far because those documents were 
not in place, there were reams and reams of some 
documents but they were not coherent, I mean they did not 
make sense, they were not part of pulling the file together 
to substantiate the charges.  So on the 22 n d, given that 
those documents had been requested way back were not in 
10 
place on the 22 n d  - were not in place by the 18 July. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now if I can take you to page 715, 
discussion in paragraph 23 about whether the hearing 
could proceed and you reliance on an alleged right to be 
consulted before the dates are set.  You refer to the fact 
that your counsel was available on particular dates but the 
attorney was unavailable on some dates, etcetera.  So was 
there in fact an argument about whether the hearing should 
proceed on the merits of the disciplinary charges? 
MR MHLONTLO:   There was no – I mean, on our side, we 
20 
always wanted the disciplinary to take place timeously.  We 
always insisted that before the process itself got to be a 
bundle of documents so that we can prepare ourselves and 
certainly the first date that was set was that of 25 January 
2016.   
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 44 of 231 
 
The session could not sit because there were no 
documents provided, there was no file and because there 
were no documents there were no files.  In the discussion 
between the attorneys was that maybe – it just maybe find 
a mediation which could be an easier process and went 
through a mediation.  That did not yield anything.  They 
now changed their strategy and wanted to question me on 
the validity of my contract sometime in March and being 
pointed out that that is not their competency, then moved 
into the 22 July.     
10 
So this point about agreeing dates, it is important 
because this thing was just not coming to an end and the 
professionals that were assisting me, they had their own 
diaries to manage. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, I have noticed that the copies 
that the witness has attached to his affidavit of this ruling 
document only – if you looked at the typed page numbers 
at the foot of the page, it comes from 1 to 3, 3 to 5, 
etcetera, it appears that the evenly numbered pages have 
been missed in the photocopying process.  Maybe after 
20 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I see there is no page turn. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, in fact it looks like all of the 
even numbered pages are missing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 45 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If we can undertake with the 
assistance of the witness or from Denel or their attorneys 
to obtain a complete copy and then have a supplementary 
affidavit signed by Mr Mhlontlo just to correct that.  If that 
can be done? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine.  That should be 
done. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think your team must just check 
whether there are any other documents which suffer from 
10 
the same defects. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that they can be identified and 
corrected as well. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That will be done, Chair.  Thank you.  
Mr Mhlontlo, the end of the ruling at page 719 sets out the 
decision of Makoeketsi(?) the Chairperson.  His ruling on 
the Denton report  remained unchanged, the hearing was 
set down then for – that was set down for the original 
dates in July was postponed.  He refers to the parties 
20 
being expected to try and agree fresh hearing dates for the 
disciplinary hearing and if there could not be agreement 
the employer could then set down the date in consultation 
with the Chair to ensure his availability and then it refers 
to you providing the bundle of your documents as well. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 46 of 231 
 
 
Now ultimately the disciplinary hearing, as you told 
the Chair yesterday, still did not take place ever, is that 
right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The disciplinary as a proper disciplinary 
never took place.  On the 18 t h we still argued about 
documents, we still argued about bundle of documents. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MHLONTLO:   The argument about the point that there 
is nowhere where the employer has proven guilt and the 
meeting was then postponed to the 3 August 2016 which 
10 
was the date of the local government elections and it never 
– I suppose I would struggled to vote if I had a disciplinary 
on that day but never got there. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now your affidavit refers to your 
having received some documents at the hearing in April 
2015 when Denel had given a lever arch file with some 
documents which included a particular document that you 
referred to and then attached to your affidavit at page 721.  
Now this is a letter – you have 721?   
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   this is a letter it appears from Mr 
Mantsha, 
the 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
board, 
on 
the 
17 
December 2015 addressed to Ms Legoabe, the acting 
company secretary. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 47 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the Chairperson requests her – 
was she the person who replaced in an acting capacity Ms 
Afrika? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And he requests her in paragraph 1 
to: 
“Furnish us with a draft charge sheet so that we can 
settle as we need to have the charges served up 
the suspended employees before close of business 
tomorrow the 18 December.” 
10 
We have already seen the charge sheet that was in fact 
served on you on the 18 December, correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Then he says in paragraph 2: 
And further request you to instruct our lawyers to 
draft 
a 
settlement 
proposal 
of 
three 
months 
payment in full and final to the three suspended 
employees. 
The 
letter 
for 
settlement 
must 
be 
delivered tomorrow with the charge sheet and 
further, with a letter informing them that their 
20 
suspension is extended until the finalisation of the 
hearing.” 
Now you have mentioned in your affidavit that when you 
picked up this letter that appeared in documents provided 
by management’s representatives in April you found it 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 48 of 231 
 
significant that there was mention not only of the charge 
sheet but also the settlement proposal.  What significance 
do you attach to that fact, Mr Mhlontlo? 
MR MHLONTLO:   It is always a little bit of a mystery that 
you write charges that are so big and have serious 
ramifications and at the same time you put a caveat that 
says, you know, we are quite keen to settle.  That is one 
point.  But this letter, rightly or wrongly, the paragraph 4 of 
this letter will read – maybe more – fairly obvious  maybe a 
hidden meaning because that particular paragraph, in our 
10 
reading, it means that there was an element of eagerness 
to have the process and that report reading in a certain 
way. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If we can read into the record 
paragraph 4 says to the company secretary: 
“You are further requested to inform Dentons that 
their report is not accepted and request them to 
provide us with a report within 30 days and kindly 
direct them to provide information to support the 
charges.  Lastly, may you recall the circulated 
20 
Dentons’ report and make sure it is not circulated.” 
Did you ever see the Dentons’ report that he has referred 
to? 
MR MHLONTLO:   We never saw it.  We were told it is 
never ready until the very end of a long process. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 49 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what did you see ultimately?  
Was that the original Dentons’ report that appears to have 
been retracted and had to be rewritten? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Our reading of the letter is that there 
was a version of a Dentons’ report that was not to the 
satisfaction or was not in line with what the board had 
anticipated it would be and they were asking for it to be 
retracted, where also the line that says: 
“Kindly direct them to provide information to support 
the charges.” 
10 
It sounds a little bit suggesting that it was a little bit of 
massaging in terms of what direction they should take in 
terms of preparing the report and then again, it referred to 
the speculation that we were being sort of elbowed out. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mhlontlo, I want to just read out a 
sentence from your affidavit.  You do not need to go to it 
but for the Chair ’s purposes, if you need it, Chair, it is at 
page 592, paragraph 5.28.  And you then comment on the 
settlement proposal that the Chairperson has asked the 
company secretary to prepare, page 592. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said 592? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, Chair. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Right. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Page  592 paragraph 5.28.  You say: 
“The Chairperson goes on to require the Acting 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 50 of 231 
 
Company Secretary to instruct our lawyers to draft 
a settlement proposal of three months payment in 
full and final settlement to the three suspended 
employees.” 
Of course we know from your evidence yesterday that 
ultimately they offered and you accepted 24 months’ salary 
plus an incentive bonus in addition to the fact that you had 
been on suspension for about a year.  What I am interested 
in is your next statement, Mr Mhlontlo: 
“What is quite remarkable about this is that the 
10 
charges against us were stated in serious terms 
including 
reference 
to 
dishonesty 
and 
gross 
negligence, 
then 
why 
Denel 
would 
in 
those 
circumstances seek to settle the matter is beyond 
comprehension.” 
Now the Chairperson has already asked you to an extent 
about this aspect.  I would just like you to comment 
particularly about why you were driven to say this in your 
affidavit? 
MR MHLONTLO:   As I really have pointed out is that we 
20 
will sit with this particular history, sit with quite – charges 
that were alleged that we had done and then every time the 
charges our laid out there was always one caveat that says 
we are quite happy to give you some rands and cents so 
that you disappear.  So if these charges were ever real, 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 51 of 231 
 
why was that the case?  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would this be a convenient time? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Would this be a convenient time, 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take the tea adjournment.  We 
will resume at half past eleven.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Mhlontlo 
we can wrap up this section of your evidence if you can 
turn to page 593, your affidavit then refers to the 
disciplinary hearing that was held on the 18 t h of July but 
there again it dealt with preliminary issues concerning 
documents etcetera, is that right?  
MR MHLONTLO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you say in 532 that Denel 
20 
was still not ready to prosecute you on the charges and so 
then the matter was postponed again to the 3 r d of August. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you refer in 534 to what you 
mentioned yesterday in evidence before the chair, that you 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 52 of 231 
 
were contacted by the acting CFO, the Groups CFO, the 
person who was acting in your position, Odwa Mhlwana 
who said he had a mandate and you, ultimately, in the 
lunchtime 
meeting, 
discussed 
the 
settlement 
that 
he 
proposed and you ultimately, settled.  May I ask, did he 
come with the 24 months plus the incentive bonus as his 
mandate or did you have negotiation back and forth where 
he started, for example, at six months and you pushed him 
up to 24 months? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The first meeting at the Baron in 
10 
Woodmead, he indicated that he had a mandate, he 
ascertained the period which was left or wanted to clarify 
the period that was left within my contract and he asked to 
what 
extent 
I’d 
be 
amenable 
if 
he’s 
seeking 
some 
secondment within the context of the number of months 
that were still left, roughly, at that time was about 30 
months whereas, I think at some stage, what was left in my 
contact, obviously was far longer than that and because of 
the period I had been at home the period, obviously had 
reduced and I indicated my amenability to engage and to 
20 
find a solution but whatever Denel had presented to me, up 
until that point, was not acceptable. Whether we’re talking 
about three months, in some sessions – three months 
features 
a 
lot 
in 
these 
documents 
that 
there 
were 
indications that the months could be eight at some point, it 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 53 of 231 
 
became clear it could be 13 which I had stated to Denel 
that, that was not acceptable. So, he then went away, a 
week later or so, he called me, we met at Midrand and at 
that stage that’s where we had an…[indistinct 3.30] that 
the 24 months would be okay, I would forego, roughly, six 
months or so and he said he would then engage on that 
with the principals and a few days – maybe a day or so 
later he gave me a call to say, okay we can proceed on the 
basis in which we had discussed that got reduced into the 
settlement agreement. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, if I may now turn to deal with 
other issues and specifically those raised in the initial 
affidavit, in fact it’s a statement that you find from page 
568.  Chair there are a number of sections where the 
witness has indicated, in his affidavit, that he had little, if 
any involvement in anything, so that obviously rises from 
questions raised by the investigators.  Just for the sake of 
completeness I’ll touch on the ones that may be of some 
interest but very, very briefly if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that’s fine. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just before we get into the meat of 
the specific transactions, Mr Mhlontlo, you set out your 
professional background from page 569 which you touched 
on yesterday but I just want to fill in a couple of gaps.  You 
have a BComm in Accounting Degree and then an Honours 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 54 of 231 
 
in Accounting, is that right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   That’s correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you joined the firm EY, it 
used to be known as Ernest & Young and you became – 
you got accredited as a Chartered Accountant in 2001 and, 
is it correct, you were a partner, you say in 2006, in one of 
the big four accounting firms, is that EY, did you obtain 
partnership status in that firm? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you then joined Denel in October 
10 
2008 as Group Financial Director and you became a 
member of the Denel main Board of Directors. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Until the time of your resignation.  
Now, you then deal, in paragraph three with the process 
followed by DLS, that’s the Denel entity, when awarding 
the 
…[indistinct 
5.44] 
contract 
to 
LMT. 
Now, 
you’ve 
corrected, in paragraph 3.4 already yesterday, the date 
from April 2009 to April 2010.  As I understand it you had 
no real involvement in the award of this contract by DLS to 
20 
LMT, is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   That is indeed correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Now, you were then 
asked about – to comment on the procedures that Denel 
followed in relation to the advance payment and in 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 55 of 231 
 
particular R12.7million that was advanced to LMT.  You’ve 
mentioned in your affidavit that it’s normal practice to 
make advance payments in some circumstances in the 
defence industry, to suppliers.  As I understand it,  you 
were not involved in the actual process of approving any 
advance payments to LMT, is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   There is one element that we’ll deal with 
that talks to that email of April 2010 but in terms of 
advance payments of any kind, certainly, I was not involved 
in. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, you mention in paragraph 4.4 
that you attended a meeting where the advance to LMT was 
mentioned but there were discussions that this fell within 
DLS Management ambit. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, what I’m interested in, is your 
paragraph 4.5, the foot of page 572.  I understood the 
advance payment of R12.7million by DLS Management, 
supported by the Board was to start production, which is a 
normal practice in the Defence industry.  The forensic 
20 
investigators have, however,  presented evidence that 
contradicts this understanding presented to me an email 
correspondence between DLS Officials and Managers of 
LMT suggesting that the advanced payment was made by 
DLS, mainly to assist LMT alleviate financial problems that 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 56 of 231 
 
were faced by the company at the time.  Then DLS 
Management will need to account for the contradiction.  
The Chair has already heard evidence in relation to this 
advance payment to the extent that the evidence indicates 
that, in fact, this was not a normal course advance 
payment to a supplier, in the normal course but in fact, was 
to assist LMT in its financial difficulties.  From your 
perspective, as the, at one stage, the Group CFO, can you 
comment on whether that was acceptable from a Group 
financing point of view? 
10 
MR MHLONTLO:   If we go back to 4.4 it makes reference 
to a meeting that took place in April 2010, it further points 
out that there was a discussion which I then followed that 
by email.  Yesterday as Mr Piet Knoetze was addressing 
you, Chair, this email was covered in detail where I 
expressed the concern that, if you are to order this turret 
hull from LMT but in the same vain you are stating that 
LMT is in financial difficulties it prevents a risk to the 
Group, tread carefully, considering that this is a public 
institution and if you really feel, within yourself that you 
20 
really have to do it, make sure that guarantees are in place 
so that, in the event that LMT has any financial difficulties 
as is unable to operate, they are able to extract the value 
or the assets or recover the money.  I never pre-empted 
that we would have this hearing today but the level of 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 57 of 231 
 
seriousness that I took, that advance payment, it shows 
that, that there was a, sort of, care on my side over the 
resources that we were given an opportunity to be a 
custodian of at the time and that position – and Mr Knoetze 
goes on to say, a month later, I might have changed my 
mind without providing any evidence that substantiates that 
position.  Even if we have to go to the minutes of that 
meeting, certainly the questions I had posed was, to what 
extent they have started to implement my email and there 
were certain responses but there is nowhere, where I 
10 
communicate that I was miraculously satisfied that they 
had done all the things they needed to.  Given the quantum 
involved, which is R12.7million, it was their responsibility, 
they have to answer from here, whether they put into place 
all the things that I thought that were bare minimum that 
we required. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, you then proceed, from page 
573 to deal with your response to questions about the 
procedures followed when Denel was acquiring LMT and 
how Mamotsi ended up being a BEE partner.  Were you 
20 
involved in the transactions that led to the acquisition of 
LMT? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Before, Chair, I respond to this question 
there’s another aspect that’s linked to that R12.7million.  
The R12.7million, as per my email was an advance 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 58 of 231 
 
payment towards a product that was to be – that was 
bought from LMT.  The evidence yesterday, indicates that, 
even though it started that way, it then changed form into 
something else.  I was not party, I cannot recollect, I can’t 
remember 
being 
party 
to 
something 
that 
I 
was 
so 
concerned with and to the extent that I documented it in 
that fashion when it changed form to be, that of financial 
assistance.  If it’s proven at some point that I was party to 
it, I would have erred, I would have made a mistake 
because Denel is not a bank to advance monies in order 
10 
for some other companies to escape…[indistinct 13.04]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now, at page 574, paragraph 5.6 you 
refer, again, to the advance payment of LMT which 
reflected as an asset in the Denel group amounting to 
R12.7million and was converted to equity, sometime in 
2013 alongside Mamotsi’s loan to the LMT Business.  
Conversion had a neutral financial impact to the business 
as advance payment asset was merely converted to an 
investment asset in the books of Denel.  Are you saying 
there, that you feel,  from what you’ve been able to pick up 
20 
from 
information, that 
the 
R12.7million 
was 
probably 
accounted for as the so-called advance payment to LMT? 
MR MHLONTLO:   From an accounting view point when 
that money left the Group as an advance payment is 
reflected as an asset it’s not expense. It’s reflected – 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 59 of 231 
 
here’s a value of something that we hold.  A couple of – 
maybe two years or two and a half later the proposal that, 
that amount must now be converted to equity it simply 
changes the form. Instead of being described as stock or 
work in progress, now it’s described as an investment in 
LMT.  There is no loss in the company there is no loss in 
the fiscus. We had the issue that is presented to me by 
investigators 
is, 
there 
are 
underlying 
agreements 
or 
reasons other than what was presented to me and that in 
itself is a problem. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is there anything you want to add  in 
relation to the process followed in terms of which Denel 
purchased 
the 
majority 
shareholding 
of 
LMT? 
 
Any 
comment as to whether it was regular or irregular in your 
view? 
MR MHLONTLO:   There was a genuine – at least based on 
the facts that were presented and would be the essential 
message within the PFMA application that there was a 
capability that resulted – resided within LMT that was 
required by Denel. If you go back to Mr Mkhwanazi’s 
20 
testimony yesterday, he also stated that even way back in 
2002 there was a view that there’s capability sitting in 
Denel, LMT and I think there was another third company, 
there was a presentation by DLS, that here’s a company 
that has a capability that complements our capability and if 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 60 of 231 
 
it were to – if a position that has been, sort of, put out 
there that Denel could take this company at zero cost and 
it would enhance its ability to mitigate any risk that are 
likely to be there on …[indistinct 16.31].  So, that 
acquisition, as a process, my concern as a CFO at the 
time, was that, if you bring onboard a company with 
financial difficulties, sometimes there are other issues and 
reputationally, there could be other liabilities that are not 
as clear, perhaps what we should be doing ,we should be 
doing, sort of, an asset…[indistinct 17.01] of sorts and you 
10 
could look at taking the employees and buying the plant 
that you require for the purpose.  Of course that was not 
the view that won the day and as a part of that EXCO I 
align with what prevailed at the end. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now of course, you ultimately, 
resigned some years ago from Denel in circumstances 
you’ve described to the Chair. By the time that you left as 
Group Chief Financial Officer, did you have a view and an 
understanding of whether the LMT acquisition was good or 
bad for the Denel Group, particularly from a financial 
20 
perspective? 
MR MHLONTLO:   At the time it wasn’t so clear, they had 
secured a huge order from overseas and they had received 
an advance payment, it seemed as if the future of the 
business would go in the direction that had been presented 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 61 of 231 
 
out of appraising and motivating for it.  It had some 
challenges in the short-term though. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the process in which the 
investigators have put certain things to you and asked to 
comment on processes and so forth, do you have any 
different view now as to whether LMT was a good thing or 
a bad thing from a Denel point of view, financially? 
MR MHLONTLO:   It probably wasn’t a good decision, there 
were certain assumptions that were made and one of the 
assumptions was that, Denel’s order book, at the time, was 
10 
growing.  LMT’s order book had a history of growing but 
had started declining, they had the capability they were not 
a big business.  Even our growth, as a company, they 
would then compliment what we were doing, they would 
become sub-contractors to a number of our programmes.  If 
you now, look at it, where Denel is at currently where the 
order book is dwindling and it certainly hasn’t worked out 
as the way it was envisaged. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you, I’d like to move 
away from the LMT acquisition and the advance payment, 
20 
Chair, if I may refer the witness to his second statement 
which is, in fact, an affidavit on page 576, you will turn to 
that please, Mr Mhlontlo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that’s fine.  Before you do so, I 
just want to ask this question because I don’t want to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 62 of 231 
 
forget it.  At the time of your suspension, are you able to 
tell me what Denel’s financial situation looked like? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes, Chair, I’ll answer just now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’ll be happy if you can tell me that 
because we hear what Denel’s situation is now and I heard 
evidence from Ms Van Rensburg who was the Chairperson 
of the Board that was before the Board that came in, in 
2015 before the Board that was Chaired by Mr Mantsha, my 
recollection is that she said, at that time when her Board, 
it’s term ended, when it’s term ended, they had a plan to 
10 
take Denel to higher heights and everything was looking 
very good and so on and so on but you might be able to 
give me your own understanding of what Denel’s situation 
was when – at the time you were suspended. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, Denel, in the financial year ended 
March 2014 posted revenue at R4.5billion with a operating 
profit of R282million, that is 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s the 2013/2014 financial year? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MHLONTLO:   If we look at year 2015/2014 they posted 
a R399million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was going higher. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes, then in 2016 they posted the 
number of R605million.  This was a company that had a 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 63 of 231 
 
history of significantly underperforming.  Came 1992 - 
…[indistinct 22.27] in 1992 had a captive market which was 
the South African Government and with its own projects 
and programmes and the industry survived at the back of 
that.  After 1992, cold war, no-one is fighting with no-one 
then the business really struggles a lot and it – and a 
number of CEO’s were appointed, a number of general 
strategies were put together and those strategies evolved 
from 
being 
a 
decentralised 
business 
into 
centralised 
business, evolved from introducing a …[indistinct 23.16] to 
10 
be 
100% 
owned 
businesses 
in 
different 
fields, 
it’s…[indistinct 23.21] it had businesses even in the – that 
was producing soya beans and breakfast cereals and did 
some plastic moulding, it was in IT, it was in everything.  
They went through the process of getting rid of those 
businesses streamlining themselves in certain strategic 
businesses bring onboard equity partners and it – there 
were, retrenchments, obviously part of the game to ensure 
a profitable enterprise.  We’re beginning to see those 
results coming through, the cash at the bank was becoming 
20 
slightly bigger, we’re enjoying a sound and a very strong 
relationship with financial institutions.  Every year we’d go 
and meet no less than 20 financial institutions that were 
supporting this company, but if I then, look at the numbers 
beyond that, if I look at 2017 it’s more like a break-even, if 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 64 of 231 
 
I look at the year 2018 there’s a loss of about a billion, if I 
look at…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2018, a loss of about? 
MR MHLONTLO:   2018 a loss of about a billion and then if 
I look at 2019 the loss of close to R2billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, from 2017/2018 financial year it 
started going down, okay, thank you, Mr Kennedy?  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it looks like once – it looks like when 
it started going down it went down quite sharply. 
10 
MR MHLONTLO:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair.  May I then ask the 
witness to now refer to page 577, this is in your second 
statement or affidavit, Mr Mhlontlo.  Now, this deals with 
the award of the contract to VR Laser for platform hulls. 
Now you’ve set out in some detail what was initially 
proposed to you which was that there should be an award 
to VR Laser and it appears that, initially, you had doubts 
about that, could you tell the Chairperson how this came 
20 
about, how you became aware that this was the intention 
and what your attitude was? 
MR MHLONTLO:   In, around June, Maybe July the CEO of 
DLS, 
Denel 
Lan 
System 
brought 
a 
memorandum 
…[intervenes]. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 65 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that Mr Burger? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Mr Burger, brought a memorandum in 
which he – the memorandum summarises a process that 
they had followed to put out the hull tender and it spelt out 
that three companies had tendered for that which is LMT, 
DCD 
and 
lastly 
VR 
Laser. 
 
The 
memo 
criticises, 
extensively, the quality and capability of LMT, appraises 
the quality of VR Laser and the numbers were tabulated in 
there that VR Laser is offering two hundred and sixty, or 
there about million, the lowest tender, I think, was about 
10 
one sixty one or there about from LMT and in between was 
the DCD and the recommendation was, that they wished to 
place the order with VR Laser. I rejected that strongly, 
there’s no – no matter to what extent, technically, and the 
quality being good, it cannot be acceptable, in my view, 
where the price difference between the second, at least, 
was like something between R80million and R100million, 
almost and I opposed that, I rejected that.  It further – that 
position was seconded or supported by the Group COO, Mr 
Jan Wessels who also was on the same page as me on 
20 
that, because, at that point we became privy to that 
process and LMT being an internal Group company, we 
specifically requested that there be a meeting between 
ourselves, which is Mr Jan Wessels, myself, Mr Burger and 
Mr Nel, even though we had no intention of saying, you 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 66 of 231 
 
know, this is not about to be awarded to you or not 
because they had raised a number of technical concerns 
we wanted to understand, you know, what are – are there, 
in reality, technical issues and also if there are, to what 
extent those can be mitigated.  Whether it would mean that 
DLS – how DLS can support the process so that the 
technical issues could fail …[indistinct 29.25].  My concern 
from a finance standpoint is that if you award the business 
internally, you are depriving the Group – the money 
because it could involve the money within.  The debate in 
10 
their – there was a very strong emphasis by DLS that 
technical issues are so material that they would – it would 
risk the entire Hoefyster project if eventually it would be 
placed within LMT.  They went on to show a letter from UM 
about the work that LMT had done and earlier had issues.  
So it became a big issue.  There were a number of options 
that were put in there.  What about if you award the work to 
LMT but LMT sub-contracts some aspects to VR Laser of 
which LMT was not amenable on that option and I recall 
writing an email to Mr – Dr Nel to the effect that any money 
20 
whether it is a small money because his argument was that 
that model would not really ensure a good profitability for his 
business.   
And I then pointed out that any money should be 
welcome – any profit whether it is half a million or whether it 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 67 of 231 
 
is 10 million you should be able to move on from there.  And 
that as an option.  At the very end – or during the process 
somehow the – the memorandum got back into – into us in 
October 2014 the price had reduced.   
There was aspect that says there would be some 
other work that will be given to LMT and given the last point 
that was raised very strongly was look you – you head office 
you can really tell us up to a point in terms of who we should 
work with but if you are going to hold us accountable for 
performance – project performance you cannot really fully 
10 
dictate the – in terms of who at the overall we should go 
with.   
From where I am sitting with the price having reduced 
with a possibility that a portion of some of the work in the 
bigger Hoefyster platform would go to LMT I ended up 
supporting 
the 
memorandum 
which 
was 
not 
for 
my 
memorandum was for the CEO to sign.   
Okay because commercially it should have been 
addressed – it seemed as if LMT would get some bit of work 
and I signed.  On the day I signed the Supply Chain 
20 
executive was not at work – was on leave and my 
understanding for where I am sitting his issues were fairly 
common to my issues.   
The issue was overall the price which was out of line 
and when got into it a certain level and I was quite satisfied 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 68 of 231 
 
to sign it off. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now what was the outcome of the 
discussions where you had voiced your objections to the 
business going other than to LMT?  Was that resolved? 
MR MHLONTLE:  The misgivings were not so much about 
LMT versus VR I barely in those days knew who was behind 
VR Laser and when I only learnt more when I was 
suspended.  It was more about the – the understanding I had 
about the capability of LMT.  My understanding some design 
work of the very same product had been done by LMT.  I 
10 
was… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And was it also about a principle namely 
on your understanding if a company that is part of the group 
can give us a certain product or certain services we should 
not go outside of the group unless there is really proper 
justification? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Precisely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now your affidavit has referred to the 
issue of price and the commission has already heard 
20 
evidence that in relation to the tender to which LMT and VR 
Laser and another tenderer had responded that initially there 
was approximately a R100 million difference.  LMT was 
tendering approximately for R160 million whereas VR Laser 
was approximately R260 million.  Now did that have any 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 69 of 231 
 
bearing on your view that there were concerns that LMT 
should not be awarded the tender? 
MR MHLONTLE:  My – my challenge with those initial 
numbers was big a gap in pricing and I was of the strongest 
view that you would rather be – even if it meant that there 
were – there was a lot of support we needed to give the LMT 
assuming that support was worth R10 million for argument  
sake.  We will rather be giving support to LMT and V and 
then award the work to LMT.  So the price was my serious 
issue and the second part was the group consideration.  If 
10 
there is a subsidiary or a division within the group that can 
produce the product why would you take the product 
outside?   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now did you eventually get persuaded 
to approve the award to VR Laser? 
MR MHLONTLE:  The – it is not necessarily approving 
because approving set elsewhere.  I needed to maybe not to 
be saying I am opposing it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – you decided at some stage not to 
persist in opposing or in objecting? 
20 
MR MHLONTLE:  The opposing as a process went on for 
three months from roughly around June to October and in 
that process we met the key people within the LMT and DLS 
we went on to meet with Kgomotso who is an investor within 
LMT and what was at the centre of the conversation was a 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 70 of 231 
 
very clear message that we would want the work to go to 
LMT.  If DLS has issues can they specify what those issues – 
can LMT rectify the issues?   
At the end of the – and also that was LMT 
consideration was a price consideration.  At the very end the 
price is now reduced.  LMT at least in the understanding was 
that LMT would get doors and frames which the nether part 
of the work as the actual package and therefore at that point 
with a third element of a very strong point that was being 
made that says, we desire to go with VR Laser as a division.  
10 
If you are now stopping us you know from going with our 
supplier having met your price requirement then we cannot 
be held technically responsible for any shortcomings if the 
work is not done to the standard that we want which we do 
not believe that LMT would do.   
And on that basis – when those arguments were on 
the table and I had to back off.  But what is interesting just 
the last point that the very same program that obviously VR 
Laser was advanced as the solution today is eight year late.  
So the – I mean I would have been drawn into the part now if 
20 
I had insisted on my position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the argument that you allude to which 
seems to have ultimately either persuaded you not to insist 
on opposing or objecting at a certain level one can 
understand it.   
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 71 of 231 
 
But namely if they – if the management at DLS were 
going to be accountable for the performance one can 
understand at a certain level if they say well you know do 
not hold us accountable if you insist that we use an entity 
that we have concerns about.  Allow us to use an entity that 
we have got confidence and in that event if anything goes 
wrong you can hold us accountable confidently.   
But at the same time one says why did they want 
your views?  Because if the position is that a decision lay 
with them and – and it anyway you were expressing your 
10 
views and you were not saying that you are going to take 
away whatever power they had to make a decision.  So I 
have those two reactions to their argument.   
It is – at a certain level it is like it was to say shut 
up.  Shut up because we are the ones who will be held 
accountable in the end?  But then if you do not want our 
views because they do not agree with your views why did 
you want to hear from us?  That is the two reactions I have – 
I have to the argument.  I do not know if you want to say 
anything about the two reactions. 
20 
MR MHLONTLE:  I think Chair they would say we have 
listened to you particularly in this case because you queried 
the price. Now the price has reduced.  You have queried why 
are we taking the work outside.  We have scratched around 
we have found the other work that we will give to the entity 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 72 of 231 
 
within the group.  This is a hefty critical issue we believe we 
should – by that particular company because he has the 
competency.  They are going to say we met you halfway.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well certainly they can say they do – 
they did something.  But I would have thought that when they 
do that the parts of argument that says look we will be held 
accountable do not insist on your views when we are going 
to be held accountable.   
I would have thought that they will simply say look we 
have gone a long way to try and accommodate your concerns 
10 
in the light of all of this you know.  Do you still have a 
problem?  You know.  And if the concerns have – if you think 
that the concerns have been adequately addressed you 
might say no look that is fine.  But it is just that they say 
look we are the ones ultimately accountable.  But it might be 
much of a muchness.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now Mr Mhlontlo you 
have referred in your affidavit to the views of Mr Mlambo.  
He was the Group Executive for Supply Chain is that right? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Correct Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Was he in the hierarchy of Denel was 
he junior to you? 
MR MHLONTLE:  In the structure he was reporting to me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  He reported to you? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Hm. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 73 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I take you in another bundle not 
the one in front of you.  Just put that one in front of you to 
the side please.  Chair may I refer him to a bundle that was 
presented – was admitted by you previously when Mr 
Mlambo gave evidence and Ms Malahlela it is – should be 
headed Denel Bundle 1.  If you could open that please Mr 
Mhlontle.  May I take you please to page 791.  So for the 
record it is Denel-01-791.  Mr Mhlontle may I ask were you 
able to hear the evidence of Mr Mhlontlo two weeks ago? 
MR MHLONTLE:  I only heard the first part where he was 
10 
going into details around this part.  I could not listen to him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay. Now he referred in his evidence 
at page 791 to this email that came from him.  It was 
addressed to Mr Saloojee as well as to yourself and Jan 
Wessels COO.  It is dated the 9t h September 2014 and I am 
going to summarise the contents before I ask you to 
comment on it. 
 
He says: 
“I 
have 
managed 
to 
review 
DLS’s 
submissions 
pertaining 
to 
the 
20 
abovementioned subject.” 
And you will see in the headline the subject is the 
awarding of the manu – of hull manufacturing contract to VR 
Laser Services.  And then he raised certain issues.  He says: 
“The following issues paint an unacceptable 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 74 of 231 
 
picture 
from 
a 
process, 
fairness 
and 
objective point of view.” 
The first paragraph refers to the tender documents 
not sent – being sent to all the bidders simultaneously.  The 
second 
is 
that 
there 
were 
separate 
engagements 
for 
clarifying sessions with individual bidders rather than all at 
the same time. 
The third relates to the BBBEE status where LMT’s 
BBBEE status was disregarded because it was not verified 
whereas the VR Laser certificate was accepted and rated a 
10 
few days after the closing date.   
In other words that they were not treated equally.  
Then the fourth point he says this if I may read it into the 
record.  It says: 
“In the submission” 
And his evidence was that this was the submission 
that came before him and others in senior management 
requesting approval for this award to VR Laser.  He says: 
“In the submission it is claimed that LMT’s 
quote is too low and unrealistic.  The 
20 
difference between LMT’s quote and the VR 
Laser quote is almost R100million.  After 
questioning Stephan Nel on the accuracy of 
his quote that is of course is the – was the 
then head of LMT – on the accuracy of his 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 75 of 231 
 
quote he offered to come and present the 
facts to demonstrate that it is based on 
realistic quotes.  Furthermore he claimed 
that LMT had made the hull before under 
Patria’s contract.” 
And then 5. 
“In 
my 
meeting 
with 
Stephan 
Burger 
yesterday he of course was DLS’s CEO at 
the time he indicated that VR Laser had 
offered to reduce the quote from around 
10 
R262.4 million to R195.0 million with an 
exclamation mark.  Does that not tell a 
disturbing story about the initial offer on the 
basis of these findings and other facts it is 
my considered opinion that the submission 
from DLS be rejected since LMT has the 
capability to make the hull this issue should 
have been discussed further before going out 
on tender.” 
Now do you recall Mr Mhlontlo receiving this email 
20 
that was addressed to you and Mr Saloojee and Mr Wessels? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Yes I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And did you read its contents and did 
you take them seriously? 
MR MHLONTLE:  The contents were – were read.  One 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 76 of 231 
 
aspect that it talks to is a price – there is LMT – there is our 
process issues which all of these issues were taken into 
account before that final memorandum was signed off.   
But more importantly in the meeting this is the very 
email was asked to what extent these issues have been 
cleared and there was a position that I do not fully recall 
either it said the matter was either cleared or was in the 
process of being clear with Dennis it is a pity that on the day 
he was not at work when I signed it.  But when I signed that 
memorandum it never at all meant that these issues needed 
10 
not to be closed out.   
Materially from where I am sitting the price was 
significant.  The fact that it had reduced it was important.  
There are issues in my affidavit that I am covering that are 
saying how it go to reduce is also another matter altogether 
to which I was not privy to in terms of how practically it 
reduced.  But the price had reduced,  LMT seemed as if it 
was going to get another package and those were material 
and there was a broad point that says, Dennis has issues to 
what extent are you either addressing or can you address 
20 
these issues?  My understanding was that these issues 
would be addressed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you know whether they were 
addressed satisfactorily? 
MR MHLONTLE:  I -  I mean of what happened obviously 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 77 of 231 
 
after awarding that work give or take October 2014 I do not – 
never got a feedback really that we sat down with Dennis 
and myself and say you know there has these issues been 
fully addressed? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you… 
MR MHLONTLE:  But lastly Chair the memorandum of 
October 2014 that we initialled it had the Supply Chain at 
least divisional executives signing that off which went a long 
way in ensuring that if we were given assurance that these 
issues would be addressed we had faith that it would – they 
10 
would be addressed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am going to come back to Mr 
Mlambo’s role and responsibility and the concerns and 
whether they were resolved.  I would like to just focus before 
we move onto that just for a moment on the reduction of 
price.   
Now Mr Mlambo made a comment obviously felt it 
important enough to raise it in a letter and used exclamation 
marks etcetera to emphasise his feeling of real concern that 
there was initially approximately R100 million difference and 
20 
it is significant.  We are not – we are not talking about this 
being R100 million compared to a R100 billion contract.  This 
was 
R100 million 
between 
approximately 
R160 million 
tendered by LMT and about R260 million tendered by VR 
Laser and Mr Mlambo seems to find it very disturbing that 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 78 of 231 
 
VR Laser could be so way above LMT in the first place yet 
LMT is not going to get the business.   
But secondly he is disturbed seriously disturbed by 
the fact that when there were discussions – sorry that there 
were discussions between Denel and VR Laser and that 
resulted in it bringing its price down from R260 million to 
R195 million.   
Now what he suggested in his email and as he 
explained to the Chair two weeks in his evidence, oral 
evidence is that he was especially disturbed about that.   
10 
That is – how can you get a tenderer who is serious dealing 
with a public institution such Denel presumably giving a 
competitive price if it is actually a genuine fair competition 
competitive process not engineered and not manoeuvred to 
favour one.   
How can it come in with R260 odd million and then be 
persuaded just a few weeks later oh well yes we will change 
it by about R70 million to bring it down to R195 million?  
Those are the concerns that Mr Mlambo expressed in his 
email briefly and of course he has elaborated that on his oral 
20 
– in his oral evidence.  Was that a matter of considerable or 
any concern to you as Mr Mlambo’s boss? 
MR MHLONTLE:  It was a huge concern.  I – when the 
memorandum was brought to me and brought to the COO this 
is the issue that led to that few months of back and forth.  
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 79 of 231 
 
Price for me was to say no matter how good the quality could 
be 
that 
better 
quality 
cannot 
be 
R100 
million 
more 
expensive.   
And 
then 
there 
were 
engagements, 
there 
were 
workshops, there were clarifications.  Lots of emails were 
exchanged between my office and DLS and even LMT for 
that matter where these issues were have been voiced out.  
My stance has been leaning on the side of ensuring that you 
will save the money for the fiscus.   
So – so but at the end of the day with a huge 
10 
pressure from the division that had a responsibility to 
execute this project with the price having reduced and with 
the LMT being – becoming very clear that would be catered 
for it was only on that basis that I signed the memorandum.  
But also in the meeting was to say but by the way there are 
process issues, there are certain issues that Dennis has 
raised we will extend a view – raise those issues or address 
those issues.   
And there was an assurance that they would be 
attended – or they either were being attended to or had been 
20 
attended to.  But the central to his email and his issues were 
aligned to what were my issues. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now apart from the fact that VR Laser 
was about R100 million more in its tender compared with 
LMT the fact that it was given an opportunity to negotiate a 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 80 of 231 
 
reduction, a major reduction from about R260 down to 
R195million was that in your view acceptable from a legal 
and particularly procurement point of view to actually engage 
in negotiations? 
MR MHLONTLE:  Even in a tender process you would have 
your criteria, your criteria would talk to whatever maybe 
quality, would talk to a timelines or talk to all the factors that 
you – that you deem critical.  And you would also have a 
price would be and everything else.  The – even that you 
looked at all of those issues and you tick, tick, tick for me it 
10 
remains the issue around the price was now reduced and the 
LMT was now being considered.  But I am getting to your 
point if at some point you would go in what you call best and 
final offers and that process you go to all those who have 
tendered.   
Now let us say in terms of quality because of 
concerns LMT was no longer a feature because they fell 
short on quality you would then go to VR Laser and go to the 
next supplier go into a best and final offer and then they – 
then you then have it for me.   
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now that was not done here Mr Mlambo 
has testified.  Do you know whether that was done?  
Whether both VR Laser and LMT were invited to give a 
revised best and final offer? 
MR MHLONTLE:  What I – what the investigators have 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 81 of 231 
 
shown me are the emails that have been exchanged between 
the DLS management and VR Laser.  It – which suggest that 
that process was in all likelihood I think more internal emails 
between management within DLS which suggests that they 
may only have gone to VR Laser which renders the process 
unfair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I mean presumably let us assume 
for a moment and I am not sure of necessarily it would 
comply with Treasury regulations but let us assume for a 
moment that it is permissible once tenders have been 
10 
submitted and open that it is permissible for an entity like 
Denel to go back to the tenderers and say, would you like to 
revise your tenders?   
The evidence that has been presented before the 
Chair has been that only VR Laser was approached.  Mr 
Mlambo has also explained that it is permissible if for 
example a tender has been awarded so the decision has 
been made to award a tender to a particular entity then it 
may be permissible once the decision has already been 
made for the entity to go back to the tenderer and say, would 
20 
you be prepared to bring down your price maybe we can 
push up quantities or whatever to make it worth your while.  
So there is a latitude and I believe the Treasury regulations 
bear him out on that.   
But what appears to have happened and that Mr 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 82 of 231 
 
Mlambo has commented about it here is that VR Laser was 
approached when its price was so much higher than LMT’s 
despite that where their – the scores that they received from 
the evaluation committee were less than 1% difference 
where LMT was going to save Denel R100 million or so that 
VR Laser is then approached on its own and said would you 
like to bring down your price and they say yes we will bring it 
down by R60 million or so.   
Now it seems that that offer – that opportunity was 
not given to LMT.  Who knows maybe it would have been 
10 
prepared to reduce its ended price by R60 or so million to 
bring it still R100 million below VR Laser’s revised price.  
But did you believe that this issue of offering VR Laser on its 
own the opportunity to revise its price were you aware at the 
time that that was irregular as seemed to be hinted at by Mr 
Mlambo? 
MR MHLONTLE:  It is also hinted by myself in my own 
affidavit to say if you are to offer best and final you got to 
have to give it to the tender – tenderer that you maybe 1 or 2 
or 3 that you have shortlisted in order to just a step before 
20 
you make your final decision.  And if that process was 
afforded only to VR Laser not to number 2 in terms of the 
ratings, LMT was number 3 instead of not giving it to your 
number 2 as well.  And also, if you look at the issue of 
quality, that I deal a lot within my affidavit that there was a 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 83 of 231 
 
concern from a technical point of view, they would not be 
able to produce the product.   
 
So let us take for the purposes of this session that LMT 
had fallen out already but you would needed to have given 
the opportunity to both tender number 1 and tender number 
2.   
 
And I had no knowledge that they only had go onto one 
supplier.  And it – I have liked as I sit at home as I got 
presented the evidence, is obviously, they were the only 
ones that were given the opportunity, rendering the process, 
10 
once again, irregular. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So were you not aware at the time 
...[intervenes]  
MR MHLONTLO:   No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...that in fact LMT was not given a 
similar opportunity? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, I want to make this point.  In my 
affidavit I deal at length that DLS had rated LMT negatively 
on technical aspects, went on to produce evidence that came 
from the UN(?) for some of the work that they have done for 
20 
the UN. 
 
And then given that – and the issue of the fact that they 
would be accountable for the product, it narrows the 
suppliers really to one VR Laser to supplier number two.   
 
And if I was the one running the process, I would have 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 84 of 231 
 
then go on and do best, a final offer, to the two suppliers.  It 
served no purpose for LMT to register(?) their price because 
they were low anyway.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So if they were prepared to go even 
lower, that surely should have served your purposes as a 
state entity trying to avoid asking for yet another bailout 
from government, surely? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Well, precisely.  I am pointing out that I 
was not aware of that communication, how it unfolded.  
Some of the emails going so as to far as to say I will get VR 
10 
Laser prices reduced.  I will use other means to get to them.  
Now to me, it sounds as if VR Laser was too close to DLS 
and those aspects were not as visible at the time of signing 
that memo. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now, Mr Mlambo then raises all 
of these issues in the email.  Ultimately, you came to be 
persuaded to sign the revised memo at a stage when you 
believed that these issues had been addressed.  Is that 
right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Did you ever have a discussion 
with Mr Mlambo either by email or in person and he, of 
course, reported to you, to ask him:  These questions that 
you have raised that are serious that I, Mr Mhlontlo, actually 
shares some concerns about.  Dennis – Mr Mlambo, are you 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 85 of 231 
 
– have your concerns been addressed, have they been 
resolved?  Have you ever discussed that with him? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I would think that in our normal 
engagements, we would have – I would have brought him to 
speed around what we had done but I do not recall 
specifically a session where I took this email, went on a 
point(?) my point.  You see.  To say all issues are resolved.   
 
But I guess, we were both executives.  Maybe it is where 
we missed doing that.  Either I should have gone to him or 
he should have come to me and then we can look and solve 
10 
these issues. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Would you agree that Mr Mlambo, 
although he was genuine to you, he still occupied a relatively 
senior position within Denel? 
MR MHLONTLO:   In terms of the Executive for Supply Chain 
was a relatively new position.  Executives for Supply Chain, 
if it did not come into existence late in 2012, it would have 
come late in 2015.   
 
So the position – and maybe by the time he left Denel 
had really matured into a well-understood role given its own 
20 
powers.  But perhaps in him facing(?) and there was also a 
bit of finding fit.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But would you not agree that where he 
has been appointed, he was already then the Group 
Executive for Supply Chain?  If he reporting to you has 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 86 of 231 
 
raised with you and the Group CEO and others concerns in 
the email, would you agree that they needed to be taken 
seriously? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I had fundamental issues that I made the 
point that they were taken seriously.  And these issues – 
these issues and my issues are not materially adverse.  And 
that does ...[indistinct] [Speaker not clear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I accept that you shared many of 
the concerns that he raised.  Can I ask you please, in the 
same bundle, that is still Bundle 1.  Chair, the one that you 
10 
have just been handed up.  Page 612.  In fact, the document 
starts at page 604.  Let us start there.   
 
And the Chair has already heard the evidence of Ms 
Malahlela who was the then Head of Supply Chain in the 
entity DLS and she indicated that she was instructed to 
prepare this revised memorandum despite her own concerns 
and misgivings about the procurement process.   
 
But she, on the instructions of the DLS Executive, 
prepared this and this motivated for the approval of the 
award of the platform Hull Contract of VR Laser Services.  
20 
And if I can take you to page 612, that appears to be your 
signature at the food of the page.  Is that right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
And 
that 
was 
dated 
the 
16t h of October 2014.  And so you signed.  You did not give 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 87 of 231 
 
final approval to it yourself because that needed to be 
approved by Mr Saloojee as we see on the top of the next 
page.  You were part of the slightly lower ranks within the 
organisation who were expected it to either recommend or 
not recommend approval.  Is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you recommended approval by 
Mr Saloojee.  And the analysis is set out of the tender 
process and the evaluation and why it was submitted or 
recommended that VR Laser rather than LMT should be 
10 
awarded the contract.   
 
Now it is interesting to see the dates on which you 
signed that.  That is the 16 t h of October 2014.  That was 
about five or six weeks after Mr Mlambo’s email that I took 
you 
to 
earlier 
at 
page 
791 
and 
that 
is 
the 
9 t h of September 2013.   
 
So am I correct in understanding your evidence a bit 
earlier to the Chair, that after Mr Mlambo raised his concerns 
in his email, many of which you shared, you were engaged in 
a process where you understood those concerns were 
20 
ultimately remedied, at least sufficiently, to be persuaded to 
recommend this? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The specific meeting that signed this 
memo, it was one of the items that got discussed whereas 
the price is now reduced whereas there is an indication of 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 88 of 231 
 
another package that will got LMT, the question was, has all 
Dennis’ issues been addressed?  Because my fundamental 
issue was the price.  My fundamental issue was the work 
that were going to LMT.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now mention was made by 
Mr Mlambo of the fact that in terms of the Delegation of 
Authority, any contract to be awarded with more than two 
hundred million had to be approved by the full head office 
board, the Denel SOC Limited Board.  Is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I now need to be refreshed ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR MHLONTLO:   ...to the Delegation of Authority.  But as 
far as I am aware, the Delegation of Authority worked in 
cascading order where zero to a certain amount.  It will be 
the division from a certain amount to a certain amount, it will 
be Dennis Mlambo.  Above a certain amount it will be myself.  
Above a certain amount it would be the CEO.  And I do not 
recall 
in 
those 
years 
they 
acquisitioned 
any 
specific 
acquisition that needed to go to the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  But he has given evidence in 
20 
relation to that specifically.  If I could ask you, in the same 
bundle, to turn to page 757?   
MR MHLONTLO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   This is part of the Delegation of 
Authority which starts at page 752, the table.  And then at 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 89 of 231 
 
757, 5.1.  Do you have that? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja, I have that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So that gives, as you put it a cascade 
of levels.  So anything below or equal to fifty million would 
have to be approved to a certain level.  Between fifty million 
and two hundred million, at another level.  That would be 
approval, the A in a column headed GCE.  The A according to 
the PS approval.   
 
So that means, that anything between fifty million and 
two hundred million would have to be approved by the DCE.  
10 
That was Mr Saloojee at that stage, correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And in the right-hand column, it says 
Group 
Supply 
Chain 
Manager 
prior 
consultation 
on 
procurement above twenty million.   
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Group Supply Chain Manager, in fact, 
was meant to read Group Supply Chain Executive.  Mr 
Mlambo gave evidence.  Do you have a different view on 
that? 
20 
MR MHLONTLO:   In fact, if I look at this, it actually 
suggests that it escaped. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry.  Just say that again? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I am saying that if I look at this 
...[intervenes]  
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 90 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MHLONTLO:   ...it means that it fell exactly in the DCO 
approval because it was one ninety-five in the end. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Well, I am not asking you that.  
Sorry, Mr Mhlontlo.  Perhaps you could just indulge me to 
answer the questions that I am putting to you.  I am getting 
to the point in the moment about where the one ninety-five 
fell.  If you could just indulge me.  The last category is over 
two hundred million.  The approval no longer was rested in 
the DCE but now had to be approved by the board, correct? 
10 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it says in the right-hand column, a 
report outlining the process followed to invite a shortlisted 
as suppliers and evaluation and scores of the shortlisted 
suppliers of recommendations of the Tender Committee to be 
tabled at the board for approval.   
 
Now let us go to your point about the hundred and 
ninety-five.  Do you have any comment on the fact that it just 
seems rather interesting, perhaps coincidental, that VR 
Laser initially tendered at two hundred and sixty odd million 
20 
who was now persuaded in a process that you have 
acknowledged was not fair because LMT was not given the 
same opportunity, to revise its price. 
 
It does so quite dramatically and then just happens to 
bring it down just below the requirement for the entire board 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 91 of 231 
 
approval.  Do you have any comment on that or am I reading 
too much into it? 
MR 
MHLONTLO: 
 
 
I 
mean, 
there 
could 
be 
two 
interpretations.  It could be your very view.  It could be the 
view that is applicable.  Or it could be coincidental.  It is 
difficult to say.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MHLONTLO:   But ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now Mr Mhlontlo, let us go back 
to the issue that we were debating earlier about the 
10 
information that you got because Mr Mlambo had raised 
concerns.   
 
You had your own concerns which coincided with the 
substance of Mr Mlambo’s concerns.  And then when you 
signed the recommendation, as we seen, if you go back to 
page 612.  That was five or six weeks after Mr Mlambo’s 
email and you were given assurances. 
 
Now I just want to take you back to your evidence 
earlier.  Are you saying that Mr Mlambo did not take part in a 
meeting that took place in October when you were ultimately 
20 
persuaded to join in the recommendation of VR Laser? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Mr Mlambo on that day, on that week, I 
think was on leave.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  I do not know if you heard 
Mr Mlambo’s evidence two weeks ago but certainly the Chair 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 92 of 231 
 
did.  But Mr Mlambo said.  He understood that his advice 
given in his email that the award to VR Laser would not go 
ahead – should not go ahead because of the concerns that 
he raised, many of which were shared by you. 
 
He understood that management would acting on that 
and consistent with that and he found to his surprise that at 
this meeting in October just five weeks later, this was in fact 
approved. 
 
Recommended 
and 
approved 
despite 
his 
concerns which were not resolved. 
 
Did you...  I do not know if you heard that evidence.  But 
10 
the clear effect of his evidence seems to be.  He is employed 
to do the job.  He is employed to advice senior executives, 
including yourself and Mr Saloojee that there is a serious 
problem in different aspects as is set out in his email and 
that it should not be awarded to VR Laser. 
 
Now I accept, of course, that Mr Mlambo did not have 
the final say.  It was subject to approval either by the board 
if it was over two hundred million or by the Group Chief 
Executive. 
 
But he clearly had a feeling that – of being offended and 
20 
undermined that behind his back, as it were, a decision is 
taken to approve the very thing that he had strongly 
recommended should not be approved because there were 
serious irregularities.   
 
Now he was not consulted, he said, before the decision 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 93 of 231 
 
was taken.  He was not asked or it was not – nobody came 
back to him and said:  Mr Mlambo, on your point in 
paragraph 
2 
you 
are 
completely 
wrong. 
 
You 
have 
misunderstood the facts.   
 
Or on point number 3, we have actually resolved it.  We 
have actually invited LMT to revise its offer, for example.  
None of that was done.  Were you aware that that was not 
done with Mr Mlambo? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I am going to, Chair, go back to the 
process.  That around June/July of 2014, a memo came to 
10 
my office.  A memo I rejected on the core grounds which, as 
I understand it, Mr Mlambo raised.   
 
A series of workshops and conversation took place.  A 
lot of emails which endeavoured to ensure that LMT ended 
up with this work on the basis that it is within the group. 
 
And also, at the very end, the quality issues were raised 
by DLS and when we met on this day three months down the 
line, the pressure was huge and the point was made to say 
that if we delay this aspect any further, it would begin to 
impact the Hoefyster Project.  
20 
 
And a number of the issues that I had raised had been 
mitigated and there was a specific question posed to say:  
Yes, Dennis had a Supply Chain process related issues to 
what extent those have been raised, had been addressed.  
And then there was assurance that either the – I cannot 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 94 of 231 
 
quite recall whether either had been addressed or in the 
process of being addressed. 
 
Dennis – Mr Mlambo was an executive within the Group 
of Executives.  His inputs would be considered but his input 
is not the final input.  And I think that is important.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the point that Mr Kennedy seeks to 
canvas with you is not that Mr Mlambo’s view or input was 
final.  I believe it is simply that approval was given without 
his issues being addressed.  I think that is the point.   
 
To say, if the final authority to approve rests with 
10 
somebody else, that is fine.  But if I have raised issues and 
they you to make issues by virtue of the position that I hold 
or the job that I am doing.   
 
At least, somebody needs to engage me on these 
issues.  If there is engagement and we do not agree.  Maybe 
that is fine.  But what are the answers to my questions that 
should 
be 
addressed. 
 
That 
is 
my 
understanding.  
Mr Kennedy might indicate...   
 
That is my understanding of the level at which he is 
raising it because that is also what I would expect.  If you 
20 
are counted among the people who must be consulted and 
you take a different view from everybody, at least there must 
be 
an 
engagement 
or 
somebody 
must 
address 
your 
concerns.  It does not mean that they have to agree with you 
but you must have that engagement at least.   
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 95 of 231 
 
 
Otherwise, you might feel like, so whatever input I make 
does not matter or whereas you might think some people are 
just going through emotions because maybe they have got 
some predetermined outcome that they are pursuing.   
 
Because if somebody says here are the problems to 
following this route and others follow it.  At least they must 
be able to say these are our arguments against his 
arguments.  Are you able to say anything on that? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, if I look at my concern and look at 
his concern.  Look at the issue of one aspect of it around 
10 
quality that I could not talk to – being in finance I would not 
talk to whether the quality is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MHLONTLO:   ...is appropriate or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MHLONTLO:   To the extent I am provided with evidence 
around quality that almost excludes LMT.  There is not a hell 
of a lot I would be able to do there.  The price, which was a 
concern to me, had reduced.   
 
There was an indication that even though quality is an 
20 
issue and therefore they cannot be trust with this package, 
that there is another package that would go to LMT.  It was 
on that basis that I had fined. 
 
My understanding was of material aspects or what 
Dennis was concerned with had been addressed.  But I also 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 96 of 231 
 
put the question to the divisional leader of DLS to say:  By 
the way, as you are now converging us in this room to sign.  
Have you – are you – have you addressed or are you going 
to ensure that Dennis’ issues are addressed?   
 
And I am saying, if we then did not necessarily at some 
point raised an eye, sit down on an email on a point by point, 
it is our fault, both of us as neither the two of us had done 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because as I understand it, and you have 
made the point two times or more, to say there was serious 
10 
overlap between your issues and his issues or they may 
have been substantially the same.   
 
And it seems to me form what you are saying that you 
got persuaded, partly because you were told either that his 
issues had been addressed or they were being addressed 
plus the issue of the price and then the quality.  Those...  
Otherwise, substantially, you and him were on the same 
side. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay.  And one does not know 
20 
whether it so happened that the meeting happened when he 
was away or whether it was engineered [laughing] to be like 
that because it is...  Well, maybe it should not say it is 
strange.   
 
Here is somebody that is quite seriously opposed to this 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 97 of 231 
 
thing and this crucial meeting happens when he is not there.  
But it maybe that it was coincidence.  It is just, also it is 
strange that if – even when he comes back, he finds that his 
issues have not been addressed, you know.   
 
It might have been different if – when he came back he 
found that when he looks at the minutes it is clear that 
somebody said:  Well, this is our response to this and that 
and that.   
 
But ja.  Okay.  Thank you.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  If I can just for 
10 
completeness refer to you page 785?   
MR MHLONTLO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Page 785 appears to be another email 
from Mr Mlambo which in fact was sent before the one that 
we have looked at.  I am not going to go Chair through the 
detail of it but this, again, is a letter from Mr Mlambo.   
 
In this case, addressed primarily to Mr Stephan Burger, 
CEO of DOS but he copied in Ms Malahlela and yourself, as 
well as Mr Wessels, Teubes and Saloojee.   
 
And this raises similar sort of issues.  Can I just go back 
20 
for a moment Mr Mhlontlo to the issue about LMT and its 
quality and reliability.  You have mentioned that there were 
concerns raised that, for example, LMT had caused the 
embarrassment because it had produced vehicles for the 
United Nations, which turned out to have typical safety 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 98 of 231 
 
problems.  And other witnesses have given evidence in 
relation to that.   
 
But are you aware that in the evaluation of the tenders, 
LMT was not rejected?  It was actually scored on the basis 
of its technical capability.  It did not score as highly as VR 
Laser but it was not found to be so bad that it could not be 
used by Denel.  Are you aware of that? 
MR MHLONTLO:   No, I was not aware of that.  But what, 
obviously, in amplifying the problem in trying to make the 
problem appear maybe big.  That was evidence that was 
10 
produced to us by the division and a lot more in this regard.  
Chair, the division concern must answer for itself.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, but it seems that some in the 
division, not everybody, but some in the division of DLS 
seem to be saying:  Well, we have got to give it to VR Laser 
because they are only people who can do the job properly, 
technically because LMT is really not reliable. 
 
But that was not a view shared by others.  And in fact, 
there was the further issue about LMT being acquired by 
Denel.  So it was now going to be in-house.  It could now be 
20 
controlled by management and it was being assisted in terms 
of an advance payment for another contract that it was still 
working on. 
 
So it seems that Mr Mlambo may have had some 
substance when he said:  But why are we not giving it to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 99 of 231 
 
LMT especially when it is going to cost so much less and 
where technical issues can be managed? 
 
Was that something you went into or was that something 
on which you felt you were guided by other people to a point 
that you were satisfied? 
MR MHLONTLO:   If we consider my affidavit.  I am very 
strong on this very point that I wanted this work to go to 
LMT.  At the end of the day, Denel in those days operated in 
decentralised sector.  Divisions had to account for their own 
revenue and had to account in terms of the project execution 
10 
and completion. 
 
And even though I was so strong on that, I do say in my 
affidavit, that with all the pleas and begging, I was not 
successful.  And at some point, I had to let the process go. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the position that if you had the power 
rested in you to make a decision, you would have made a 
different decision?  In other words, you would have given it 
to LMT but you kind of deferred to the people in the 
particular division.  Or what is the position? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, if I was both the CFO of the group 
20 
and I happen to be the MD of that division, I would have 
given it to LMT without a doubt.  Reasoned(?) with specific 
mitigations, I would have had to put in place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, may I just ask a few more 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 100 of 231 
 
questions just to complete this line? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If it will be acceptable.  I see it is one 
o’clock but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, that is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I promise just to ask a few. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then we should be able to move on 
from this.  What I find important, Mr Mhlontlo, is that this 
was not a decision that was vested in the division.  We 
10 
have already looked at the delegation of authority.  If it 
was vested in the division it would have left to Mr Stephan 
Burger and it is quite clear from the documents that Mr 
Stephan believed only VR Laser should be given this 
contract despite the arguments against – that were raised 
by various people including yourself but surely the reason 
for delegating the authority of – for an amount of so much 
to the Group CEO based on the recommendations of inter 
alia yourself as Group CFO was that this was a matter of 
such importance because so much money of the Group’s 
20 
money, which is of course public money, was being spent.  
It was not left to Mr Burger.  So do we not have a situation 
where you effectively seem to be saying to the Chair, 
unless I am misunderstanding your evidence, you seem to 
be saying I, as Group CFO, when I was asked to make a 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 101 of 231 
 
recommendation, I would have liked to have recommended 
LMT but I was persuaded to rather recommend VR Laser 
despite all my serious concerns and the reason why I was 
persuaded to recommend was simply that the head of the 
division wants VR Laser.  Whereas the head of the division 
did not have the power vested in you, surely you were 
there together – I am not suggesting you alone, Mr 
Saloojee and others, surely you were there as a safeguard 
for Denel’s interests to ensure that it was not just a 
divisional head steamrolling you and getting their way to 
10 
prefer an entity such as VR Laser but you had to be 
satisfied that there were good reasons and if there were 
not good reasons, if there were concerns like you to your 
credit had that they needed to be properly answered before 
the decision could go the way that Mr Burger wanted. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, the recommendation from myself 
as to the process to proceed to go the overall approval is 
informed by a number of considerations on my side.  One, 
the price had reduced to a number.   
Secondly, it was a package that would go to LMT.  
20 
Thirdly, there were various technical issues that were 
pointed to be the issues and I had – there was no way of in 
particular of going against those technical issues that were 
appointed, at least based on the information that was 
before myself at the time. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 102 of 231 
 
 
So if I then have a letter that say as this company 
would do this work, there is this letter from a client that 
states the following things,  then as a division, we 
evaluated at a point in time, this letter has come and is 
such that we are going to entrust this to LMT.  Even that 
correspondence in terms of letter, price having come down, 
the fact that there would be other work going to LMT, 
persuaded me sufficiently to be able to say – to give it 
sign-off.   
 
And if we look at the other aspects that I have now 
10 
become aware of, now obviously if I was aware of those 
facts at that point, there was no way I would have signed it 
off.  I feel, Chair, that really I have put my position around 
the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I – it seems to based on your 
answer you are conceding the point that Mr Kennedy 
makes but you seek to defend your decision on its own 
merits, leaving out the issue of deferring to the division, is 
that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   It is correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, one final question if I may?  Mr 
Mlambo’s emails effectively were saying this process has 
not been fair.  You seem to have confirmed that the 
process was not fair in at least the respect that VR Laser 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 103 of 231 
 
was given the only chance to amend its price.  Effectively, 
of course, if a tender process is not fair, it is contrary to 
the Constitution, Section 217 which says that any state 
entity, such as Denel, has to follow a process which is fair, 
equitable, competitive, etcetera.  Cost-effective too.   
 
Now was Mlambo, who reported to you, was he not 
ringing a bell, an alarm bell, saying this process cannot be 
awarded to VR Laser because it is unfair and you would 
have known surely, Mr Mhlontlo, as a chartered accountant 
and a senior executive of a state entity that if there was an 
10 
unfair process in a tender award, which you were being 
asked to recommend, it would firstly be unlawful and 
secondly, it would be subject to legal challenge in a High 
Court.  Were you not recommending something that you 
had already been warned by Mr Mlambo and which you 
shared his feelings should not be awarded precisely 
because of that? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, I recommended this for overall 
approval on the basis of three points that I have articulated 
with the full understanding that the matters that had been 
20 
raised had either been fully addressed or in the process of 
being addressed.  There is absolutely no other information 
that was available to me other than those points.  I then 
indicate that as I was at some point during this course of 
this year or the last year investigated pointing out internal 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 104 of 231 
 
communication that had taken place within DLS that 
indicate that this business was too close to DLS and the 
process could actually have been irregular.  It is up to DLS 
divisional manager who must take a stand at some point 
and account for this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, would this be a convenient 
time to take the adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us take the lunch adjournment, 
we will resume at ten past two. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Ten past two.  Thank you, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  If I may just 
complete these questions on this topic.  We are still 
dealing with the hull contract that was awarded to VR 
Laser.  Are you aware that apart from Mr Mlambo, who was 
the Group Executive in charge of supply chain at head 
office, Ms Malahlela within the division DLS had also 
20 
raised concerns about the compliance with procurement 
and also whether it was appropriate to go outside LMT? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, I was not aware of that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You mentioned a meeting which 
culminated in the document that we see at page 612 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 105 of 231 
 
bearing your signature.   
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is the 16 October and if you 
look on – this is the motivation that you signed off as 
approving 
the 
recommendation 
or 
endorsing 
the 
recommendation of the award of the contract of VR Laser.  
Do you see at the foot of the page 611 Ms Malahlela’s 
name and signature appear?  611.  Can you see that?  Was 
she present in a meeting as far as you can recall? 
MR MHLONTLO:   She was not. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   She was not? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The memo was brought by Mr Burger 
already bearing the signatures. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So who was it at that meeting who 
gave you the assurance that the procurement and other 
concerns that Mr Mlambo had raised and that you largely 
agreed with.  Who was it at that meeting who persuaded 
you that all of these concerns had been sorted out?  Was 
that Mr Burger? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Mr Burger presented the memo bearing 
20 
the signatures, giving assurance that the divisional supply 
chain was comfortable and when a specific question was 
posed 
about 
Mr 
Mlambo’s 
queries, 
my 
sense 
– 
my 
recollection, not hundred percent, many years ago now, 
was that those are either being addressed or have already 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 106 of 231 
 
been addressed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You see, a concern might arise where 
Ms Malahlela who occupied a senior position with DLS as 
the head of supply chain, he is obviously paid a salary 
appropriate with those responsibilities, where she has 
raised concerns within divisional level that were not 
brought to your attention, she was effectively pushed into a 
situation where she had to, she was instructed by the DLS 
board, to prepare this revised recommendation to – this 
proposal to motivate for the award of the contract to VR 
10 
Laser. 
 
That 
was 
against 
her 
own 
advice 
and 
recommendations and then at head office level, which is 
supposed to supervise and ensure that the divisions do not 
act outside the law and outside government policy and 
outside Denel policy and so forth, when Mr Mlambo, the 
head of supply chain management at head office, likewise 
raised these concerns.  I can understand you were not 
aware of Ms Malahlela’s concerns.  Does it cause you 
concern now to hear that Ms Malahlela had serious 
objections to the award of this contract to VR Laser that 
20 
you were not made aware of? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I am actually concerned that Ms 
Malahlela had concerns, we had quite a reasonable 
relationship, that she never brought those to my attention.  
Now it sounds like serious concerns and I am concerned 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 107 of 231 
 
not only for Ms Malahlela but also the emails that were 
shown to me by the investigators and my overall conclusion 
on this, once again, there was too much closeness between 
this division and the supplier and the division concerned 
must answer as to why this happened. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Indeed you are right that it must 
answer and Mr Burger will be called to testify in the next 
few days and we will certainly be asking him some of these 
questions.  What I am concerned about, though, is this.  At 
this meeting, was there anybody from supply chain either 
10 
at divisional or head office level? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The meeting that was called at short 
notice when Mr Burger, you know, came with this memo, 
comprised of Mr Burger, Mr Wessels, myself and Mr 
Saloojee and is not out of the ordinary. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry and it was not?  Just speak up 
please? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I am saying that the meeting that took 
place, it was with Mr Burger …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, no I heard that bit, just… 
20 
MR MHLONTLO:   Mr Jan Wessels, myself and Mr Saloojee 
to consider this memo and is not out of the ordinary, we 
would meet on various issues. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, my question was, was anybody 
from supply chain management there? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 108 of 231 
 
MR MHLONTLO:   There was nobody from supply chain but 
the signatures that are in the memo were sufficient. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And did you raise with Mr 
Burger or anybody else, was it you who raised the issues 
that Mr Mlambo had raised to try and get reassurance that 
they had been addressed? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I am not certain who raised the issue 
but all I know is that the issue was discussed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And were you satisfied from Mr 
Burger – was it Mr Burger who satisfied you that the 
10 
questions or concerns raised by Mr Mlambo had been 
properly addressed? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You see, what concerns me, just at 
the level of governance and ensuring that things are done 
properly is that you have a memo submitted to you that 
starts off with a recommendation from Ms Malahlela who 
has given evidence that she was basically forced to do this 
by her bosses who included Mr Burger.  Mr Burger does not 
seem to have conveyed that to you and then, on top of it, 
20 
Mr Mlambo had raised to your knowledge a number of 
concerns that you shared.  Mr Mlambo was not there to 
speak for himself.  Ms Malahlela was not there to speak for 
herself.  So you, rightly, Mr Mhlontlo, to your credit, were 
concerned at least about the concerns raised by Mr 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 109 of 231 
 
Mhlontlo (sic) and raised by yourself but what troubles me 
is that Mr Burger just simply said do not worry, all of this 
has been sorted out when clearly it is not the case.  Mr 
Mlambo gave evidence that they were not sorted out.  Ms 
Malahlela gave evidence that they were not sorted out.  
Neither of them was invited to the meeting, it may be that 
Mr Mlambo was away at that time.   
Can you just explain to me about the urgency of the 
matter?   
We 
have 
already 
heard 
evidence 
from 
some 
10 
witnesses that in defence contracts it frequently happens 
that these things are matters that take many years.  We 
know in fact in respect of the Hoefyster project that it is 
already many years behind schedule.  This is not an 
industry that has to, just for example, dealing with Covid 
patients that need ventilators tonight, these things take 
ages.  Can you just explain to the Chair why it was – why 
this meeting was convened?  I am not saying you are 
responsible for that but do you understand why this 
meeting was convened as a matter of such urgency and, as 
20 
it happens, Mr Mlambo is not present and Ms Malahlela is 
not present? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Mr Mlambo or Ms Malahlela being not 
present would not be a big issue because there will be 
many other issues that get debated at executive level 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 110 of 231 
 
without Mr Mlambo or Ms Malahlela being there.  But let 
me get back to the specific question that you are posing.  
This memo was presented to myself around the end of June 
or beginning of July which I had [indistinct] 09.14 that, 
having rejected, that a number of various workshops and 
conversations took place where we were seeking to see if 
LMT cannot become part of this process and be awarded to 
LMT and in that process it did create tensions, quite 
frankly, because we were putting our foot down with 
regards to issues of price, with regards to issues of LMT 
10 
not being considered and three months down the line the 
division comes back after various interactions and gives 
certain assurances and based on those assurances this 
memo is signed off. 
 
What we know today, we did not know it in 2014 
when this was being done.  Bear in mind that Hoefyster 
had just been – I think it had been awarded at that stage, 
probably was less than a year that this programme had 
been awarded and there was a speed at which the – at 
which Hoefyster would be produced.  At least that is how 
20 
we 
understood 
it 
back 
then, 
that 
necessitated 
this 
particular finalisation of the memo.  At least that is how we 
understood. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 111 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This meeting, those who attended it, do 
they fall into a certain category that could have justified 
leaving out persons who had been allowed to contribute to 
the debate such as Ms Malahlela.  Was it said maybe it 
was a meeting of the executives or was there a basis 
known to you that may have been responsible for Ms 
Malahlela to be left out? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The meeting took place literally  - Mr 
Burger walked in with the memo, went to my office and 
10 
asked if we could converge.  We met at Mr Jan Wessels’ 
office, the CEO, Mr Saloojee, in attempt to – was invited 
into the meeting, even business development executive 
was invited to the meeting, Mr Zwelakhe Mpepi.  Those 
were the executives that met over this and there were 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   From how you described it it seems like 
it was a rush-rush meeting. 
MR MHLONTLO:   It was a meeting that was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I happened without much notice and it 
20 
was like let us meet and discuss this quickly or something. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, it happened along those lines. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Along those lines, yes.  Okay.  Mr 
Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Looking back, Mr 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 112 of 231 
 
Mhlontlo, if you had known what you know now from what 
evidence 
has 
come 
out, 
such 
as 
through 
what 
the 
investigators have shown you, would you have signed at 
this meeting to recommend the award of the contract to VR 
Laser? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Certainly not, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And do you feel that you were misled 
by anybody to an extent that that induced you, persuaded 
you wrongly to sign approval? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The process is compromised.  If you 
10 
begin to read something that says I will contact that 
specific supplier, I will use other channels to get to them, 
suggesting that there is a relationship that is beyond the 
normal business relationship.  And once again, as I 
indicated earlier, if you go to best and final offer, you 
would have followed a process of short listing, you will be 
looking at those short listed suppliers to see what would be 
the final price that you will go with.  And it happens – I 
mean, I continue to be in business today, it happens every 
day, but there is a process. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Specifically …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but Mr Kennedy’s question is 
whether you feel that anybody in that meeting misled you 
in any way, as you sit there? 
MR MHLONTLO:   The aspect that has disclosed to me 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 113 of 231 
 
today, that there were meetings outside the process then 
lands to one thing, that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That you were not told about. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And specifically in relation to the 
procurement issues, do you feel you were misled by Mr 
Burger or anybody else into a belief, a wrong belief that 
these concerns had been properly resolved? 
MR MHLONTLO:   At the end of that meeting I had the 
10 
understanding that either the issues were in process of 
being resolved adequately or were already resolved and 
that statement certainly based on Mr Mlambo’s evidence in 
this committee, was not true. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did you raise with Mr Burger the 
specific questions point by point that Mr Mlambo had 
raised in his emails to you?  For example, that the tenders 
had not been sent out to the people at the same time and 
the fact that there had been separate individual question 
and answer sessions with tenderers rather than the 
20 
standard 
practice 
required 
by 
the 
supply 
chain 
management policy that everybody should be treated the 
same meeting.  Did you raise any of those questions with 
Mr Burger? 
MR MHLONTLO:  No, my signing of the recommendation to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 114 of 231 
 
the CEO for overall approval is based on three different 
issues, as I articulated a little earlier on, the issue that the 
price had now reduced.  Even if Mr Mlambo did not have 
any concern I would still have had the concern.  I had a 
responsibility to ensure that the finances of the company 
are used economically and I would have had an issue 
around the level of the price, at least preliminary, it was if 
we are going to pay that, I would have had the issue 
around LMT and also to look to see if there was no way 
that LMT would be part of this, whether we put certain 
10 
mitigations in place and so my issues and that of 
[indistinct] 16.59 are complementing each other, to a large 
degree are the same, but I had my own fundamental 
concerns on the process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Looking back, with the benefit 
hindsight which we all know is fifty/fifty, but looking back 
with the benefit of hindsight, do you now feel that perhaps 
you, quite apart from others, do you think that perhaps you 
should have been more detailed and more enquiring to be 
satisfied that all of the various issues raised by Mr 
20 
Mlambo, not just the ones that you focused on, but all of 
them were complied with or resolved, rather? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I suppose when you work as a team, 
would expect all of us, the executives, who are contributing 
towards or working towards the same goal.  So when you 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 115 of 231 
 
split(?) and looking at the division, look at the leadership, I 
expected to play their part, I play my part.  Now with 
hindsight, yes, you rightly say and many other factors that 
we now know that we did not know back then, I mean, one 
would 
have 
been 
more 
circumspect 
on 
[indistinct 
– 
dropping voice] 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that not exactly the reason why 
you should be more circumspect?  That is exactly why, for 
example, the delegation vests the authority to approve this 
10 
sort of contract of almost 200 million at head office level, 
not the divisional level?   You see, I understand your point 
that you – we were all working as a team and we are 
entitled to expect that we are all working for the same 
goal, are you in fact able to say that everybody with the 
benefit of hindsight, that everybody in that meeting was 
actually working for the same goal?  In retrospect do you 
not feel perhaps there is a possibility that some at that 
meeting may have been trying to manipulate you and the 
process to ensure that VR Laser was given at all costs? 
20 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, with what you know, that is not in 
dispute, there are many facts that are suggesting that this 
particular division was too close to that company and I say 
that clearly in my affidavit, that this could have been 
staged, to say the least.  But there were certain aspects 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 116 of 231 
 
that I looked into and those aspects were ones that 
enabled me to put my signature.  Bearing in mind, I was 
not the overall approver, but I will in a sense say, one or 
two issues that are critical to me, I think had been 
addressed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But not all of the issues raised by Mr 
Mlambo, not so? 
MR MHLONTLO:   There was a specific understanding 
around Mr Mlambo’s issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me tell you what I understood your 
10 
immediate past answer to mean to Mr Kennedy’s question.  
I understood you to be saying there can be no doubt or 
there is no doubt in your mind that either there was or 
there    may have been some manipulation of processes 
when you look at the transaction with the knowledge that 
you have now.  Am I right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what you are saying.  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I just want to 
complete the questioning in relation to your earlier point 
20 
that you were all part of team working for the same 
objective.  Presumably you are talking about the objective 
being the best service that you can provide for Denel in its 
interests through a proper procurement process that from a 
technical, financial business point of view is going to get 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 117 of 231 
 
the best solution, is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   That is indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And would you agree that Mr Mlambo 
was motivated by that objective? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I will say yes, indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  What I want to suggest to you 
is Mr Mlambo was effectively to an extent sidelined, that if 
Mr Mlambo had been taken more seriously in the concerns 
that he raised and that you had perhaps been more careful 
in scrutinising what Mr Burger gave you as an assurance 
10 
that all of those concerns had been resolved, that perhaps 
you could have stopped the award of the whole contract of 
VR Laser by Denel’s Land Systems entity.  Is that fair to 
say? 
MR MHLONTLO:   No? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that no? 
MR MHLONTLO:   No.  I got presented with a memo, we 
have got people with certain skill sets with over 20 years 
experience of assembling vehicles, designing, engaging 
with clients, they have done and carried out, you know, big 
20 
– executed big projects in the past and those individuals 
with that background with a history of excellent work for 
the country, produce a memo, they bring it to me, I query 
the aspects that I feel that are out line.  They go away, 
come back, those were – that are out line have been 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 118 of 231 
 
addressed and represented to me to say Mr Mlambo raised 
certain issues and those certain issues we are addressing.  
Your specific issues have now been adjusted and then 
under those circumstances I would have been comfortable 
even if you take me back to 2014.  However, knowing what 
I now know, that there was something wrong in the 
process. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Before I leave this topic of the award 
of the contract for the hulls, I just want you to refer – so 
can you put away the bundle 1 that we have been looking 
10 
at and I would like you to go back to bundle 7 which 
contains your affidavit.  If I can ask you in bundle 7 to turn 
to your affidavit at page 580?   
MR MHLONTLO:   Page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   580.  At the top of this page, 
paragraph 3.18, you refer to emails that were shown to you 
by the investigators, DLS internal emails that you say you 
were not privy to.  They were discussing details of the 
tender and then you say in paragraph 3 at 19: 
“Based on emails evidence VR Laser Services was 
20 
too close to DLS and the whole process might have 
been created for and just to favour them.  These 
emails rendered the tender irregular.  Had I know 
this, I would have even opposed the award much 
more.” 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 119 of 231 
 
Is that your current state of mind? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  Now the final point 
on this topic that interests me is 3.20.  You refer to 
something that happened during the Denel Annual Women’s 
Day function in 2014 and you received a call from City 
Press.  Women’s Day is in early August, hey?  I think it is 
the 9 August. 
MR MHLONTLO:   We had a function in the middle of 
August. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, the middle of August was the 
function and you received a call from City Press.  Was that 
a City Press journalist? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what were you asked? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I was asked a question that is it true 
that the tender for – or relating to Hoefyster would be 
awarded to VR Laser or procurement would be... 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Ja. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And how did you respond? 
MR MHLONTLO:   My response was fairly standard to say 
that any work that we put out there follows a procurement 
process, so there would be no one at any point who would 
just know who would be awarded what with and when the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 120 of 231 
 
question was posed, it was after Hoefyster had been 
awarded to Denel and my understanding was that there 
was going to be a comprehensive process around pieces(?) 
of work would be put out to the market. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, thank you.  Chair, with your 
leave, may we move to the next topic? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Which is dealt with from paragraph 4 
on page 580 and I propose to deal with this very briefly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It is the acquisition of the BAE Land 
System South Africa.  Now the BAE is a reference to the 
British defence entity, is that right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that sold a subsidiary that was 
known as Land Systems South Africa, also referred to in 
the papers as LSSA, is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you gave evidence yesterday 
and 
this 
morning 
about 
the 
circumstances 
of 
your 
20 
suspension and the basis on which you were told that they 
were considering your suspension was that you and your 
colleagues, Mr Saloojee and Ms Afrika, had misled the 
board in relation to issues concerning the acquisition of 
LSSA.  Is that what they alleged? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 121 of 231 
 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So this is the very company that you 
are alleged to have given them misleading information 
about. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Right. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Correct.  Now, Mr Mhlontlo, you have 
given very helpful detail in your affidavit from page 580 to                     
587 dealing with the background relating to the acquisition 
and whether there was anything wrong in relation to that.  
Now of course ultimately if your disciplinary enquiry had 
10 
been held you would have had an opportunity to put all of 
this up before the disciplinary enquiry.   
How much of it    may ultimately be relevant, if at 
all, for purposes of the Commission will be for the learned 
Chairperson to decide in due course but can I just ask you 
to give by way of just broad summary your overall 
evidence, summary of your evidence overall as to whether 
there was anything improper or irregular or unlawful or bad 
from a business point of view in relation to the acquisition 
of LSSA from your perspective, from your knowledge. 
20 
MR MHLONTLO:   Chair, this business had operated in 
South Africa for many years, it had produced some of the 
military vehicles that are heavily utilised by our SANDF.  It 
had produced the vehicles that were used in the Middle 
East by the Americans during various sort of wars and so 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 122 of 231 
 
on.  This company was brought to our attention by ABSA 
that it was being disposed.  My initial reaction was initially 
I thought I would even meet ABSA to discuss it because 
Denel was not acquisitive at that stage but out of ensuring 
that, you know, we had a business relationship with them 
so we were matched with them  I briefed the CEO who 
undertook to brief various stakeholders before they can 
take any view whatsoever, and there was a positive or 
support that it is something that we must look at closely 
because in the event that there’s somebody bought off by 
10 
other companies that are outside the State there could be 
certain vulnerabilities that could be there within our forces 
and anti, and we looked into that, went and viewed the 
premises of the company ...[indistinct] at the end, we 
instituted, valuation was instituted, due diligence, we wrote 
PFMA applications to the Ministry.   
 
After a protracted 15 month period there was a 
PFMA approval, after various requests or various sets of 
information and presentation, due diligence was done by 
the banks outside of our own due diligences and it was 
20 
then a business that was then bought.  There are a few 
things that were linked to this process.   One was that the 
funder, which was Nedbank, the in-principle funder as we 
were pursuing this opportunity.  When it came to actually 
just about to conclude the deal they became uncomfortable 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 123 of 231 
 
and their point was in this funding structure we had 
incorporated ABSA, the co-funder, and they felt that the 
securities that had been provided for them versus what had 
been provided for ABSA were not on par ...[indistinct] 
basis, they were not equal and they wanted us to exit 
ABSA and use our own resources to fund.  The alternative 
would be they are no longer going to continue to fund. 
 
At that point our Chair of the Board engaged 
directly with the executives of Nedbank and the agreement 
was that there would be a sort of bridging finance for five 
10 
months to allow a proper restructuring of the funding, and 
one of the things that stood out in the approval from the 
Minister was the fact that we needed to ensure that there 
was an equity partner as a part of the structure in terms of 
the ownership, not only 100% Denel but there is an equity 
partnership. 
 
So the position by Nedbank talked to in one way or 
the other the fact that there was anyway a revisit of the 
shareholding of the entity.  The equity partnership process 
of our ...[indistinct] session for equity partnership started 
20 
and there was a preliminary view that that should be a UAE 
company 
...[indistinct] 
and 
that 
all 
was 
part 
of 
the 
handover process to the new Board, whereas the new 
Board did not carry that through. 
 
When we left we had not fully restructured the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 124 of 231 
 
funding, because we were running out of time we had 
arranged that the funding of Nedbank be extended to 
March 2016, you will see the evidence in the pack, but the 
one last thing is that ABSA was also exploring to take over 
the overall funding, instead of the funding being half/half 
just take over the whole funding but a load of issues with 
the banking relationship with this institution arose when we 
were 
suspended. 
 
We 
had 
an 
unbelievable 
mature 
relationship with financial institutions, no one deal can be 
concluded without a financial institution behind it to 
10 
support it in the form of guarantees etcetera, etcetera.  We 
would have 
comprehensive engagement 
with financial 
institutions, 
and 
when 
those 
relationships 
fell 
apart 
obviously the institution suffered. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, now LSSA once it was 
purchased was then incorporated into the group as part of 
DVS is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and there was an agreement 
between DVS and VR Laser for a single source supply of 
20 
particular items.   As I understand it Mr Mhlontlo that took 
place after your suspension, is that correct? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I have no knowledge of it so it must 
have happened after I left. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now I would like to come to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 125 of 231 
 
page 594, right near the end of your affidavit, to deal with 
the final issue if I may, and you were asked to answer 
questions about alleged interference by the Guptas and 
their associates.  Now you mentioned earlier that in 2014 
around mid-August 2014 you got the strange call from the 
City Press journalist, did the journalist mention anything 
about the Guptas? 
MR MHLONTLO:   No.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you aware, so it was just about 
two months later, after the City Press journalist spoke to 
10 
you strange call, did you participate in the meeting where 
you 
joined 
with 
your 
colleagues 
in 
signing 
the 
recommendation of the motivation to appoint VR Laser for 
the hull contract, is that right? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When you were part of that meeting 
were you aware that the Guptas or any of their associates, 
such as Mr Salim Essa had any shares or interests in VR 
Laser?  
MR MHLONTLO:   I did not, but I would imagine even if I 
20 
did it would not have mattered. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, but you did not at that time? 
MR MHLONTLO:   No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You were asked to comment about 
your 
knowledge of the Guptas and their associates’ 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 126 of 231 
 
involvement and your contact with them, did you have any 
business transactions at all to your knowledge at the time 
that you were still Group Chief Financial Officer, which 
involved to your knowledge the Guptas or their associates? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Not directly, I mean that could be within 
the group, some business I wouldn’t know. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But were you aware of that or not at 
the time? 
MR MHLONTLO:   No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That’s why my question was specific, 
10 
were they involved to your knowledge at the time.   Now 
you were asked as to what contact you may have had with 
the Guptas or their associates and you’ve mentioned three 
things in your affidavit on page 594.  The first is a visit to 
Denel’s offices by – in May/June 2013 by Mr Hower, Mr 
Williams, and a third individual who came to meet your 
Group 
CEO, 
Mr 
Saloojee 
and 
your 
then 
business 
development executive, Mr Ntshepe.  Do you remember 
who the third individual was? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I think the first was Patience, I don’t 
20 
know what the surname was. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Patience? 
MR MHLONTLO:   I suspect. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay and were you involved in that 
meeting, did you understand why those individuals came to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 127 of 231 
 
Denel’s offices to meet Mr Saloojee and Mr Ntshepe? 
MR MHLONTLO:   Not really, but when the meeting was – 
the meeting was roughly about 30 minutes, at the end of 
that meeting as I was coming out of my office to go for 
lunch I was called in and introduced to them and they 
indicated that they had been to us or Denel to look for 
business opportunity and their understanding was that I am 
quite influential and would ...[indistinct – dropping voice]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now your affidavit refers specifically 
to a subscription for Denel to subscribe to the New Age 
10 
newspaper and take up advertising space.  Was that 
discussed with you at the time? 
MR MHLONTLO:   So the meeting that was said would be 
scheduled for the following week it was scheduled, the 
same three individuals came to see myself and the 
Communications Executive and they put to us that they 
were looking for business opportunities and one if the area 
would be the New Age newspaper that we could subscribe 
similar to the SAA and similar to the various government 
departments and this is what they put to us, and that 
20 
meeting wasn’t – didn’t arrive at anything because we said 
to them we first of all would need to know, do a little bit of 
homework ourselves, how many businesses they were 
buying, how many staff we were buying and whatever other 
newspapers.  If we were to subscribe for New Age it will be 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 128 of 231 
 
within the context of our normal consumption of newspaper 
and we asked other questions, typically what is your 
circulation, who is the reader of your paper and to what 
extent can that be beneficial to us. 
 
For example if they were to say a lot of youth who 
are good scientists or engineering students are reading 
this kind of paper, something that we might have looked at 
because our mandate included ensuring that we do recruit 
young engineers and nurture those into senior – you know 
to become proper good engineers, so we asked those 
10 
business principle questions and the meeting came to an 
end without – we said look we cannot commit to anything, 
we must first do our own homework, we do meet in future 
whatever might happen 
would be informed by these 
principles, how they have been – or answered. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Arising from those discussions did 
you later decide to do any business with the New Age 
newspaper, 
either 
by 
way 
of 
subscription 
or 
advertisements? 
MR MHLONTLO:   So what happened in about a week or 
20 
two after that I realised that in my diary there was an 
invitation to Sahara Computers for lunch, I went over, I 
thought somebody else within the group was supposed to 
be coming, but I mean they had the guys that I had met 
only once a little bit more formal because we had a 30 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 129 of 231 
 
minutes or so meeting, I had previous met them for five 
minutes, I thought somebody else was coming.  When I got 
to Sahara Computers it was the three, two gentlemen, plus 
Patience, plus a fourth person who I battle to locate who 
might have been and a gentleman of Indian descent. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, just please speak up a little.  
MR MHLONTLO:   A gentleman of Indian descent.  We met, 
we sat around a big table and he was chairing the meeting 
and he did make reference to the fact that they had met 
with me, his guys had met with me and have they reflected 
10 
on what they are looking for and – which I confirmed that I 
had reflected, I have done, I have now had a look at a 
number of Business Day newspapers that I am buying, the 
Star that I am buying and any other newspaper that I am 
buying, I am buying no more than 36 copies of all of those 
newspapers and the business uses the newspaper on a 
sharing 
basis, 
they 
put 
them 
in 
a 
common 
area 
...[indistinct] and then they really were looking for what 
was the way forward and I regurgitated the same points 
that we had made with them, to say look to the extent that 
20 
the newspaper enhances what we are about in terms of our 
mandate to the extent that the circulation makes sense, 
any other services that you are selling should be within the 
context of our own mandate.   We must also further take 
into account the issues of budget and it must be something 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 130 of 231 
 
that we always wanted, not just because you’re selling it, 
and after this long-winded meeting because essentially, 
and I am raising those kind of points because the meeting 
becomes a little bit long-winded, at the end I said to them 
could it be possible for them to reduce their request into 
writing and I never heard from them since then, but what’s 
relevant also is the fact that when they were explaining the 
sort of business or the empire they were trying to create in 
this country it included setting up ANN7, at that point ANN7 
was  not – was still being built, the studios were being built 
10 
and I was taken around in terms of where the studios would 
be and what sort of format of television would be used 
would be more aligned to some – current affairs program 
as apparently there is ...[indistinct] somewhere in India 
that follows that kind of current affairs, so – and I was 
promised, which happened, I was promised that I would be 
the first – I would be among the first people who will be 
invited to the studios once the studios are up and running 
to come and talk about Denel, so I never heard from them 
other than that invite was to come and talk about Denel in 
20 
ANN7 which I went there and did, and that was the last 
time I heard from them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair, we have no further 
questions for this witness. 
 
Thank you. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 131 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Thank you Mr 
Mhlontlo for coming to give evidence, we appreciate it very 
much.  If we need you to come back we will ask you but for 
now you are excused. 
MR MHLONTLO:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair thank you, our next witness is I 
understand available and ready to start, and that is Mr 
Zwalakhe Ntshepe.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you may call him as soon as Mr 
10 
Mhlontlo has left the witness chair.   Are you going to need 
me to adjourn or it will be smooth without adjourning? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I am sorry Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you going to need me to adjourn 
before Mr Ntshepe or everything will be smooth we don’t 
need to adjourn? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I don’t think so, although the previous 
week somebody wanted to sanitise the area, I don’t know if 
that may – you may want to adjourn while that is done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe I will adjourn for five minutes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 132 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair thank you we are ready for the 
next witness.  It is Mr Zwelakhe Ntshepe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I just indicate Chair that he is 
legally represented and my learned friend Mr Zed Feni – F-e-
n-i – Advocate Feni instructed by Tlale – Tlale Attorneys I 
beg your pardon if I got it wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is present Mr Feni is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You want to just place yourself on 
10 
record Mr Feni. 
ADV FENI:  Chair – may it please you Chair I confirm my 
appearance for Mr Ntshepe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair for you guidance.  We 
are dealing now with the affidavits that appear in Bundle – 
Denel Bundle 8 under the Exhibit number W23.  There is a 
main affidavit and then a – a supplementary affidavit and I 
would ask with your leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  To take the witness to that once he has 
been sworn in.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR NTSHEPE:  My name is Zwelakhe [?] Ntshepe. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 133 of 231 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you swear that the evidence you will 
give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but 
the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help 
me God. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may be seated Mr Ntshepe. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Kennedy you may proceed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Ntshepe thank 
you for assisting the commission’s legal team earlier in 
providing 
two 
affidavits 
initially 
requested 
by 
the 
investigators and thank you for assisting us as the legal 
team in a recent consultation.  If I can ask you in the bundle 
that is in front of you – the file in front of you do you have it 
20 
open at page 497 the beginning of your affidavit and if you 
look at the top left printed in black you will see Denel-08-484 
is the title page and in fact your affidavit starts I believe at 
497, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 134 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now before your affidavit what has 
been included is a series of questions that you were sent by 
the investigators.  Can I take you to page 486?  That is the 
beginning of a letter that comes from the commission sent to 
your attorneys Tlale Attorneys, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And they raised a number of issues, 
questions under specific topics in a list of questions from 
page 488, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So for example the first topic paragraph 
1 on page 488 is Denel Asia? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You then responded as they requested 
in a form of an affidavit that starts at page 497 and you then 
deal with the – page 497 paragraph C you say: 
“I deposed to the affidavit in response to the 
list of questions contained in a letter and I do 
so in an affidavit format as a result of a 
request to respond in such a manner.” 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The list of questions is the one that we 
have just looked at, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct.  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So when you say for example on page 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 135 of 231 
 
498 paragraph 1 ad paragraph 1 that is obviously the legal – 
the lawyers terminology ad paragraph 1 that is a reference to 
paragraph 1 of a list of questions that you received from the 
investigators? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And may I ask is that your signature 
that appears on page 522?  The first signature on page 522. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I ask have you been through this 
affidavit? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And are you satisfied that it is contents 
are correct save in one respect you make a correction of 
some detail in the second affidavit which we will come to. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Apart from that particular aspect that 
you have corrected in your supplementary affidavit you 
confirm that the contents of the - this affidavit are true and 
20 
correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right thank you.  And then before I ask 
for it to be formerly admitted Chair may I just complete the 
process of the second affidavit page 523 is another letter 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 136 of 231 
 
from the commission the acting secretary of the commission 
523 to 525 and that was a request by the commission for 
clarification of some issues that you have raised in your first 
affidavit, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you then were requested to provide 
a supplementary affidavit to deal with that and may I take 
you then to page 526 is that the beginning of your 
supplementary affidavit? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And if I can take you please to page 
531 is that your signature above the typed name Z N 
Ntshepe? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And again this was signed in front of a 
Commissioner of Oaths like the first affidavit, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And have you been through the 
contents of this supplementary affidavit? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I have. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Were both of your affidavits done with 
the assistance of your legal team? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Thank you.  May I ask you say 
you have been through this supplementary affidavit are you 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 137 of 231 
 
satisfied and can you assure the commission’s Chairperson 
under oath that the contents are true and correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I can confirm and to say that they are true 
and correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right thank you.  Chairperson we would 
then formerly move for your leave to admit these two 
affidavits.  The one starting at page 497 together with the 
questions which are followed by the affidavit as well as the 
supplementary questions and the supplementary affidavit 
that starts at page 526. We would ask that the first lot be 
10 
admitted as Exhibit W23 and the documents that appear from 
page 523 as Exhibit W23.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think we will have to separate the 
questions from the affidavits.  The first affidavit you propose 
should be admitted as Exhibit W23? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  W23? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  I suggest that we do it this way and 
if it is fine with you that the letter appearing at page 486 we 
20 
make it W23.1.  And then the – it has got an annexure so 
that will be that letter plus the annexure.  And then that the 
affidavit which responds to those questions be Exhibit 23.2.  
Would that be fine and then… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 138 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will do the same when we go to the 
other one.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that fine? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  The letter starting at page 386 
together with the annexure thereto is admitted as Exhibit 
W23.1 and the affidavit of Mr Zwelakhe Ntshepe starting at 
page 497 is admitted as Exhibit W23.2. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Point – well ja 23.2.  And then we go to  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Page 523 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next – ja that is 523.  The letter 
starting at page 523 is admitted as Exhibit W23.3 and then 
the affidavit of Mr Zwelakhe Nthlanganison [?] Ntshepe 
starting at page 526 is admitted as Exhibit W23.4.  Is that 
fine Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thank you Chair.  Mr Ntshepe 
20 
you deal first in your main affidavit at page 498 with the 
issue of Denel Asia and you refer to the Minister of Public 
Enterprises giving approval for the Denel Asia Joint Venture 
in January 2016 with the formation was after the approval in 
January 2016.  And then you refer to the concept and idea 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 139 of 231 
 
being introduced to you by Mr Riaz Saloojee.  He was at that 
stage the Group CEO, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then we know that Mr Saloojee was 
suspended from the position and you then took over as 
acting Group CEO, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right when was that? 
MR NTSHEPE:  That was in September – mid-September 
2015. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  2015.  And before that you were 
what in business development? 
MR 
NTSHEPE: 
 
I 
was 
– 
Group 
Executive 
Business 
Development including new business development. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And you then held the acting 
GCEO position until you were appointed properly as proper 
GCEO, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct Sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  When did that appointment take effect? 
MR NTSHEPE:  That appointment took place end of 2017 I 
20 
think in December. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.   
CHAIRPERSON:  This position – I am sorry – the position of 
Group Executive Business Development that you held before 
Mr Saloojee 
was suspended is that in terms of the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 140 of 231 
 
structuring of the Group 1 level below that of Group CEO? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes correct, correct Your Honour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Perhaps logically Chair I should have 
taken him first to his background.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Perhaps Mr Ntshepe with the Chair’s 
leave may I take you to your supplementary affidavit.  You 
did 
not 
deal 
with 
it 
in 
your 
main 
affidavit 
but 
the 
investigators then asked you to deal with it in your 
10 
supplementary affidavit.  If you – Chair it is Exhibit W23.4 
and if I can take you please to page 526?   Are you there?  
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Ntshepe you refer to your 
professional journey starting in 1982.  You worked at Alfa 
Romeo and then you went to the United States to study and 
then you were a night manager at the New York Hilton and 
you worked as a stockbroker in the USA.  You worked for the 
Council of Churches in South Africa and then later you were 
a senior consultant to Barry Pieterse and Associate – 
20 
Associates.  Now it seems that you started at Denel in 
September 1996, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  In fact I started in November 1996.  Right so 
when you say in paragraph 10 it should be November not 
September 1996? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 141 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  To November 1997 you were an 
executive consultant? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  At Denel Personnel Solutions, is that 
right? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay thank you.  And then it seems you 
moved up through the ranks.  You later became Chief 
Operations Officer.  Would that be of Denel Personnel 
10 
Solutions? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then later you became a senior 
marketing manager for Denel SOC Limited and then you 
became Director Marketing Asia Pacific until June 2004. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then at that stage you became 
Group 
Executive 
Business 
Development 
and 
Corporate 
Affairs.  That is the top of page 528 and that is when you 
took up the acting position of Group CEO and later became 
20 
Group CEO and then you say you resigned around May 2018. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I resigned May 2018. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR NTSHEPE:  With a month notice. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 142 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  And – so my effective was it – resignation 
was in June – end of June. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thank you and then in 
paragraph13 you set up your – set out your duties as when 
you were still the Development – Business Development 
Manager, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thanks that is by way of your 
background.  Now I would like to go back to your main 
affidavit page 498 paragraph 1 you start dealing with Denel 
10 
Asia Joint Venture.  And you have referred to your getting to 
know – I am in the last three lines of 1.1. 
“I got to know about the concept around 
August 2015 at that time I was still a Group 
Executive Business Development.” 
Now if we go to paragraph – page 507 paragraph 1.11 it 
says: 
“A trip was taken early around February 2015 
to India and tried to find partners as stated 
before the key ones were already taken 
20 
etcetera.” 
Now in your supplementary affidavit you deal with the 
question that the investigators raise about when in fact you 
first became aware of this concept which you have now 
clarified in your supplementary affidavit, is that correct. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 143 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  It is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  If I can take you now please to 527 – 
528 I beg your pardon Chair.  This is what you say at the 
foot of the page 14. 
“Paragraph 3 of the letter addressed to me.” 
Now that is the letter from the investigators correct?  Mr 
Ntshepe. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   
“Raises an issue of an alleged contradiction 
10 
in paragraph 1.1 of the original affidavit 
where it is alleged that I stated that the 
concept and idea of Denel Asia was first 
introduced 
to 
me 
by 
Riaz 
Saloojee 
in 
September 2015.  It is claimed that in a same 
period – in the same paragraph I asserted 
that I got to know about the concept around 
August 2015.  I shudder to think there is any 
contradiction.  At the time of the formation of 
the 
Denel Asia 
I 
was 
Group 
Executive 
20 
Business Development and in August 2015 I 
got to know of the Joint Venture through the 
grapevine and this was ultimately officially 
introduced 
to 
me 
by 
Saloojee 
around 
September 2015.” 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 144 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Does that clarify the apparent 
distinction that the investigators saw between August and 
September? 
MR NTSHEPE:  In my understanding yes it does. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thank you.  Now then you deal 
with another – another issue that the investigators raised in 
relation to travelling to India and here you seem to accept 
that there was a mistake which you say was an honest 
mistake in your first affidavit and you clarify that here.  Now 
10 
in your main affidavit you indicated that there was a trip to 
India and you gave the dates of that.  And then there were 
problems with the dates relating to that.  Are the correct 
facts set out in the supplementary affidavit? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Which say that in fact there were two 
trips not one? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct Sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay and let us just – let us just have a 
look while we are at this.  At paragraph 18. 
20 
“The trip we undertook in February 2015 did 
not include anybody from VR Laser.  It is 
only around March 2016 when we went to an 
exhibition with VR Laser in Goa.  It is in 2016 
that Denel official used the VR Laser aircraft 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 145 of 231 
 
and not in February 2015.  Late September 
2015 I became the acting Group CEO and the 
duties and responsibilities entrusted to Mr 
Saloojee fell on me that includes all of the 
processes 
including 
the 
incorporation 
of 
Denel Asia.” 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So – so let us go back if we may I am 
sorry to be jumping around but I just wanted to clear up 
those discrepancies first.  Let us get back to page 498.  Now 
10 
you have already mentioned when you dealt with your 
previous experience that you were involved at a more junior 
level as far back as about 2004 where you dealt on behalf of 
Denel with the Asian market as part of your responsibilities. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now did you – did Denel drop out of the 
Asian market? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes it did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then you refer in your affidavit to 
the efforts that were made in 2015. There was now the thing 
20 
that Mr Saloojee indicated to you that Denel was now 
interested in developing business in Asia.  Correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And in particular a focus on India, is 
that right? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 146 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now did you go on your first trip to – 
that you have mentioned to India to look at that possible 
business? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct.  We were three of us and we in 
2015 
around 
February/March and we 
went to several 
companies to see if we can be able to work with them – 
Indian companies. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And – so that was three of you from 
Denel – you and two colleagues? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct Sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And anybody from VR Laser get 
involved in that trip? 
MR NTSHEPE:  In 2015 no. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And when did you first become 
aware of VR Laser’s possible interest in Denel’s project to 
look at developing business in Asia? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I became aware officially when it was 
presented to the board.  However I became aware because I 
was very – working very close with the Chief Executive we 
20 
were very close that Denel Asia might be a possibility of a 
JV that could be formed with VR Laser. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you have indicated in your 
affidavit that you got to know about the concept of – of the V 
– sorry the Denel Asia Joint Venture when Mr Saloojee 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 147 of 231 
 
raised it officially in August 2015. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Officially I mean in the sense that when we 
were talking but officially in writing to the board it was in the 
September board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  September 2015? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now who was the – who was the person 
who really initiated the idea of developing this business in 
Denel?  Was it you or Mr Saloojee or who? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I cannot confirm who – on my side I did not 
10 
develop it because in 2015 we went there to source other 
Indian companies because in India there is the requirement 
that you must buy and make in India and we were looking at 
Indian companies.  Unfortunately we found out that we were 
a bit late.  We were – so the concept of going back to India 
came about because there was the understanding that the 
banning of Denel in India has been lifted. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  When was Denel banned? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I would say banned in the form of blacklisted 
around 2004. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Was this – and that was about the 
stage that you left the role that you were in Denel trying to 
promote business in Asia, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And – so it was blacklisted?  Was it 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 148 of 231 
 
blacklisted by whom?  By the Indian government, the Indian 
Defence Force or who? 
MR NTSHEPE:  The – there is a thin line of separation 
between the Indian government and the Indian Defence 
Force.  If the Indian Defence Force does not want to work 
with you there is no Indian company that will be able to work 
with you especially government company. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And was that black – what was the 
reason for the blacklisting? 
MR NTSHEPE:  There was an alleged accusation that Denel 
10 
has used Asians in India.  We were on the brink of securing 
a huge contract of our countries in 80 vehicles very powerful 
vehicles selling to India and we were in the process – we 
were in the process of getting the finalisation through their 
own processes.  And then they – I think the newspaper – the 
Argus in Cape Town or something like that came out with the 
story. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So was the blacklisting lifted? 
MR NTSHEPE:  In my understanding yes it was lifted 
because we were allowed to come into India and we were 
20 
allowed to look at possible partners in India. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  When was the blacklisting lifted? 
MR NTSHEPE:  This 20 – in around 2014/2015. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  So does that explain the first 
trip that you took. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 149 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Once the blacklisting was lifted the 
Indian market was still a possibility and so you went to 
investigate, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct.  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you went with two colleagues and 
then you came back and then it seems that you then had the 
matter escalated to the top executive then it was taken to 
the board you say in paragraph 1.1 in September 2015.  Was 
it then approved by the board that you could then proceed to 
10 
investigate this project further? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Now there was the second trip 
that you took to Asia in 2016 you have indicated? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now before we get to 2016 you have 
dealt with in your affidavit from paragraph – from page 499 
with certain steps that took place in paragraph 1.5.  There is 
a step on the 28t h October 2015 a pre-notification to Minister 
Brown who is the Minister of Public Enterprises and then you 
20 
got so approval from the Denel Social and Ethics Committee 
on 28t h October 2015.  And then there was a submission to 
the then Finance Minister, Minister Nene on the 29t h October.  
And then there were meetings and presentations etcetera.  
Now 157 on page 500 refers to a due diligence report by 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 150 of 231 
 
ENS that is the attorneys firm ENS, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And their forensic unit submitted a due 
diligence report.  What did that relate to? 
MR NTSHEPE:  The due diligence report was related to the – 
the circumstances and the – the ableness of VR Laser to be 
able to be a partner with Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  To be a partner to Denel. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  In what business?  The Asian business 
10 
that you were aiming to get? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes the Asian business correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now at what stage had VR 
Laser come onto the scene?  Why were they looking 
specifically at VR Laser?  Who had identified VR Laser as 
being somebody worth considering to become your partner in 
the Denel – in the – in the Denel business that you were 
wanting to expand into Asia? 
MR NTSHEPE:  In my knowledge VR Laser was identified by 
the previous CO from in the sense that he did say that we 
20 
were going to work with VR Laser very closely. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That was Mr Saloojee? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now Mr Saloojee is going – has 
already given evidence about I think it was eighteen months 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 151 of 231 
 
ago before the Chair and he has been asked to testify again 
later this week to answer specific allegations that have been 
made by other witnesses such as yourself and he has told us 
and he will tell the Chairperson on oath later this week that 
he disputes that he was the origin of the idea that VR Laser 
should be brought in as the partner to Denel for the Denel 
Asia business.  He says in fact it was you who came up with 
the idea and that you strongly – strongly promoted that idea 
that VR Laser should be the preferred entity to be – come 
into the Joint Venture. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  I dispute that vehemently. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And… 
MR NTSHEPE:  Mr Sal… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes carry on. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Mr Saloojee introduced me to Mr Essa with 
the understanding that I must work very closely with him.  
And Mr Saloojee also informed me that VR Laser is prepared 
to give about R100 million into the new venture.  So we will 
need to work and make sure that this new venture will 
happen. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now… 
MR NTSHEPE:  So my duty was to make as you will notice 
that my duty was more action orientated in terms of 
marketing, in terms of new business development.  But I had 
no reason to believe that VR Laser is the – should be - 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 152 of 231 
 
because I did not know Mr Essa from anywhere.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you aware at that stage that 
Mr Essa was a business associate of the Gupta brothers? 
MR NTSHEPE:   As time went on, I realised that Mr Essa has 
a relationship with the Gupta’s.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When did you learn of that, first?  Can 
you recall Mr Ntshepe?  I know it is a long time ago.  If you 
cannot recall, tell us but can you? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I would not recall exactly or around what 
time that happened because Mr Saloojee did say I must meet 
10 
Mr Essa as often as I can so that I can be able to get him to 
be involved in the defence industry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   To get into the...? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Defence industry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Defence industry? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In general, or only in relation to the 
defence industry supplying to the Asian market? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Well, initially it was in general and I also 
think he encouraged Mr Essa to – via VR Laser because VR 
20 
Laser was owned by a different shareholders and I think.  
And then later on, he encouraged VR Laser that they would 
be able to be our partner in – to go into the Asian market 
and that was in 2016. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you have said two things that you 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 153 of 231 
 
think happened. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The one is that you think that 
Mr Saloojee encouraged Mr Essa to buy the shares in VR 
Laser and the second thing that you think he did was to 
encourage VR Laser now under Mr Essa to get involved in 
the Asian market. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On what basis do you think that that 
happened?  You had to have knowledge yourself of what 
10 
actually happened. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Mr Essa when he bought VR Laser initially, 
was to help to get into the market but also because VR Laser 
had a very good product, was to supply Denel.   
 
Secondly.  Mr Essa and Mr Saloojee were able to – in 
my understanding – were able to know the Gupta’s firstly.   
 
And secondly, that they made me to believe that we were 
able to run something in India and also to have a buffer 
between the Denel Holdings and the Indian market.   
 
So as if there are problems because we did experience 
20 
in problems in Indian before.  Then we will be able to have a 
buffer company which is a subsidiary of Denel, rather than 
Denel Holdings.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you mentioned a hundred million.  
That would be an investment by VR Laser once it was 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 154 of 231 
 
acquired by Mr Essa.  Is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, no.  Mr Essa had already acquired VR 
Laser South Africa.  The hundred million would have been a 
contribution that VR Laser Asia.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So that is also in existence already, 
VR Laser Asia? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I do not know when it was found but in my 
understanding that there was a concept of VR Laser Asia 
whereby they would have the hundred million to contribute to 
the joint investment. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what would be contributed, if 
anything, by Denel, the joint venture? 
MR NTSHEPE:   What would be contributed by Denel, firstly 
was, we knew the market and we are out of the market for 
more than ten years.   
 
And secondly, Denel was able – we had the technical 
expertise in terms of we knew exactly what India was looking 
for especially on the land system side.  And Denel would 
have been a partner in terms of being able to contribute in 
the manufacturing.   
20 
 
But also VR Laser South Africa would also have 
contributed in the hull manufacturing because those items 
that we were looking at in India, at that point, in time were 
really – were vehicles. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So ...[indistinct] vehicles?  [Speaker 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 155 of 231 
 
not clear] 
MR NTSHEPE:   Sorry? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Would Denel then have contributed its 
know-how but it would not have contributed any actual cash 
to a joint venture like a hundred million from the VR Laser 
side? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Denel would have contributed a product.  A 
not finished product. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And VR ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   The know-how would still be remaining in 
10 
Denel.  VR Laser would have contributed a hundred million 
and largely what was to the – for the marketing purposes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well...  Sorry, Mr Kennedy.  Before we 
move too far.  I want to take you back a little bit.  You said it 
was Mr Saloojee who introduced you to Mr Salim Essa. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that he is the one also, that is 
 Mr Saloojee, who officially told you about VR Laser for the 
first time.  Is that right?  Or did I misunderstand that part? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   No.  Mr Saloojee is not the first person who 
told me about VR Laser. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Officially? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Officially when we were going to form a joint 
venture.   
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 156 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then it was him? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From whom did you hear about VR Laser 
for the first time if you are able to remember? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I have been in Denel for more than 20-
years.  So I... 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, by the way.  VR Laser had been there 
but owned by other people for quite some time. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in terms of associating VR Laser with 
Mr Salim Essa, when did you become aware of that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I became aware of that when – one time he 
asked me and a colleague who used to be a Denel board 
member, to go and visit VR Laser.  So the three of us 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   ...went to visit VR Laser. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR NTSHEPE:   It was still owned by other individuals. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 157 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, was he still trying to – was he 
exploring the possibility of acquiring? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not know? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The notion was to say:  Let us go and visit 
this great company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, you said that Mr Saloojee 
introduced you to Mr Salim Essa. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In his affidavit, he also said that.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He said he introduced you to – or he 
introduced Salim Essa to you. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he said that he, in doing so, one; he 
was trying to create a distance effectively between himself 
and Mr Salim Essa because Mr Salim Essa – I am putting it 
in my own words – harassing him or pestering him or trying 
20 
to put pressure on him and he decided that he should get 
him to deal with you. 
 
But he says he warned you when he introduced you, 
Mr Salim Essa to you and said you are going to be the 
contact person or the person that Mr Salim Essa would deal 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 158 of 231 
 
with. 
 
He says he warned you about his concerns with regard 
to Mr Salim Essa and said be careful.  And I think he said:  
Make sure that whatever is done will be done in accordance 
with Denel processes.   
 
What do you have to say about that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   It is not correct that he introduced him for 
the reason that he wanted to have a distance because I was 
paid by Denel to do a real job and I cannot be – but if he 
says that, then he was using me in appropriately as an 
10 
employee of Denel to put a distance between Mr Essa and 
himself. 
 
In my understanding and this was ...[indistinct].  He said 
to Mr Essa:  This is the..  Zwelakhe, this is the marketing 
guy.  You can trust him.  You – he will – I would – as you 
would want to get into the market of defence.  We will work 
together and with him.   
 
Yes.  But I do not think that he wanted to put distance 
between himself and Mr Essa.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Because it will be incorrect.  In fact, it is 
inappropriate for him to say that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Therefore, I was being used. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he says, after some time, he began to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 159 of 231 
 
get a feeling that the relationship between yourself and 
Mr Essa was becoming too strong, I think.  That is how I 
would put it.  He was getting concerned.  I cannot remember 
whether he says he spoke to you about that at that stage or 
not.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, I saw his affidavit where he 
mentioned all these things about me   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR NTSHEPE:   My job as business development is to get 
strong relations in the defence environment.  Trust is very 
10 
important, globally.  I have... 
 
As I said I have worked for a very long time in marketing 
and I have created and been able to develop trust in the 
market we operate especially in the Middle East and South 
Africa in particular with the defence force.   
 
I would, therefore, not think that I would be involved in a 
situation whereby I will be doing things with Mr Essa 
because we have – I come close to him, which he would not 
know.   
 
Because I used to report to him at – because he wanted 
20 
to know what is happening, every week.  If he wanted a 
distance, why would he want to know every week? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  On page 499, 
paragraph 1.3, you say you were appointed by the Board of 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 160 of 231 
 
Denel to be the Chairperson of VR Laser Asia.  Is that 
correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We are not talking here about Denel 
Asia.  It is VR Laser Asia. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That was already an existing company.  
Is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that correct? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   It was existing in terms of preparations here 
but it was – what was existing then was the company that – I 
think VR Laser Asia.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja.  But not owned by VR Laser South 
Africa. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So who was it owned by?  Was it not 
also owned by Mr Salim Essa? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Mr Salim Essa owns VR Laser, in my 
understanding, VR Laser South Africa. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So who owned VR Laser Asia? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I would believe he did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, say again? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I would believe he did. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He did? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 161 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Essa? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I think so, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  So what – were you not aware 
when you were appointed as chairperson of this company 
who actually owned it? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I was aware that mister – I mean, the mere 
fact that the names are similar, there is a relationship 
number one.  And number two.  The mere fact that I was 
asked to be working very closely with Mr Essa, I would not 
10 
be able to start another VR Laser Asia which has the name 
VR Laser without me being – Mr Essa being there, being the 
owner of the company. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But Denel did not own VR Laser Asia, 
correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, they did not ...[indistinct]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It was owned, if I understand you, by 
Mr Salim Essa. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now what I am interested in is.  Why 
would you have been appointed then to chair a company in 
which Denel ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   No, no. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...did not own the shares. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 162 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And who appointed you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, correct.  Your affidavit, in fact, 
says you were appointed by the Board of Denel SOC Limited.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   To say this Chairperson of VR Laser 
Asia. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correction here Chair.  The correction is 
that it should have been Denel Asia. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Denel Asia? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So this is another error in your 
affidavit? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you say in paragraph 1.3, where it 
says 
you 
were 
appointed 
by 
Denel 
SOC 
to 
be 
the 
chairperson of VR Laser Asia...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   Asia. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you say ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   It is Denel Asia. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...it is Denel Asia. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, because VR Laser was owned by LSM. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
there 
would 
have 
to 
be 
a 
supplementary affidavit. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 163 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   [Speaker not clear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If you can...  Yes, the assist the 
Commission in that regard. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, help with your ...[intervenes]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...liaise with the legal team who has 
already been working with your own legal team. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I would like to go back to page 
10 
500. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe Mr Kennedy.  When was it was 
this happened when you were appointed as Chairperson as 
Denel Asia? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I think it was in 2017.  Maybe 2017, 
February/March.  Around there.  I cannot specifically say.  
Yes.  Ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I take you back to page 500, 
20 
paragraph 157.  It is the ENS Forensic Unit Due Diligence 
Report that you mentioned looked at the ability of VR Laser 
to work as a joint venture partner with Denel in its Asian 
operations.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 164 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now is it correct that the ENS Due 
Diligence Report, in fact, raise some concerns? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what were those concerns? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In my memo, one of them was that the 
people who we want to form a joint venture with our PEP’s(?) 
[Speaker not clear]  Meaning that they are...[intervenes]   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It is Publicly Exposed Persons? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Publicly or politically? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Oh, politically, ja.  Politically Exposed 
Persons. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And who were they referring to? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In my belief, because the owner of VR Laser 
was Mr Essa.  So in my view that was ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And did you understand their concern 
to be that Mr Salim Essa was already in the public domain, 
the public knowledge, media and so forth – already a 
controversial figure? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, I was aware. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   But I – for me, the business was separate 
from the individuals.  How the public views the individual.  
Many companies have done joint ventures with individuals 
that were perceived to be controversial. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 165 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
So 
are 
you 
saying 
that, 
to 
your 
knowledge, at that time Mr Salim Essa would have fallen 
within the category of Politically Exposed Persons, within 
that group of people? 
MR NTSHEPE:   As per the definition of ENS. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that definition necessarily...  Does 
that definition, as you understand it, necessarily have some 
negative connotation to it or not?  Or it depends on each 
10 
individual?   
MR NTSHEPE:   I think largely it has a negative connotation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It has a negative connotation? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you understood him to, at that time, 
to fall within that – within that category? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I understood that he has been exposed to 
the politics of this country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  But you – as far as 
you were concerned, that should not disqualify them, it 
should not be a problem.  The mere fact that they were 
politically exposed or controversial, did not take away from 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 166 of 231 
 
the fact that they were suitable business partners.  Is that 
right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In fact, ENS said we can still go ahead.  
There is a way I would be able to do that. [Speaker not 
clear]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, just repeat Mr Ntshepe? 
MR NTSHEPE:   ENS ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MR NTSHEPE:   ...said you – at VR Laser, they are PEP’s.  
However, it is able – it is possible to form a joint venture 
10 
with VR Laser. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Their due diligence, what did it 
reveal about VR Laser in terms of negative things or 
Mr Salim Essa that Denel may have needed to be careful 
about or concerned about if you are able to remember? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  I remember, one was the issue of the 
close relationship with the Gupta’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  And the – in my understanding, the 
previous GCEO, he knew that.  It was not ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Saloojee? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  It is not – it was not news to him.  He 
knew it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  And – however, he encouraged me to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 167 of 231 
 
work with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   And that for me, that was a major thing 
which I thought was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Obviously, this being 2015 because 
paragraph 1.5.7 of your affidavit says: 
“In December 2015, ENS provided a due diligence 
report.” 
 
Obviously, this was quite some time after the Waterkloof 
plane landing incident that had happened in 2013. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And then the 
previous paragraph 165 refers to the Minister of DPE, 
granting Denel approving in principle to continue discussions 
with VR Laser.  Was that Minister Brown at that stage? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Thank you.  And then you get in 
158 approval from the Board of Denel.  It is final approval of 
VR 
Laser 
as 
equity 
partner. 
 
That 
is 
the 
20 
7t h of December 2015.  Is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   By that stage, you were already acting 
as GCEO.  You were no longer just as the Executive for 
Business Development.  You were now acting GCEO.  Is that 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 168 of 231 
 
right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now had any consideration or 
effort being given at the risk point to whether you should be 
looking at any other person other than VR Laser or was it 
simply VR Laser and nobody else? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In 2015, as I said, early 2015, Chair.  We 
went to Indian, in particular to do the exercise to see who 
can we partner with in India in order to fulfil the requirement 
of ...[indistinct] [Speaker not clear]   
10 
 
We 
visited 
defence 
companies 
and 
we 
found 
out 
because we have been out of the market that they have 
already been – they have already associated themselves or 
found JB’s with other international companies and we were 
going to tender for the same products.   
 
And therefore, they told us that that we ...[indistinct] 
[Speaker not clear]  Except for one company that was, if I 
still remember, BEML.  BEML was a state-owned company.   
 
It was prepared to work with us but at a sub-contractor 
level because they would – they – even the product that they 
20 
were going to work with Denel was not their product.  It was, 
if I am not mistaken, a shack(?) product ...[indistinct] 
[Speaker not clear] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Why was it necessary to have a 
partner at all?  Why could Denel not simply do the work 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 169 of 231 
 
itself?  The produced the vehicles, for example, through one 
of its divisions such as, for example, LMT. 
MR NTSHEPE:   The vehicle is a specialised vehicle.  It is 
an 8 x 8.  And there is a huge vehicle that can take the big, 
massive cannons.  And Denel does not have that capability 
to do that.  We have never produced a truck.  Even some of 
the trucks that you see on the road were never produced by 
Denel.  So we have never produced a truck.   
 
So Denel in certain areas its price(?) sub-systems 
already existing in the market.  Or sub-systems that the 
10 
client to say that:  This is what we would like.  Whoever is 
going to bid for this contract, this is a sub-system we would 
like to see.   
 
And Patria was a good – is a good vehicle.  It is used 
globally.  And the – in fact, there was another time when the 
TATA also had a truck in India but – and once used the Denel 
for the cannon to do a demo in India.   
 
And, however, there was – there were problems which in 
the end, I think there was no compatibility at that point in 
time.   
20 
 
But the truck from BEML and BEML got a truck from 
Czech Republic, was the truck that we believed that will be 
able to carry the big cannons, which was the 155 millimetre 
which weighs more than, say, 15 tons or more.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you mentioned that you needed a 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 170 of 231 
 
partner for the reasons that you have indicated and that 
when you went on your trips, the two trips, in 2015 and early 
2016, it became apparent that this was now pretty late.  You 
could not find an overseas partner that would work for you.  
Is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In 2015? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In 2015. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Because, of course, when you went in 
March 2016 with VR Laser’s people on their company 
10 
aircraft, you had already formed Denel Asia and entered into 
an arrangement with VR Laser, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now you deal in some detail 
with the process that was followed, how the board gave 
approval and how there was a shareholders agreement, 
1510.  1.5.10.  There is a shareholders agreement concluded 
on the 10t h of December 2015 between Denel and VR Laser 
with some suspensive conditions.  And these suspensive 
conditions included approval under Sections 51 and 54 of the 
20 
PFMA. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that process was then followed 
when 
you 
submitted, 
the 
next 
paragraph, 
on 
the 
11t h of December. 
 
Denel 
submitted 
a 
formal 
PMFA 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 171 of 231 
 
application 
to 
Minister 
Brown 
at 
the 
DPE 
and 
Mr Van Rooyen.  He was by then the short-term Minister of 
Finance.  Is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now that required a 30-day 
period to run and in terms of the relevant sections, if there 
was no response by the end of the 30-day period from the 
minister’s concern, that would be deem to be approval.  Is 
that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, that was my understanding. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then, that expired on the 
10t h of January.  And then you get on the 13 t h of January, at 
1.5.13 a letter from the chairperson of the board, instructing 
you to proceed to incorporate Denel Asia. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the Chairperson at that stage was 
Mr Mantsha. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Why was he giving you the 
instruction?  Was that not something – was not simply an 
20 
operational matter that you as acting GCEO would know to 
do yourself?  Why did it come from the chairman? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The motivation to form the joint venture, 
went to the board and it was approved by the board.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now ...[intervenes]  
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 172 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Secondly, the issue of correspondence with 
the minister at ministerial level is, in terms of protocol, is 
with the chairperson of the board, not with me.  I correspond 
directly with the DG.   
 
And Mr Mantsha was able and he was available all the 
time when he knew about what was happening in terms of 
forming this joint venture.   
 
And in January, he asked me, in fact, in writing to say 
that the 30-days have passed.  Because Denel, in truth, 
Denel never had money.  Never had money. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Never had money? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes!  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For this project or...? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, no.  Denel had never...  I mean, it was 
never a sustainable company – profitable company.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR NTSHEPE:   As long as I remember.  And I do not know 
why they are not saying that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   I mean, you can look ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the Group CFO was here.  He told us 
something different. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes!  And because it was a shock after I 
heard as Group Director Marketing or Group Executive got 
orders because initially, they were only concentrating in 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 173 of 231 
 
South Africa.  Then after the independence or after the 
settlement in South Africa, then they have a problem.  
Because South Africa had stocks(?) and they could not sell. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I asked him the question with 
reference to September 2015 when he and the other 
executives were suspended.  I asked him what the financial 
position of Denel was at that time. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then he – he told me about 1992 
when the years after that but then when it came to 2015 and 
10 
the years that came – the year – the following years up to, I 
think, 2018 that the financial situation of Denel was good but 
then in 2018 or in 2019, it went down. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, correct.  Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you do not dispute that part? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I do not dispute it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  No, that is fine. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just wanted to make sure. 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I do not dispute that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  No, that is alright. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Then, just to follow the 
sequence.  You then – so you get that instruction on the 
13t h of January 2016 from Chairperson Mantsha.  And then 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 174 of 231 
 
on the 29t h of January 2016, Denel Asia was formed and 
incorporated in Hong Kong.   
 
Now some people have suggested that this was all a 
very rushed process which you have denied in your affidavit.  
What is significant, it seems to me Mr Ntshepe. 
 
That if you look back at the timetable from 1.5.1 where 
you submit a pre-notification about the formation of Denel 
Asia to Minister Brown and then you follow the various other 
processes.   
 
It seems to have been remarkably quick, particularly for 
10 
government which is not always well-known for being very 
quick in some of these procedures.  That it really just took a 
few months from beginning to end.   
 
And already by the 29t h of January 2016, you had 
actually formed the company in Hong Kong.  Correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.  The reason ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You do not find that unusually quick? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, I do not think it is quick.  Other 
companies form joint ventures within a month, private 
companies.  This took three months.   
20 
 
And I have to say, our chairperson at the point in time, 
because he wanted to move Denel forward and he believed 
in this JV.   
 
And he said, ,you have to work.  We used to have many 
board meetings there.  And that is why you see so many 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 175 of 231 
 
days because I would not be able to the other activity 
without getting board approval.   
 
And the three months for me – and internationally, I 
think...  In fact, internationally, it could be long, you know.  It 
is not necessarily that it is a quick...   
 
And another thing is that Denel, because it is a 
government company and then it must be slow.  I think that 
should not be the standard that we measure ourselves. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Unfortunately, when it came to 
the actual business that was already been undertaken, the 
10 
Hoefyster Project, we know that it was delayed by year after 
year after year, if not more than a decade.   
 
Unfortunately, the speed with which the Denel Asia 
Project was undertaken, was not always applied in practice 
for some of the other initiatives or undertakings.  Correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, if I can explain on that issue? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   The Hoefyster Project was approved in 2008 
that Denel will do it.  And Denel was going to partner with 
Patria.  And Patria was going to transfer its IP to Denel in 
20 
South Africa.   
 
However, we had two problems.  The first problem is that 
you needed a system, a gun.  A gun by itself...  I am sorry.  
Because this is a military business, I have to talk...  Ja.  It 
was an American gun.   
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 176 of 231 
 
 
And our defence force was not very comfortable with 
that.  They said you must – you, Denel must manufacture 
and make your own gun.  And to the accolade of our 
engineers, they were able to do that, number one.   
 
And number two, the – what do you call – the baseline 
product – baseline before it is accepted.  There was a bit of 
development that still had to be done, including the gun 
which took time and the clock was moving.   
 
Mind you, these are technical issues.  These are not 
marketing issues.  And it takes time to mature and be able to 
10 
say that we can bring the client to come and test it.  That is 
it.  So they took time.   
 
I am not justifying the long period that they have but I 
am just explaining how the industry works.  It will take time 
but of course, eleven years is a long time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Very long time. 
MR NTSHEPE:   It is a very long time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV 
KENNEDY SC:   And it had 
massive 
financial 
implications, not so? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, my ...[indistinct] [Speaker not clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   [Indistinct]  
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 177 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR NTSHEPE:   A short adjournment Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  Comfort break.  Well, we are at ten 
past four.  Maybe we should take it and – but we are going to 
have to stop at quarter to six or thereabout. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Quarter to six? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  That will be in order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so let us take just ten minutes and 
then we will resume. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may be seated Mr Ntshepe. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Ntshepe, you must just push the 
button on your microphone please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy, did I say we will stop at 
quarter to without saying quarter to what or did I say...? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You said quarter to six if I heard 
20 
correctly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright, then it is – I thought I 
just said quarter to without saying when because I was 
under the impression that we are after five, it was after 
five, but it is not after five yet. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 178 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No.  It may feel like a very day but it 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes so maybe we will stop at about 
twenty two six or thereabout. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Twenty to six, thank you.  We will try 
to, I am hopeful we will …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then if we have not finished we can 
start early tomorrow, as we previously discussed and then 
once we are done with him then tomorrow’s witness can 
follow. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  May I ask if there 
is still a problem in the afternoon when Mr Seleka, my 
learned friend, who indicated may be heard tomorrow, 
but... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, as things stand, the plan is that he 
will still lead that witness but from what he has said and 
from what he has told me, he might take between thirty 
minutes and an hour, so there is room for us to continue 
subject to that hour.  So, as I see it, we certainly could still 
go up to five. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then if his witness could come after 
that. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 179 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, would that be okay with you in terms 
of sufficiency of time? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I hope that we will be able to 
finish, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Chair, may I just deal with 
a few aspects still to be dealt with in relation to Denel 
Asia?  The product that you were intending to get VR Laser 
to produce for sales into the Asian especially the Indian 
market, was that the armoured vehicle similar to the one 
10 
that VR Laser was awarded the contract for Denel for the 
South African market? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In my understanding, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  But the Chair has already heard 
evidence in relation to the procurement or the award of 
that contract to VR Laser and some witnesses have 
contended that VR Laser was not the only one that could 
do such a product.  In fact LMT in that tender had not only 
tendered to produce those items, it had been producing 
similar items previously and was able to do so much 
20 
cheaper than VR Laser.  Now I am not going to go into the 
detail of that award at the moment because we are 
focusing on Denel Asia but my question is, why would you 
be giving the business to VR Laser to do this without 
following any sort of tender process for their market and in 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 180 of 231 
 
Asia when in fact there were others such as your own in-
house company LMT able to do that production? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, there were two reasons.  One, we 
did not have R100 million to start a marketing company in 
India.  Before our banning(?) in India we will stand over 
300 million in just in the marketing campaign, Denel, and 
we never getting – ended up getting a contract.  So the 
risks of spending a lot of money in India because in India 
you evaluate – they evaluate at your own risk.  In other 
words you can spend a billion rand in getting your system 
10 
to what they need, they can still say no and they are not 
obliged to pay you any money back.  Firstly – so there no 
other company that was prepared to have a 100 million.  
Denel did not have a 100 million to go back to India at a 
point in time to go and start marketing.  After being away 
from the market for more than 10 years.  That is number 
one. 
 
Number two, the vehicle which Denel was going to 
vie for in India is similar but not exactly like the one in 
South Africa.  Number one.   
20 
 
We were also going to not only VR Laser or Denel 
Asia alone in India, we were going to have to get an Indian 
company in India to be able to be our partner and that 
needed to make sure that also that company will have to 
contribute to the operations of the organisation and 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 181 of 231 
 
because 
by 
buy 
and 
make 
India 
means 
that 
some 
technology will remain in India and therefore the Indians 
will want to make the product themselves in the end, like 
we are making the Hoefyster ourselves because we got  
the IP from Patria, you know, licence IP. 
 
So it is two reasons.  One, the marketing costs 
were very high and LMT did not have the money to do that 
and nor did Denel and secondly, was that you also needed 
to get an Indian company to be involved in India to be able 
to do that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us talk about the first reason.  
Why is the position not this that if you think VR Laser is 
going to assist Denel by injecting R100 million into the 
project, what is wrong with you still putting this out to 
tender because when they tender they will include that 
benefit and if there is no other bidder who is able to do 
that you would still then go with them but you will then 
have 
gone 
– 
complied 
with 
the 
requirements 
of 
procurement.  
MR NTSHEPE:   I could be wrong, Chair, but my 
20 
understanding, when you want a partner to do business, 
especially in the corporate world because Denel, though it 
was a state owned company, had to operate within the 
corporate Act, the Companies Act and therefore you do not 
go out on a tender – like, for instance, when we got the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 182 of 231 
 
Rheinmetall, Denel, it did not go out on a tender, it was 
Denel and Rheinmetall that came into an agreement that 
this is what we are going to do.  It is not only Rheinmetall, 
there is also Zeiss, Carl Zeiss, which was the same thing. 
 
So I did not see an anomaly in the sense when VR 
Laser was going to be our partner because we – the issues 
is competitive advantage.  We believed that if we have VR 
Laser, we – number one, competitive advantage in terms of 
in terms of cash, we did not have any cash.   
 
And number two is that the links within India, itself.  
10 
Although we were there ten years ago, we were not there 
anymore, so – and the companies that we knew were 
already partnered with.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you see, I am putting to you this 
question because when Mr – your answer to Mr Kennedy’s 
question which was why did you not follow procurement 
procedures you said the first reason why you did not do 
that was because VR Laser was going to inject R100 
million, you know?   So but from what you say now, I think 
what you are giving might be a different reason but 
20 
whether it is valid or not, that can be looked at, but you 
are now saying well, your understanding …[intervenes] 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …when you – when Denel got into 
partnership 
with 
another 
company 
then 
procurement 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 183 of 231 
 
procedures would not apply.  That is what you are saying. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Which is the experience I have, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  What was the 
R100 million intended for?  Marketing costs? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, initially it was – that was the 
concept, that we will spend R20 million per year for five 
years. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And did VR Laser actually put up the 
R100 million?  Was it spent? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, not at all, there was no cents spent. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Is 
that 
because 
the 
project 
collapsed? 
MR NTSHEPE:   In my understanding, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now you said earlier that 
Denel could not come up with the money, R100 million, and 
only VR Laser could come up with that sort of money.  Did 
you actually make enquiries through a public participating 
process to find out?  Did you, for example, advertise your 
intention to enter into a joint venture with a suitable 
20 
partner to market products in the Asian market and say to 
the marketplace all potential competitors, if you are 
interested in tendering we will give you an opportunity  but 
please note that you will have to put up a R100 million for 
marketing costs.  Did you undertake such a process? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 184 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, we did not undertake it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But why not?  You said that VR Laser 
is the only one with that sort of -  with that money.  But 
how do you know unless you go out on a public tender or 
similar process?  How do you know whether there might be 
anybody else out there interested and able to do it? 
MR NTSHEPE:   As I have indicated, we have done this 
before and we have done it with Rheinmetall and then we 
have done it with Carl Zeiss and …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Done what before? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Joint ventures. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Joint ventures, yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes and there never was a public tender. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes but …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you see, that is a different reason. 
You see, you said you did not go out to open tender 
because VR Laser is going to inject R100 million.  So Mr 
Kennedy says but how did you know that there was not 
going to be another entity that could the same?  Then your 
answer now is, we had never done that before whenever 
20 
we - we are a joint venture.  You see, so that is a different 
reason.  But, of course, if that is what you intend doing to 
say okay, you understand Mr Kennedy’s argument but here 
is another reason that influenced you, that is fine.  Is that 
what you are saying? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 185 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Chair, if maybe I can repeat?  We did not 
go out on a tender, we did not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Why not? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but he was asking the reason why. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Why not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you had initially said it was because 
of the R100 million. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then Mr Kennedy said but if you did 
not check other companies, how could you know that there 
10 
was no other company which could do the same. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, we did not do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then you said well, whenever in the 
past you have done joint ventures you had never gone out 
on open tender. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  No, we have never. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  So the next question 
must be, Mr Ntshepe, the fact that you had never done it 
before, does that mean that you did not have to do it this 
20 
time?  If you had always followed a practice where you did 
not comply with any tender requirements, that is no reason 
why you should not comply with it if the law requires it. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So – but was it in fact not expected 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 186 of 231 
 
and required of you, leaving aside what your practice may 
have been, whether that complied with the law or not 
previously, was there not a requirement at least for this 
procurement where you would be procuring large scale 
supply of very expensive vehicles for you to sell in the 
Asian market?  The mere fact that you had never complied 
with a tender process surely was not an excuse not to 
comply with it again? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct but what needs to be noted is this.  
The defence market operates slightly differently from the 
10 
other industries.  The tendency is that when you form a 
joint venture or a partnership you already have to identify 
the partner, who the partner is, and this is what has 
happened before but it is true that if in terms of the law or 
in terms of what is required in South Africa, I think that is 
where one of the things that needs to be clarified with the 
defence industry, how do you go out and form – especially 
if you are a state owned company, how do you form a joint 
venture? 
 
If 
you 
follow 
the 
normal 
processes, 
not 
necessarily are you going to be successful in doing that 
20 
because it might not necessarily be the partner because 
the point is, might not necessarily be the partner that 
would help you to win because the issue is to win the 
contract.  It might not necessarily – I am not saying it is 
not, Chair.   
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 187 of 231 
 
 
So in terms of that, this has been the norm in the 
defence industry.  It might be wrong, I concede, but this is  
- this has been the norm and this is what has been 
happening in – for a very – not only – for a very, very long 
time in the defence industry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, is the position not that supply 
chain management policies, Section 217 of the Constitution 
which ought to be known by CEOs and high ranking 
officials of any state owned entity says whenever you are 
going to procure goods or services you must do so in a 
10 
manner that is fair, that is cost-effective, blah, blah, blah, 
blah, blah, therefore should you not simply be saying am I 
procuring goods or services?  If I am then I know what the 
law is that applies and the procedures that I must follow. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair, you …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if you are not going to be procuring 
goods or services, that might be different. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, Chair, but you are forming a joint 
– you are forming a company.  Yes, a different company 
from the existing company.  And therefore the operations 
20 
and the manner in which – and the philosophy behind the 
formation of that company is not necessarily in line with 
the 217 Procurement Act in South Africa, especially in 
defence companies.  This is what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, of course, in a case such as this, 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 188 of 231 
 
the idea was to procure particular vehicles or products, is 
it not? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, it was not to procure any vehicles 
made by VR Laser South Africa, whatever. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NTSHEPE:   The design will come from Denel, the 
steelwork we believe will come – because usually all steel, 
almost all steel in South Africa is sold by VR Laser and 
then the welding will be done by VR Laser and that also 
depends if you win the contract and you can only win the 
10 
contract if you are joint – you – we have already – and we 
have already formed the joint venture at that point in time 
but if it was just a pure straight procurement, I can 
understand what you are saying, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  If I may just 
complete with one or two questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But VR Laser would not have gone 
into the joint venture if it was not going to derive a lot of 
20 
financial benefit, not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And especially in defence market, if 
this project had taken off. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 189 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It would have been very lucrative, 
not so, for VR Laser? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And hopefully for Denel as well. 
MR NTSHEPE:   If it is lucrative for VR Laser it must be 
lucrative for Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now VR Laser in fact was 
taking not just the lion’s share it was taken the entire R100 
million upfront for marketing costs to get the project off the 
ground, not so? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It would never have done that if it 
was not going to get a lucrative benefit at the end. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you were marketing, you were 
intending to market the joint venture in order to obtain 
contracts from the Asian market. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Which would then be – would be for 
goods that would then be manufactured by VR Laser. 
20 
MR 
NTSHEPE: 
 
 
No, 
the 
goods 
would 
have 
been 
manufactured because largely the design engineers come 
from Denel.  The goods …[intervenes] 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Sorry, 
I 
was 
talking 
about 
manufacture, not design. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 190 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Who would do the manufacture?  
MR NTSHEPE:   The manufacturing largely would have 
been Denel because they cannot make a gun, VR Laser. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   VR Laser. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
But 
they 
would 
have 
been 
manufacturing components, not so?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, certain components. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Including the hulls, not so? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   If we got the contract, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   But not necessarily all the hulls. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   But I think they will be manufacturing, I 
mean that would be reasonable to think like that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But if in fact – sorry, may I just stop 
for 
a 
moment? 
 
The 
Constitution 
that 
the 
learned 
Chairperson has referred you to says in Section 217, as 
the Chair put to you, when an entity such as Denel, we are 
20 
not talking about a private company here, we are talking 
about a state entity such as Denel, is procuring goods and 
services, it must follow, as the Chair said, a process that is 
fair, competitive, etcetera. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 191 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It does not say except where it is 
Denel and it does not say except where it is dealing with 
the defence industry and it does not say except where it 
does so by way of a joint venture. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The Constitution of course is our 
supreme law. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So if one accepts that Section 217 of 
the Constitution requires Denel whenever it is going to get 
10 
into a relationship with a provider, in this case a provider 
in a joint venture – and I understand the vehicle would be 
a joint venture, but at the end of the day VR Laser would 
be 
benefitting 
largely 
through 
the 
production 
of 
the 
relevant items that would go into the finished product.  So 
was it not appropriate for you if you did not know this 
already because you had been following the practice, was 
it not appropriate for you to at least take advice and find 
out is this permissible under law?  Can we do this without 
going out on a tender or similar process? 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   What informed me to continue with this, 
Chair, was the precedents that I have seen before in the 
company.  The precedents – and I am just quoting a few 
joint ventures that we have done.  We have done joint 
ventures in the Middle East and there was no tender. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 192 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, Mr Ntshepe, I have no difficulty 
with your point. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I do not know those facts.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But let us assume that you are 
correct and I am not suggesting anything to the contrary, 
let us assume that there were ten different joint ventures 
before this one, it was at number 11.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Was it not necessary for you, 
particularly once you were at the head of business 
development and then as Acting Group Chief Executive to 
make sure, to be questioning in your mind, I know that the 
law 
has 
developed 
over 
the 
years, 
not 
only 
with 
Constitution adopted in 1996 but the PFMA was adopted in 
1999 and then Treasury regulations keep coming out.  So 
what we may have done in the past, are we up to date with 
the legal requirements?  You seem to be saying to the 
Chair, if I understand you – and if I am being unfair or 
20 
incorrect in my understanding please tell us, but you seem 
to be saying because we have done it this way ten times 
over, that means we do not have to do it. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Two things I was saying to the Chair.  One 
is that that is the past.  Now in the present going forward, 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 193 of 231 
 
we did not do that, we were still adopting the processes of 
the past, that is what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must just tell me if I misunderstand 
you.  I understand you not to be contesting necessarily the 
proposition 
that 
procurement 
laws 
and 
supply 
chain 
management policies were applicable and should have 
been followed, I understand you to be saying I do not know 
but there was a practice that had happened before and 
because of that practice, I acted in accordance of the 
practice. 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you tell me that Section 217 of the 
Constitution 
was 
applicable, 
if 
you 
tell 
me 
that 
procurement laws were applicable, I do not know, I am not 
contesting that, I do not know, but there is this practice 
that had happened and I followed it.  All I can say is, 
based on that practice, I thought if I acted in accordance 
with that practice that was in order but if you tell me that it 
was 
actually 
wrong 
because 
procurement 
procedures 
should have been followed, I accept that. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   I accept it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  If I may just take 
you back to page 499, paragraph 1.5 …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, I am sorry, Mr Kennedy, you 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 194 of 231 
 
may or may not take this further at some stage, of course 
there would still be the question of whether somebody at 
the level of Group CEO of a state owned entity, such as 
Denel, whether or not they would not be expected to know 
that procurement procedures or laws are applicable. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, when one looks at that 
question, one will not forget the practice that he is talking 
about but it does not close the inquiry, so – but you decide 
whether you take it further or not. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  If I can just pick 
up this question and then return to the point that you have 
raised, Chair, with the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On page 499 you say in paragraph 
1.5: 
“According to the opinion which was sought from 
senior counsel the board resolved to explore a 
suitable equity partner with the Asia Pacific region.” 
Now you have not provided a copy of that opinion, we are 
20 
not sure who the senior counsel is or what he or she may 
have been asked to advise on or what the advice was. Can 
you enlighten the Chair? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The issue was when we were not – Chair, 
when we were not getting any reply from Treasury, so we 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 195 of 231 
 
wanted to know, the board wanted to know if have we 
followed the processes correctly.  So we went to senior 
counsel 
and 
I 
mentioned 
at 
the 
time, 
when 
I 
was 
consulting, that it was Mr Bhana, senior counsel Bhana, 
and this is the chronology of events, in support of the – 
because I think we went to court here and so this is public 
knowledge.  It should be in the public paper. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So that was after you had not got a 
reply from Treasury, you then went to senior counsel? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Is there not a difficulty in what you 
have just said because your chronology indicates in 1.5 
that you received an opinion from senior counsel and 
according to that presumably because you were given 
advice in that opinion and on that basis, then the board 
resolved to explore a suitable equity partner and what then 
followed is the chronology in 151, etcetera, 28 October 
2015, 29 October and so forth.  Treasury was not involved 
until much later.  In fact if we get to your own chronology, 
you first mention Treasury at the top of page 502 which is 
20 
para 15.15 which deals with something that occurred long 
after the board meeting and that was on the 5 February 
2016.  At letter came from the National Treasury’s Chief 
Director 
for 
Supply 
Chain 
Management 
governance, 
Monitoring and Compliance to Denel requesting information  
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 196 of 231 
 
to determine whether government prescripts were followed 
in the formation of Denel Asia.  So is your chronology not 
back to front?   
 
Your chronology seems to be this, according to your 
affidavit, you go to senior counsel, you ask for advice, you 
do not indicate what that advice is, and then you say on 
the basis of that advice the board resolved to explore a 
partnership for the Asia Pacific region and that is then 
followed by a whole lot of steps which include the 
formation of the company, etcetera, and only thereafter, at 
10 
the end of 2015, beginning of 2016, you have now got the 
30 day period expiring where the Minister of Finance, the 
Minister of Public Enterprises do not get back to you and 
only thereafter does Treasury first get involved.   
I am suggesting to you that your evidence cannot 
be right, that the counsel’s opinion came after Treasury 
was approached. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, correct.  I might be then the way we 
have put the 1.5.  There is no way that we could have 
asked senior counsel to form a joint venture. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, just repeat that last 
sentence? 
MR NTSHEPE:   There is no way that we could have asked 
senior counsel, an independent senior counsel if we can  
form a joint venture or not. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 197 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that you – would have been your 
own decision. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja, that had already been done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja, it was the response to – now to say 
that Treasury is not responding to whether are they saying 
yes or no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, on Section 54 applications? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you have not provided a copy of 
that senior counsel’s opinion.  Did that senior counsel in 
fact give you advice to do with procurement processes or 
did it deal with other issues? 
MR NTSHEPE:   It actually dealt with the issue of – I think 
it dealt with other issues, in particular the issue of 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Section 54? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, which we went to – I think we went to 
court to see if we can get an answer from Treasury. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So it didn’t deal with whether you are 
not here to comply with procurement processes? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, no to get an answer, because we 
already had submitted the application. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, I am asking simply did Senior 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 198 of 231 
 
Counsel give you advice dealing with whether or not you 
had to comply with procurement processes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   No he did not give us advice on that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now if I can take you back to 
this paragraph and I drew your attention to at the top of 
page 502, a letter from National Treasury’s chief director, 
Supply Chain Management Governance, Monitoring and 
Compliance, now this is almost as it were a watchdog for 
government in its various entities and departments not so.   
Correct? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, correct so. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
A 
watchdog 
to 
ensure 
that 
government departments and entities such as Denel are 
complying with procurement processes and so that letter is 
then sent and asks has it been complied with and then you 
refer to in 15.16 to the Chairperson of the Board, that is 
Mantsha correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He addressed correspondence to 
Minister Brown providing detail regarding the formation of 
20 
the venture, a joint venture in Denel Asia.       
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But then – so that’s not dealing with 
the National Treasury query not so?  It is dealing with 
other issues.  It is dealing with the formation of a joint 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 199 of 231 
 
venture in Denel Asia? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it is a reply to – it is 
correspondence with Minister Brown, she is not part of 
Treasury not so? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and then you deal in 15.17 you 
say 
the 
Chairperson 
addressed 
a 
letter 
to 
National 
Treasury 
indicating 
that 
the 
response 
to 
National 
Treasury’s 5 February 2016 letter would be forthcoming 
10 
once sign off from the Board has been attained. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now can you explain, obviously you 
weren’t the Chairperson, and you said he addressed a 
letter to National Treasury but did you not give input to the 
Chairperson as  you were acting GCEO on that letter? 
MR NTSHEPE:   We had various meetings with the Chief 
Director at National Treasury in trying to resolve this, I 
think we had four, five meetings before this letter was 
ready and we would report back to say that this is where 
20 
we are and this how far we have gone in terms of 
discussion but we were not moving on that and actually we 
still owed them a letter for – in response to that question 
at 1.5.15, so in terms of the input to the letter we gave 
input to – because the Chair is not operational in the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 200 of 231 
 
company. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Exactly.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, we gave input to the Chair and the 
Chair was able to write a letter to National Treasury. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But this paragraph indicates that the 
Chair, presumably based on your input, said that his 
response about the procurement query would only be given 
once you got sign off from the Board, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   This is part of the response. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, unless I have missed it you 
10 
have not dealt elsewhere in the affidavit with any later 
response that may have been sent to Treasury, was there 
in fact any response sent to Treasury to deal with this. 
MR NTSHEPE:   There were many correspondence between 
Denel and  National Treasury during that time.  We would 
go and see the DG, Mr Anwar ...[indistinct] if I am not 
mistaken and then his team, so there were many, many 
interactions, so I would not necessarily know exactly in the 
meetings which meetings did we address these issues 
exactly, you know in terms of responding to these letters 
20 
and in terms of being able to find an answer into our 
problem and say are we going to ahead now. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now may I take you to page 507, you 
refer to the trip around February 2015, this is what you 
have clarified in your supplementary affidavit and in fact 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 201 of 231 
 
there were two trips and you refer to here the trip in 
February 2015 to try and find partners before the T1’s were 
already taken for example Barry Forge had partnered with 
the Israelis, others had already partnered with the French, 
South Koreans etcetera, no stakeholder was misled.  
 
Now is this what you are referring to here is this the 
first meeting that you went on without V R Laser?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC: Right.   
MR NTSHEPE:   In 2015. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and then you say, in fact one of 
the companies realised that Mr Kamal Singala was related 
to the Guptas, he immediately agreed to explore a 
partnership, I therefore cannot – well that’s in response to 
the investigator ’s question.   Who is the company that you 
referred to realising that Mr Singala was related to the 
Guptas which meant that – which led that company to say 
well in fact now we are keen to explore a partnership with 
you, who was that company? 
MR NTSHEPE:   The company as Reliance. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Reliance, and is that an Indian based 
company? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Company, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, now – yes now what I don’t 
understand is this, if this discussion took place in the first 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 202 of 231 
 
meeting, early in 2015 around February 2015 where you 
weren’t accompanied – sorry – February? 
MR NTSHEPE:   2015 was to explore the possibilities 
forming joint ventures or partnering with Indian companies 
in India. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Yes.   
MR NTSHEPE:   And then in 2016 that is the discussion 
that took place. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The discussion with ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   With Reliance. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   With Reliance? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So are you saying that in fact this 
discussion where Reliance was saying oh this is exciting 
we have got a Gupta company with Mr Singala as one of 
the Gupta family, that means they will be keen to explore a 
partnership.  Was that what happened in March 2016?   
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Would you agree Mr Ntshepe I am 
afraid this paragraph has led to huge confusion. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, that is why I apologised and said 
it was a mistake. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But it is confusion in a particular 
context which makes it a bit disturbing and that is that 
where this Commission is looking into allegations of State 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 203 of 231 
 
Capture, some of which involved the Guptas themselves it 
is important for the Commission to understand all the facts, 
and the way one reads this paragraph of your first affidavit 
that of course you swore an oath to when you deposed to 
this affidavit, the way this reads before you corrected it 
later, in fact suggests that as early as February 2015 not in 
March 2016, but as early as February 2015 you were 
already going to the Indian market and saying we are going 
to be in a joint venture with some of the Guptas.  You see 
the difficulty? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   I beg to differ honourable Chair because I 
did correct the mistake. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now if I can ask you just for a 
moment, may I have a moment Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Now if I can take you for 
a moment to page 529, paragraph 18, this is in the 
supplementary affidavit, you said the trip we undertook in 
February 2015 did not include anybody from VR Laser it is 
only around March 2016 we went to an exhibition with VR 
20 
Laser in Goa it is in 2016 that Denel officials used the VR 
Laser aircraft, not in February 2015? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So how did you go to India in 
February 2015? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 204 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  We used a commercial airline.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Normal flights as a normal passenger 
on a commercial airline? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But in March 2016 you went to the 
exhibit on VR Laser ’s transport, is that right?   
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right that then takes us back to page 
507, there you refer to the purpose of the trip but here of 
course you see to be referring, although paragraph 1.11 
10 
said the trip was in February 2015 you have corrected that 
in a later affidavit, but the trip that you are referring to in 
1.12 is not the one in February 2015 but the one in March 
2016, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   That’s in Goa?    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes and then in the third line VR 
Laser offered to travel with Denel at no cost to Denel since 
Denel had always been in financial distress we saw nothing 
wrong with the use of their aircraft at no cost to Denel.  
Further if VR Laser was going to be our partner why would 
20 
we be unwilling to travel with them. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now yes and Mr Singala was on that 
trip, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:   To Goa yes. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 205 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Who is Mr Singala, Kamal Singala? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Initially I did not know whom Mr Singala – 
but I knew that he was – can I say related to the Guptas, 
and it was always part of me, why is he using a different 
surname than the Gupta surname, but then I realised no Mr 
Kamal Singala is a relative, or he is related to the Guptas. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that what you were told or it was just 
your suspicion?  
10 
MR NTSHEPE:  Well you know as you interact with 
someone and you realise you pick up some things and also 
say that he was staying in the Gupta house. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That he was staying at the Gupta house? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, of course he could be a friend as 
opposed to being related, that is what I am trying to – why 
you would say he was related, because if he was one of 
their friends he could stay with them. 
MR NTSHEPE:   For a long time Chair I did because he 
20 
seemed to be very involved with them as a family in the 
Gupta family and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But is your answer to my question that 
nobody told you that he was related to the Guptas. 
MR NTSHEPE:  No, no. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 206 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was your own thinking.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja my deductions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Ja.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   One of the other witnesses has 
indicated that to his understanding Mr Singala is in fact the 
son of one of the Gupta brothers. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes I have read that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You read that? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And do you know if that is true or 
don’t you know?   
MR NTSHEPE:  I think it could be true, I think it could be 
true, I cannot emphatically say it is true or not, but I think 
it could be.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Okay thank you  Right, thank you, 
can I ask you to turn to page 508.   You say in paragraph 
1.15 I did not have any relationship with Mr Salim Essa.  I 
was – were you aware that he was connected to the Gupta 
family?  
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   I only realised after some time after I had 
many – some interactions with him that he has a Gupta 
relationship.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The you say I was introduced to Mr 
Salim Essa by Rhia Saloojee around 2012/13 at the Cafe in 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 207 of 231 
 
Oaklands.  Mr Saloojee instructed me in Mr Essa’s 
presence that I would work closely with Mr Essa but 
because he is trying to enter the defence market.  
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That of course was some years 
before you were going in the VR Laser jet to Indian. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So was Mr Saloojee saying you 
would be – he instructed you in Mr Essa’s presence that 
you must be working closely with Mr Essa because he is 
10 
trying to enter the defence market? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Not simply the defence market that 
may exist overseas in India. 
MR NTSHEPE:   No it was very clear that it is in the 
defence market and in my understanding is that Denel 
should help Mr Essa to be established in the – because I 
was a Denel representative.  When he says that he was 
putting me in between that is why I get upset because I 
don’t understand why would he use me. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now let me understand why you have 
used the word instructed, he instructed you that you would 
work closely with Mr Essa.  Did you understand that this 
was an instruction to favour Mr Essa or V R Laser. 
MR NTSHEPE:   It was my understanding that it was an 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 208 of 231 
 
instruction to say because ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   An instruction to? 
MR NTSHEPE:   An instruction to say that because Mr 
Essa has now bought or VL Laser and he is a black-owned 
business we should be able to help them to gain a foothold 
into the defence market. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did that mean that you should 
actually give favourable treatment to them if not what was 
being said? 
MR NTSHEPE:   I had no power to give anybody any 
10 
favourable treatment, because I was not in any line of 
business whereby I will say you do this or I mean when I 
was Group Business Development because my business 
was to combine businesses and work together.   But I 
would not be able, and if – some failed and some 
succeeded so that is an instruction the way I understood it, 
not necessarily to do a particular favour but to make sure 
that I grow the relationship that this company that has 
been bought by Essa who is classified in the BEE should 
also be involved in the defence market. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you have mentioned the black 
ownership issue and there has been other evidence and Mr 
Saloojee will also give evidence we understand dealing 
with the importance of transforming the defence industry, 
particularly in relation to Denel which was traditionally 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 209 of 231 
 
basically white owned and dominated, so I can understand 
that that would have been an important objective but are 
you saying that Mr Essa – I beg your pardon – Mr Saloojee 
were saying to you that you should encourage VR Laser or 
are you saying that he was expecting you and instructing 
you 
to 
cut 
corners 
to 
break 
the 
law 
or 
to 
violate 
procurement processes or anything of that nature?  
MR NTSHEPE:   My understand was, using your words, it 
was to encourage because they had no clue about the 
defence space. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right they had no clue about South 
African defence, is that what you said?  
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes the defence business, no clue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, they had no clue about it, they 
had no knowledge about it? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And they had no previous experience 
in what?   
MR NTSHEPE:   In the defence business. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In the defence business, but of 
20 
course ...[intervenes]  
MR NTSHEPE:   And they were buying into a company that 
had a – Mr Essa was buying into a company that had a 
long history. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes exactly, so it was now that we 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 210 of 231 
 
are Laser that had a long history in the defence business 
that while they as owners might not – new owners might 
not have experience and knowledge of the defence industry 
they were buying a company that did. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  If he had in fact been 
suggesting to you that there should be a violation of the 
law, and especially to do with the PFMA and procurement 
what would your attitude have been?   
MR NTSHEPE:   I would have told him that it is not 
10 
possible because you are putting me in a conflict because 
in the end I will be the one who is responsible and you can 
always deny it and say you never gave me that instruction, 
so I would have a problem. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, at page 509, paragraph 1.18, 
now you say that the Gupta family was involved in the 
preparation of the Section 54 application is not true, the 
application was prepared by my team comprising of Ms 
Govender, Ms Legwabe, Mr Behela and Mr Nlshowana to 
mention just a few. 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You confirm that.  May I just have a 
moment to confer with my team?  Thank you Chair, with 
your leave may we then move away from this topic of Denel 
Asia. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 211 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And move on to page 510 of Mr 
Ntshepe’s affidavit and that deals with the VR Laser 
Contract that was awarded by DLS for the hull platforms.  
Correct Mr Ntshepe? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   There were initially to be 2017 hull 
platforms later it was reduced to 183 I don’t believe 
anything turns on that though, and you there in 2.1 you say 
the instruction was to support VR Laser Services and not 
10 
to favour it. 
 
Now that appears to come from a question that you 
were asked to reply to, in fact as I understand it your 
paragraph numbers in your affidavit respond exactly to the 
paragraph numbers of the questions, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So if we can page back for a moment 
to page 491. 2.1 during the interview you attended with the 
investigators of the Commission, you stated that you were 
given instructions to support or favour VR Laser Services.   
20 
Please respond to the following questions.  Who gave 
these instructions to you using what kind of communication 
and various other questions are put.  So if I take you back 
to page 510 is this a direct answer to the question that you 
were asked to provide? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 212 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, so you say the instruction was 
to support VR Laser Services and not to favour it, 
favouring it was out of the question since I am not involved 
in the initial engagement with the entity.  I stated when and 
how I got involved and that does not merit any further 
mentioning again.  The instruction was given by Mr Riad 
Saloojee through verbal communication.   Now so the 
instruction that you say you received from Mr Saloojee that 
was to support VR Laser Services but not in a sense of 
10 
favouring it.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In other words not in a sense of 
giving it some advantage which it wouldn’t have legally 
been entitled to?   
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and when was that instruction 
given to you, was that the instruction given to you at the 
restaurant in Oaklands in 2012 or 2013? 
MR NTSHEPE:   Well the instruction was to work with, in 
20 
Oaklands in 2013, but we – because I was reporting to him 
every week the progress of how things are going I would 
not remember exactly the day and the date.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes you say at the top of page 511, 
paragraph [iii] presumably in answer to a specific question 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 213 of 231 
 
to when that instruction was given you say Hoefyster starts 
in 2007, I think the instructions were given in 2013, so that 
would seem to correlate with your earlier evidence about 
the lunch at the restaurant in Oaklands. 
MR NTSHEPE:   It wasn’t lunch it was just a cup of coffee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just a cup of coffee, I beg your 
pardon. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and then in paragraph [iv] it 
says since we have been doing business with VR Laser for 
10 
a long time and now that it has been acquired by a black 
person we need to support the growth of black business in 
the market.   Again while transformation is a healthy 
objective and of course there’s legislation as well as 
government 
policy 
that 
promotes 
it, 
in 
procurement 
provision is made for scoring in relation to the BBBEE 
component, this didn’t mean that you were simply going to 
give a contract to VR Laser if it didn’t satisfy tender 
requirements, is that right? 
MR NTSHEPE:   No, it did not mean that. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And in fact we have seen 
through the evidence of other witnesses the documents 
relating to this procurement process where in fact BBBEE 
constituted a major score scoring percentage, in fact quite 
a bit more than price not so? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 214 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes, now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I just go back a little bit, you have 
made it clear that the instruction from Mr Saloojee was not 
that you should VR Laser any advantage but it was to give 
it support.   
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
In 
practical 
terms 
what 
did 
you 
understand this support that you are supposed to give to 
them to entail? 
10 
MR NTSHEPE:   Like for instance what is involved in the 
defence industry, locally and globally.  Like for instance 
what is involved when you, although they could, I mean I 
was talking to Mr Essa, not to the company, what is 
involved when you have to get a permit to export products 
outside of this country, you cannot just export, you have to 
have a permit.   Like for instance the exhibitions that we 
have internationally, for them to understand what is 
involved in that, him and further to understand that in 
those exhibitions really initially it is the manufacturers, the 
20 
OEM’s for the first exhibitions and then thereafter it is for 
the public.  
 
Why they do it like is because they want to give the 
OEM’s the opportunity to be able to see what other 
companies are manufacturing and maybe there might be 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 215 of 231 
 
ventures, maybe there might be relationships, things like 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So basically as you understood the 
instruction to give support to VR Laser to Mr Salim Essa, 
your understanding was that it was to share with him 
information about the industry, the defence industry. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And to assist him to understand how it 
works. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Likely that but there are also other 
10 
activities, like for instance if we have to maybe there’s a 
show, there was a show if I can remember ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, in the defence industry 
MR NTSHEPE:   Yes and also introduce them to the 
association. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NTSHEPE:   Him in particular. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair.  Now you then deal 
on page 512 with LMT and you say in [i]: 
20 
“I was not involved in the identification of LMT so 
would not know who identified them.  LMT had 
experience but limited by capacity.” 
and in paragraph [iv]: 
“I do not know who took the decision to invite other 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 216 of 231 
 
suppliers to bid against LMT for the manufacture of 
the hulls and when that decision was taken.  I 
assume it was the division mainly involved in the 
use of the hulls.  That is DLS.” 
MR NTSHEPE:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now in fact your assumption is 
correct it seems in the light of evidence that has been 
given by various DLS witnesses that in fact it was decided 
to invite bids and they invited three entities, the one being 
VR Laser, the second being LMT and the third being 
10 
another entity that was also involved in the market.    
 
Now then you say in paragraph [iv] 
“The process, if I remember, was done at divisional 
level.  I am not in a position to say whether or not 
PFMA dictates were not followed.” 
So you are not able to say whether the procurement 
requirements 
under 
the 
PFMA, 
and 
presumably 
the 
Treasury regulations and the Supply Chain Management 
Policy were complied with or not? 
MR NTSHEPE:   On the hulls? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On the hulls yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:   No I am not in a position to.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, we are going to deal at a later 
stage in your evidence with the contract that was awarded 
for the single source supply of various steel and other 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 217 of 231 
 
components which in fact authorised.  We will deal with 
that in due course, right. 
 
Then you at page 514 return to the issue of 
procurement because you say in 2.5: 
“it should be clear that that the time Mr Mlambo 
rejected to approve the submission to appoint VR 
Laser Services the MOA that is memorandum of 
agreement, had already been signed and there were 
certain obligations which Denel had to meet in 
terms of the MOA, and any failure to comply with 
10 
such obligations would have opened up the way 
litigation.  VR Laser Services would have been 
within its rights to sue Denel and claim damages as 
there was a binding contract already.  It would have 
been foolish for anyone to renege from such 
agreement and expose Denel to litigation and 
payments of large sums on money in damages at a 
time 
when 
Denel 
was 
going 
through 
financial 
difficulties.  My, presumably my role, was to look 
what was best for Denel at the time to avoid 
20 
plunging the entity into further difficulties.  I must 
point out further the program was about three years 
late and obviously Denel was incurring penalties for 
the late delivery.  So there was pressure of finally 
finishing 
the 
baseline 
demonstrations 
for 
the 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 218 of 231 
 
Hoefyster which was about three years late already.  
This would show that the cost of not going ahead with 
the appointment based on what Mr Mlambo stated the 
reasons to be for his rejection far outweighs all 
reasons for the rejection of such appointment.  In my 
view his decision was not based on fact but on 
emotion and Denel could not afford to delay further.” 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now – now you reflect on this – on 
what you have said in this affidavit can I just check with you 
10 
are you not here confusing Mr Mlambo’s rejection of 
approval after the contract was already signed.  Are you not 
confusing this which deals with the hull’s contract with a 
further contract a single source single supplier contract 
because there we have heard evidence – the commission 
has heard evidence and we will take you through the 
evidence the relevant documents and so forth.  We know that 
in relation to the single suppliers Mr Mlambo was asked for 
approval after the event.  And you at that stage was – were 
acting GCEO and you said well we have to go ahead 
20 
because 
it 
is 
too 
late 
we 
have 
already 
signed 
the 
memorandum of agreement.  That appears to relate to the 
single source single supplier contract with steel items not to 
the hull contract that you are dealing with here in this 
paragraph. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 219 of 231 
 
MR NTSHEPE:  Here I am dealing with the MOA. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  MOA? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Concerning what? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Concerning the… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The single source single supply? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja single source suppliers of VR Laser. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  And there was the – I think there were the 
Casspirs which is a different vehicle and then also the hulls I 
10 
think that [00:02:09].  The one that I signed where Mr 
Mlambo had rejected was the hulls because as I said we 
were already three years late.   
I might have been under estimating because now I 
hear it is eleven years – maybe it would have been five or 
six years.  So the issue for me was the urgency and also 
because whenever I met the client and we need to 
understand that these vehicles are not just vehicles to save 
lives of the soldiers especially because these were South 
African vehicles – the hulls were with the Hoefyster.   
20 
It was important for us to get the PBL go through and 
if Mr Mlambo or me was dilly dallying and already we have a 
single source – and we have proven and the – proven that 
the VR Laser has good quality in that field and there is a 
MOA that has been signed why are we dilly dallying because 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 220 of 231 
 
my issue was that we need to move with speed. Because up 
till today as you have said it has not – PBL has not been 
even achieved. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  But just to confirm I just want you 
to – we will deal with whether Mr Mlambo was right or wrong 
and whether he was emotional or whether it was good 
business sense and so forth.  I just want to make sure your 
2.5 where you referring to Mr Mlambo being asked to 
approve the appointment of VR Laser services after it had 
already been – after the MOA had already been signed?  
10 
That is the MOA dealing with the single supplier not the 
hulls, is that correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I think the single supplier included the hulls. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Well that has not been the evidence of 
other witnesses and the agreements do not reflect that. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Single supplier – the hulls I am sure you 
know that the hulls is just the body. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Of the vehicle.  Whatever type of a vehicle it 
would be.  So being a single supplier that means that that 
20 
body – that particular body will be supplied by VR Laser.  
Whether it is the Hoefyster or the Casspirs that is what I 
understood the MOA to be doing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay so – yes your evidence is 
different from that of other witnesses but I do not think we 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 221 of 231 
 
need to go into a big debate with you about that.  That is 
your opinion and your understanding I understand that.  But 
can I take you to – to another bundle.   
If you can just put that bundle to the side please and 
Chair may I ask your learned Registrar to place before you 
Bundle 1.  Mr Ntshepe would you mind just putting that 
bundle to the side and just finding Bundle Denel number 1.  I 
do not know if it is behind you or maybe in front of you on 
the left.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes.  Denel number 1? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that number 1? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes thank you if you could open that 
please.  May I take you in Bundle 1 to page 825. 
MR NTSHEPE:  825? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now 825 in fact 824 is the start of 
that memorandum.  Now this is a memorandum dated the 
29t h October 2015 from Ms Malahlela the then executive 
manager Supply Chain in DLS and it was submitted to the 
Denel Supply Chain Executive that would have been Mr 
20 
Mlambo correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Kennedy just pace yourself 
appropriately we are five minutes away from stopping. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 222 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I will just touch on this and then we 
can… 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We can continue in the morning if we 
may then.  Thank you Chair for the guidance.  Now this 
refers in the heading to a conflict between the policy and the 
signed MOU.  Now there has been a – sometimes people 
refer to a MOU and sometimes to a MOA and you have 
10 
indicated in your affidavit that you believed there was no 
difference between the two.   
In fact other witnesses have suggested otherwise but 
again I do not propose to debate that with you now.  But 
what she says is this: 
“In giving the approval for the deviation from 
the normal procurement process and a list of 
suppliers to be used for the TS demo the 
Group 
Supply 
Chain 
Executive 
gave 
an 
instruction that DLS must first explore how 
20 
Denel vehicle systems gear ratio and LMT 
will be used in the project on condition that 
they meet the quality price and delivery 
requirements.” 
Now Ms Malahlela has given evidence before this 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 223 of 231 
 
commission that this specifically was dealing not with the 
original appointment of VR Laser for the 217 or 183 hulls. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But this in fact related to the later 
agreement that was awarded to VR Laser by DLS as a single 
supplier of relevant components. 
MR NTSHEPE:  This is a demonstration so it is only one 
vehicle. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Only one vehicle.   
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But she then continues and says this: 
“Furthermore in terms of the approved Denel 
Supply Chain policy and a DLS Supply Chain 
procedure DLS must first approach inter-
group companies before procuring outside 
the group in terms of the Denel Group Supply 
Chain Policy.  Under no circumstances…” 
And here she is quoting from the policy. 
“Under no circumstances shall products or 
services that can be procured from a Group 
20 
entity 
or 
division 
be 
procured 
from 
an 
external 
supplier 
or 
non-Denel 
company 
unless there is approval by the Group Supply 
Chain Executive based on sound business 
reasons.  Having identified a need for a 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 224 of 231 
 
single source supplier with a supply of steel 
components and fabrications in May 2015 
DLS signed a MOA with VR Laser for this 
scope of work.  VR Laser is 100% black 
owned entity.  In terms of the VR – sorry in 
terms of the MOA VR Laser prices must be 
market related and in line with the provisions 
of the MOA before an order can be placed on 
them.” 
Now here she is referring to the – a MOA that was 
10 
not restricted to a demo model.  It referred to the MOA for 
the single supply. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  For multiple purchases. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Of orders correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And she is referring here to the 
MOA having been signed in May 2015 and now she is saying 
there is a problem effectively that this has not complied with 
20 
the Denel policy which required that you cannot buy outside 
the group unless the group Supply Chain Executive Mr 
Mlambo has given his approval on the basis of sound 
business reasons.  Are you with me so far? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes I hear what you say. 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 225 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And then she says: 
“Due to these contradictory provisions – 
positions 
Supply 
Chain 
approached 
DLS 
EXCO to make a decision as to whether to 
honour the MOA and place the order on VR 
Laser or to follow the Supply Chain Policy 
and procure from Inter-Group namely DVS or 
LMT for this project.” 
So this is – so her department in DLS went to their 
management or rather their EXCO – DLS EXCO to say well 
10 
which one must we follow?  Must we follow the MOA or must 
we follow the procurement policy because the procurement 
policy seems to have been breached? And then she says at 
the foot of the page: 
“Given the time frame urgency and history 
EXCO’s recommended that the work be done 
by VR Laser.  I hereby request permission to 
implement the EXCO decision in this regard.” 
Now 
presumably 
you 
were 
not 
involved 
in 
Mr 
Malahlela’s interactions with the EXCO within her divisional 
20 
level? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Correct.  So she has given evidence to 
the Chair that you presumably cannot comment on namely 
that she told him no we cannot do – we cannot continue with 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 226 of 231 
 
the MOA although it is already signed because this is a 
conflict with our policy.  And she was then told you are now 
instructed to put together the motivation.  You cannot 
comment on that presumably? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No I cannot comment on that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay thank you.  Now – so then she 
gave evidence further and Mr Mlambo also gave evidence 
that this was then said to him at Group level Head Office 
level where he was the most senior person dealing directly 
with Supply Chain.  And he instead of signing above the 
10 
word approval where his name – it is misspelt it is spelt as 
Denise Mlambo it should be Dennis Mlambo Group Supply 
Chain Executive.  He refused to sign in there and instead he 
wrote the portion that is in writing here.  You see that?  And 
what he wrote there is: 
“NB DVS and LMT must submit proof that 
they cannot meet the requirements prior to 
the contract being awarded to VR Laser.” 
Now – so what he was saying in his evidence was 
this.  Ms Malahlela was correct to pick up that the MOA that 
20 
had already been signed conflicted with the Denel Group 
Procurement Policy.   
Because if you were going to procure goods or 
services outside the Denel group where you already have 
DVS and LMT there must be a good business reason and he 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 227 of 231 
 
must be satisfied before he would give approval that there is 
a good business reason so he is saying effectively here, I 
am prepared to consider it but both DVS and LMT will have 
to submit proof that they cannot meet the requirements 
before I give approval.  Now that was his attitude.   
And his evidence is that LMT and DVS did not 
provide proof nor did anybody else in DLS that there was a 
good 
business 
reason 
that 
they 
could 
not 
meet 
the 
requirements.   
But instead his evidence was that you then approved 
10 
it effectively overriding his decision.  Is it correct that the 
word approved below the handwritten portion that I have just 
read is your handwriting? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes it is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then it is in print – printed very 
clearly GCEO Z Ntshepe yourself, correct? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And is that your signature? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that correct?  Okay.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And is it correct that you were overriding 
his –his position? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you – it is not dated I am about to 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 228 of 231 
 
finish if I may Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is not dated can you recall when you 
signed this? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I – what is it the 9t h? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The memorandum is dated 29 October 
2015. 
MR NTSHEPE:  I do not remember.  Maybe … 
CHAIRPERSON:  A few days after that? 
MR NTSHEPE:  A few days or a week or two. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Interestingly the title I do not 
know if that is your handwriting the bold written portion 
below your signature is that your – is that your own writing? 
MR NTSHEPE:  No that is not my writing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay somebody else presumably put 
that in. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And it has not – it does not indicate you 
then as being acting it actually shows that you were then 
the… 
20 
MR NTSHEPE:  That is not my writing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The fuller fledged GCEO. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Can you remember when you 
signed this whether by then you were still acting or whether 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 229 of 231 
 
you were the GCEO? 
MR NTSHEPE:  I think I was still acting. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Thank you.  May I suggest Chair 
that the witness then proceed to explain why he took this 
decision and approved it in the morning when we resume? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You propose that he explains tomorrow 
morning or you would like that to happen now? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I know that you are under time pressure 
with other commitments Chair.  I am suggesting that he 
continue tomorrow so that we do not breach the time limit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But I am happy if you want to proceed 
to ask him? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, I think it is – let us do it – let us 
continue tomorrow. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  As things stand what is your estimate 
of how much time you would need with him before your next 
witness tomorrow?  How much time do you think he will 
take? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I believe we should finish within an 
hour maximum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That is my estimation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So should we start at nine or half 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 230 of 231 
 
past nine? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I suggest respectfully nine o’clock 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Nine o’clock. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I know you have many other demands. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But I think that we have a fairly busy 
day tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Who do we have as tomorrows…? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  After Mr Ntshepe we have scheduled Dr 
10 
Nel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  He was at LMT. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then after that Mr Van der Merwe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Who has requested and we need to 
approach you in chambers to ask for guidance in relation to 
his request to have the hearing virtually tomorrow? 
MR NTSHEPE:  Okay alright. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  But those are the two witnesses apart 
from the completion of Mr Ntshepe’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No that is fine.  Let us start at – and 
the person who would have been your second witness 
tomorrow how long is he likely to be? 
10 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 303 
 
Page 231 of 231 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Dr Nel I would think probably about two 
to three hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that so? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us start at nine tomorrow 
morning. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Ntshepe we will adjourn for the 
day and then we will start at nine tomorrow morning. 
MR NTSHEPE:  Yes thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 11 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
 
