 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
11 MARCH 2021 
 
 
DAY 359 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 242 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
11 MARCH 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 3 of 242 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 11 MARCH 2021 
CHAIRPERSON: 
  
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Myburgh, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Good morning DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes we are thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  DCJ today we are going to start with 
the evidence of Mr Gama.  He is here.  You will find Mr 
Gama’s exhibit in Bundle 7 that is Exhibit BB28. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama has thus far filed two 
affidavits which we will obviously ask you to admit into 
evidence when he is sworn in.   
 
But perhaps I could just say this by way of 
background if I may?  You are aware Chairperson that the 
parties have reached an agreement to the effect that we 
will 
affectively 
ring 
fence 
evidence 
in 
relation 
to 
locomotives and I suppose it is important for me to explain 
that when we talk about evidence and locomotives we are 
20 
talking about the acquisition of locomotives as well as any 
transactional advise and agreement and also relocation. 
 
So effectively we will not deal with anything dealing 
with locomotives today.  The agreement is that Mr Gama 
we have provided him with what we consider to be the 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 4 of 242 
 
relevant parts of the Fundudzi Report which we have 
invited him to deal with.  The agreement is that an affidavit 
will be put in by next week Friday as I understand. 
 
So it is our intention today to deal with four main 
topics outside of the locomotives.  
 
The first relates to Mr Gama’s reinstatement. 
 
The second relates to GNS/Abalozi. 
 
The third relates to alleged assistance provided by 
Mr Sagar of McKinsey to Mr Gama in respect of the 
completion of his NBA. 
10 
 
And then fourthly it had been our intention to deal 
with driver 2 but I understand there may be some issues 
from Mr Gama’s side.  I will discuss that with my learned 
friend over the tea break hopefully we can come to some 
assistance or arrangement.  Apparently it is alleged that 
there is still some information outstanding and apparently 
Mr Gama wants to cross-examine Driver No.2 so that might 
have to be put on hold as well.  But certainly we can at 
least today deal with reinstatement, GNA and Mr Sagar.  
The benefit of that as well is that after our examination of 
20 
Mr Gama and any re-examination I guess that we will all be 
in a position then to deal insofar as Mr Gama persists with 
the application to cross-examine Mr Todd and that should 
be something that could be determined quite easily in the 
light of our examination of Mr Gama. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 5 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I would imagine that any re-
examination would have to happen when he has completed 
all his evidence. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Complete his evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On everything. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then as you are aware Mr Gama 
as you know is represented by Counsel he is here if you 
would like him to place himself on record? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You may do so from where you are 
if your microphone is working. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Good morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Morning. 
ADV 
OLDWADGE: 
 
 
Mr 
Chair. 
 
Oldwadge 
KC; 
Johannesburg Bar, Brian Khan Incorporated my attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And it is a matter of record that I have 
been representing Mr Gama from the outset.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Okay you are 
20 
ready? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:  Good morning DCJ how are you? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am alright how are you? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 6 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:  Great thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good.  Please administer the oath or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR GAMA:  Siyabonga Innocent Gama. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
10 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MR GAMA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure whether they would – the 
transcribers would have heard Mr Gama’s responses let us 
double check we might have to repeat it.  Must do it again?  
Okay I am sorry.  Just speak up a bit so they can hear and 
20 
it can be recorded. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR GAMA:  Siyabonga Innocent Gama. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no, no I do not think that is up that 
is loud enough.  So try – try again. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 7 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:  Okay try and speak closer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe closer to the microphone ja. 
MR GAMA:  Siyabonga Innocent Gama. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
10 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MR GAMA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you; you may – you may sit down.  
Thank you Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Gama 
the protocol is I am just going to take you to your affidavit 
and get them entered as exhibits.  I know that you wish to 
make an opening address.  You are more than welcome 
20 
that let us just enter your affidavits formally and then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  If he would like to make an opening 
address I will prefer that I see what he is going to say. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  First because I allowed Mr Brian Molefe 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 8 of 242 
 
to make an opening address without seeing his statement 
and it implicated certain people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so I would like that you see it, I see 
it first. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that we are just sure that it does not 
implicate 
anybody 
because 
if 
it 
does 
they 
should 
procedurally first be served with 3.3 Notices. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  It is – this is something we 
10 
have raised with our learned friends.  Mr Chairperson 
perhaps can I suggest then that what we do is we get Mr 
Gama’s affidavits entered and then we perhaps have a 
short adjournment where we can be provided with the copy 
of Mr Gama’s opening address and we can then read it and 
then reconvene.  Or would you like to rather see the 
opening address now? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well no, no, I think we can do it the way 
you are suggesting.  It may be called an opening address 
but it may be that whether he makes it now or sometime 
20 
later might not make a difference but of course he or his 
counsel will indicate whether it makes a lot of difference or 
as long as he gets a chance at some stage to – to make it.  
But certainly we can have his affidavits admitted. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 9 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
And 
then 
maybe 
take 
a 
short 
adjournment, we look at it. It may be that if it does not 
implicate anybody he can then go ahead. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  YEs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And make it.  If it does implicate 
somebody it may be that it might have to wait and other 
arrangements might be made for another time.  Mr 
Oldwadge do you want to say anything in this regard or not 
really? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Mr Chair I fully respectfully in 
10 
agreement with the proposed way forward.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.  Thank you.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Mr Gama you have 
Bundle 7 Exhibit 22 in front of you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh maybe pull your microphone 
a little to – ja, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Mr Gama I think it is the 
file in front of you.  It is Bundle – sorry Bundle 7 Exhibit 
28. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you look on the – you look at the 
20 
spine of the file to see which bundle it is and then you can 
go inside the file to look at the actual exhibit. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I ask you please to turn to 
page 7 and there you will find an affidavit and it starts at 
page 7. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 10 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  It is Bundle 7 he? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Bundle 7 Exhibit 28. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where do I find Exhibit 28?  What page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is it not the first part of the file DCJ? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is it after BB24?  No that is Gigaba.  
Is the pagination of the bundle not sequential because if 
you tell me the page number? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well if – what I have is Exhibit 28 
that is then paginated by itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Let me try and look for it.  The 
10 
best is… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  DCJ do you have Bundle 7? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Do you have Bundle 7? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is the one I have. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well Bundle 7 has got a tab in the 
front that says BB28. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got – I have – I have now reached 
Mr Gama’s affidavit which appears on page 116.  116 Mr 
Gama would be the black 116 at the top left of the page.  
20 
Disregard for now the red numbers on the right hand corner 
unless you are specifically asked to use it.  I must… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  DCJ I am afraid that for some reason 
we – our documents are different. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 11 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Perhaps I could – perhaps... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  I 00:11:04 the same as that decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know what – okay how come your 
one is different from mine Mr Myburgh they should be the 
same.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  May I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one that I have in front of me Mr 
Gama’s affidavit is one deposed to on the 31 s t of August 
2020. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of January – 31 s t January 2021.  Is that 
– is that the one you were… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  DCJ may I ask – perhaps suggest 
that we – we take a short adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We take the adjournment ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So I can sort that out and we can try 
and deal with the statement issue then. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay let us… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I will speak to your Registrar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us do that because it is going to 
cause problems if we do not have the same things.  Okay 
we adjourn. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 12 of 242 
 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I realise that Mr Gama’s opening 
statement was much longer than I – I had anticipated and 
going through it would take quite some time so that is why I 
sent the message that we will have to start and I would have 
to read it some other time. 
 
Having said that I do realise that there may be 
certain portions or certain topics that he deals with that may 
10 
be might not create any problem so one option is that if 
there is agreement about certain portions that are not – do 
not implicate anybody that he could deal with those and 
maybe can leave out for now those that may implicate other 
people for later. 
 
Or – or he could make the full statement at a later 
time when we have all had a look but I have seen that he – I 
think he – there are portions that may implicate certain 
people if I am not mistaken.  I do not know Mr Myburgh what 
is – are you able to say? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson we have identified I think 
three or four points that may certainly be problematic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I – from our side I think the real 
introductory stuff about the purpose of the statement if Mr 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 13 of 242 
 
Gama wishes to complain about how he has been treated by 
the – by the Transnet’s stream we do not have any difficulty 
with him dealing with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We spoke with the investigation, his 
motivation to join Transnet, his achievements at Transnet so 
really up until page 6 we do not have a difficulty and that 
would probably fall typically within an opening statement.   
 
But then he deals with the – the various witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It seems to me also there I suppose 
potential problem is that really evidence and along the way 
he does say some things that might – they implicate people 
outside of the ordinary sort of course of argie bargie of 
litigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So I mean one possibility is that Mr 
Gama be afforded an opportunity of perhaps just paring this 
down and then we could go through the rest of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well in the course of his evidence insofar 
20 
as he is – so far as he may deal with the evidence of certain 
witnesses obviously that is fine but one assumes that he 
would deal with those within the context of the – of his 
affidavit which if they implicate those people would have 
served on those people and – but I do not know whether 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 14 of 242 
 
what he says here is confined towards his – in his affidavits 
about those witnesses or whether it might be going beyond 
that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well you – we have identified two or 
three pages where we think he is going beyond that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When – another – another possibility if 
I could suggest this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We –we are confining ourselves today. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To reinstatement GNS, Abalozi, Mr 
Sagar and Driver 2.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Driver 2 may have to be put on hold.  
The reinstatement in GNS topics effectively deals with Mr 
Todd’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Perhaps if Mr Gama deal with the 
introductory material in his opening statement and then deal 
20 
with whatever he wants to say about Mr Todd that may be 
relevant to the examination that we are going to undertake 
today Chairperson and then we can see if we can deal with 
the other things on the next occasion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Let me hear what Mr Gama’s counsel 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 15 of 242 
 
has to say. 
ADV OLDWADGE: Mr Chair thank you I am somewhat in 
agreement albeit not fully in agreement with what has been 
proposed by Mr Myburgh.  I do believe that the purpose of 
this statement is an introductory topic to this opening 
statement is important. 
 
There is and I want to say this at the outset when 
there is mention made in the opening statement of the 
prejudice that my client has suffered it is as a consequence 
of non-provision of information and documentation by the 
10 
legal team. 
 
It should not be in any way interpreted that it is 
aimed at you Mr Chair; none whatsoever and I emphasise 
that point. 
 
His discontent flows over into for instance the aspect 
concerning witness number 2.  My client’s approach to the 
matter is that he has indicated that he wishes to cross-
examine but he wants certain information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  You know so it flows over.  So to 
20 
compartmentalise as it were certain aspects of the statement 
is difficult.  But I do believe and I do not wish to speak on 
his behalf he has given me the nod thus far and if he is not 
in agreement with me from where he is he will indicate to me 
but I do believe what is important is that we deal with that 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 16 of 242 
 
second paragraph and it is also important in the context of 
the evidence that has been given with reference to his 
performance and in particular certain matters such as re-
instatement and in fact the fact that he had been identified 
as being a candidate for the position of Group Chief 
Executive Officer of Transnet. 
 
It is important to have regard to one particular thing 
and that is his achievements within Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And specifically how he came through 
10 
the ranks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  It is not as though he parachuted in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Like some of others did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The achievements are quite in order 
because he does not implicate anybody in any wrongdoing in  
regard to that. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Thank you Mr Chair might I make this 
final submission … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  On that score of matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  The position is I am not entirely sure that 
there is merit to a finding that he is implicated in the context 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 17 of 242 
 
of state capture others.  What my client does say is that in 
relation to evidence that has served before you he is not 
satisfied that in all material respects it is accurate, correct 
and truthful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  And I think that is the gist of his 
complaint. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no that is fine.  I think what we 
should do and I think we – we are all agreed at least on this 
and I say all because so far I take Mr Gama I take you 
10 
Counsel to be representing you but I will give you a chance 
to say something. 
 
I think it – I think Mr Myburgh is probably correct that 
maybe the first five and a half pages could – do not seem to 
implicate anybody in anything. 
 
Now I have not read the – the statement so I do not 
know whether – here the statement you make is correct but 
maybe if he is able to cover the first five and a half pages to 
go to just – to deal with those. 
 
Insofar as the rest of his statement may appear to be 
20 
his response to certain witnesses maybe we should say if 
and when – I mean those – a lot of those witnesses I think 
will not feature in today’s evidence because of the scope 
that has been agreed. 
 
When he comes back it may be that everything will 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 18 of 242 
 
have been cleared for him then to make – to deal with the 
rest of his opening statement.  That is – that is what I am 
thinking. 
 
So in the end he will get a chance to deal with them it 
is a question of when and also the procedure.  I think we 
would be largely in agreement with that? 
MR GAMA:  Mr – can I add Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes thank you.  Mr Gama you wanted 
to say something? 
MR GAMA:  Yes I just want to add Chair.  Chairperson I have 
10 
not spoken here about anybody who has not already spoken 
about me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  So there are no new … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  There are no new names and also Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  When one provides context. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  To something that someone said. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  I am not implicating.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  I am … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But remember that I have not read it. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 19 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  But I am just telling you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  (Inaudible). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  The elegant way to deal with it would be to do 
those things that we have agreed that we should do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  But also I think as Counsel indicates to go 
further and talk a little bit about the – the other issues 
beyond page 6 about the topics that we will be discussing 
10 
here today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  And then at a later date I can then come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  To the other issues but here I am not implicating 
people I am giving context. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  To the untruth that I think I have been visited 
upon me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no, no but as I understand you 
20 
you – you have no quarrel with the proposition that insofar 
as you seek to respond to certain witnesses that can be 
done later.  Ja.  Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Just put another way DCJ what I had  - 
would be comfortable with. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 20 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is obviously the introductory material. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Must be dealt with as you said the first 
five and a half pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then as I have mentioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We are going to deal principally with 
Mr Gama’s re-instatement in GNS and that relates to the 
10 
evidence of Mr Todd.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama does at page 10 paragraph 
8.3 deal with Mr Todd’s testimony and statement.  If he 
wishes to deal with that and obviously subject to your 
direction we would have no difficulty with it because it then 
deals with the evidence we are about to traverse now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So our – after page 6 you say he deals 
with Mr Todd’s evidence from page 10. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At paragraph 8.3. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that goes up to when? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I think it is just that series of sub-
paragraphs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh just those 8.3? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama will correct me if I am wrong. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 21 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But if he refers to Mr Todd anywhere 
else we would have no difficulty with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Dealing with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay that is fine.  Let us do it that 
way then. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Mr Chair just one final request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  From me if you will permit me? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes,  yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  I also request that my client be permitted 
to read out into the record from page 14 which is the page 
that incorporates his conclusion in the matter if he will be 
permitted to read that into the record as well? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.   
ADV OLDWADGE:  It is not a long… 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I think – I think when I just glance 
at it it looks like there should be no problem with that. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Mr Myburgh I do not see – it 
does not look like there is a – should be a problem with that? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Just glancing at it briefly, no 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Ja, no, no.  So – so basically 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 22 of 242 
 
then it is from the beginning of your statement Mr Gama up 
to paragraph 7.9.9 at page 6 and then you can skip up to – 
go to page 10 paragraph 8.3 dealing with Mr Todd.  If there 
is anything else relating to Mr Todd elsewhere you can 
include it but otherwise you then skip to your conclusion and 
then at a later date you will be able to cover what you are 
not able to – we are not able to allow you to cover today.  Is 
that alright?  Okay alright.  I give you the chance to do that 
now.  Just switch on your microphone and you can keep it on 
throughout.   
10 
MR GAMA:  Chairperson thank you very much for the 
opportunity to deal with those aspects.  I hope it is not 
stranger but it is just to give … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is just a matter of time. 
MR GAMA:  Context to those because of time.  Chairperson I 
would like to take the opportunity therefore to just thank you 
for making – for allowing me to make this opening address. 
 
First I would like to address the aspect of the 
prejudice that has suffered by me at the hands of the 
commission’s legal team. 
20 
 
Aspects relating to me being called to provide 
evidence.  I will speak a little bit about why I joined 
Transnet, my history and then I will talk as we have agreed 
will ring fence I will talk a little bit about one of the 
witnesses. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 23 of 242 
 
 
Chair various testimonies have been provided by 
witnesses in this commission who have sought to implicate 
me.  But what I want to do is I want to highlight some of the 
glaring discrepancies, some of the inconsistencies in their 
testimonies, some of the improbabilities and some of the 
falsities that relate to it. 
 
But first I start with the commission’s legal team.  
The commission has been tasked with the responsibility to 
interrogate matters in their search for the truth.  However the 
legal teams are set that they would not merely presume a 
10 
particular set of facts. 
 
Witnesses may give different even contradictory 
versions in relation to a particular factual allegation or set of 
facts. It is therefore the function of the commission and 
yourself Chairperson the Commissioner to consider all the 
relevant material and any and all versions in the search for 
the truth. 
 
I would like to address the commission on the issue 
of the prejudice which has suffered at the hands of the legal 
team since May 2019 up to the present day. 
20 
 
Although 
in 
recent 
days 
things 
have 
improved 
dramatically.  When I first addressed and engaged the 
commission in May 2019 it is when I received my second 
Rule 3.3 Notice. 
 
I set out the failure of the legal team in terms of 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 24 of 242 
 
adequately informing me as a witness in terms of what I 
needed to do to testify at the commission and also in 
implicating me and conduct which allegedly forms part of 
state capture. 
 
The failure to provide me with sufficient notice 
severely prejudiced me as I was often caught unaware that 
such allegations were being levelled against me. Sometimes 
I would wake up and turn on the television and there is 
somebody who was speaking about me and I do not even 
have the Rule 3.3 Notice.  Sometimes I get it two weeks 
10 
later.  Sometimes I do not get it at all. 
 
So by way of example maybe I should just skip that in 
the interest of time but shortly after the second Rule 3.3. 
Notice was served on me my attorneys have been engaging 
and in constant communication with the commission and the 
evidence leaders concerning the witness statements and the 
documents referred to in such statements. 
 
Between May 2019 and September 2020 we got one 
standard 00:18:30 from the commission and we acknowledge 
receipt of your communication our legal team will look at and 
20 
that is it.  And there was never any follow up as a result of 
that. 
 
By engaging with the commission at every turn 
whenever 
there 
were 
witnesses 
I 
demonstrated 
my 
willingness to participate in the inquiry with a clear proviso 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 25 of 242 
 
that I required to be provided with the documents and facts 
to by the witnesses timeously in order to be able to test or 
challenge their versions if and when necessary and to 
exercise my right in terms of inter alia Rule 3.4 of the Rules. 
 
The commission has at all relevant times been aware 
of the fact that I take the allegations against me seriously 
and do not appreciate being ambushed by the tactics that 
have been quite evidently in employed by the evidence 
leaders tasked with allegations concerning Transnet and 
myself. 
10 
 
One such example is the late provision of certain 
reports which have been read into the record.  Numerous 
requests by my attorneys of record for important and 
relevant documents including witness statements, affidavits 
and transcripts have gone unanswered as I have indicated. 
 
Now it is regrettable Chair that the commission 
Secretariat or legal teams have conducted themselves in a 
way where you find that the provision of matter that is 
sought from the commission for instance the request for 
copies of my diary during my tenure at Transnet.  I have 
20 
asked for it since September 2020. 
 
It cannot be difficult Chair to find a diary.  It cannot 
be difficult to find certain minutes of meetings that I have 
indicated took place at Transnet and I have given dates to 
say these meetings took place on these dates in the minutes 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 26 of 242 
 
there is this document.  It cannot be too difficult. 
 
So I still have not received copies of my diary despite 
my attorneys requesting this on numerous occasions.  We 
have been given something like meeting requests which is of 
no use to me to deal with – with it and being told that no that 
is the only thing that we have which is an aspect of your 
diary. 
 
I do believe Chair that in the ordinary course  such 
diary is spelt somewhere within the records of Transnet it 
must be.   
10 
 
On 21s t of October 2018 the commission served the 
first Regulation 3.3 Notice in relation to me which was by – a 
statement by Barbara Hogan.  It served to inform me that I 
had possibly been implicated by the evidence of Hogan and 
that I was entitled to attend the hearing of her evidence 
which would be presented. 
 
This was the first time that I had engaged with the 
commission.  Following on from that first notice as I have 
indicated it went quiet until 24 April 2019 when I received 
that second Rule – Regulation 3.3 that I have just discussed 
20 
with you. 
 
The notices came with a huge body of documentation 
and almost also – there was also outstanding documentation 
– a lot of it which was requested by me and my legal team on 
numerous occasions. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 27 of 242 
 
 
And as I have indicated the information was just not 
forthcoming and there has been information for instance 
where I have asked the commission that I saw my name 
being mentioned that there were certain vaults somewhere in 
Gauteng and that I was an owner of a vault and I have asked 
for information from the commission relating to that.  All I get 
is that the legal team is going to come back to me about it. 
 
But these are serious allegations that are being 
levelled against you when you know of no such but your 
name gets dragged and tainted into those things. 
10 
 
Chairperson in November 2020 I have received my 
second Regulation 10.6 Notice which called upon me to 
provide an answer within 21 days to deal with the testimony 
of Siyabulela Mapoma and Christopher Todd.  That testimony 
in respect of Regulation 10.6 sought to implicate me in 
misconduct and fraud. 
 
I 
deny 
any 
and 
all 
allegations 
Chairperson 
of 
misconduct and it – as it relates to state capture in the 
strongest terms. 
 
Ultimately on 8 t h February 2021 I received the 
20 
summons to attend the commission in order to provide 
evidence and to be questioned regarding my affidavits of 29 
and 
31s t 
January 
respectfully 
and 
to 
00:24:07 
to 
approximately 20 matters under investigation and ranging 
from Transnet’s acquisitions, locomotives, international trips 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 28 of 242 
 
which afferently coincided with trips of the Gupta family. 
 
Chairperson I just want to share with you why I 
decided to join the state owned entity and particularly 
Transnet in 1994 after having had a promising career in 
banking which included a stint in Wall Street in New York. 
 
At the dawn of our democracy Chair I was convinced 
that it was my duty to contribute what business skills I had to 
the growth 
and development of a 
new 
country.  An 
opportunity which I believe is not afforded to many people. 
 
So 
addressing 
the 
national 
question 
from 
a 
10 
perspective of creating a moderately prosperous nation has 
always been my guiding objective. 
 
 
The concept of helping to build a new country 
therefore was an exciting proposition post the success of the 
first democratically held elections in our country. 
 
 
At the heart of this excitement on my part was the 
possibility to contribute to the aspirated dismantling of the 
immoral apartheid system. 
 
And too to create a new society where redress and 
the redistribution of wealth would help to bring about many 
20 
previously marginalised people especially black people and 
women to the mainframe of the economy moving them from 
the periphery to the centre. 
 
I was convinced that Transnet had the capability to 
contribute substantially to a sustainable development health 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 29 of 242 
 
state.  I believed as I still do that SOC – SOE’s can make a 
contribution towards moving the masses of our people from 
the periphery to the centre. 
 
The majority who are largely participants in the 
second economy of have-nots have the possibility to be 
assisted 
to 
move 
towards 
the 
first 
economy 
through 
deployment of state resources they are targeted orderly and 
considered way. 
 
Training skills development the promotion of supplier 
development hubs are at the forefront of the national 
10 
initiative to improve the productive capacity of our country. 
 
In all my dealings Chair I have practiced principles of 
fairness, principles of ethical leadership and I have played 
pivotal roles in the redress of the growth and equality in our 
country and especially as it relates to youth employment and 
business opportunities. 
 
Those who have worked with me will attest to the 
positive energy that I have brought into the workplace to 
inspire young people to strive for excellence through 
believing in oneself in order for them to succeed. 
20 
 
So I could never stand by and ignore the immorality 
of the concentration of our economy on a few leaks.  Our 
country Chairperson needs to continue the conversation of 
how more people can participate in the economy especially 
strategies to address youth unemployment and to give hope 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 30 of 242 
 
to those who have never enjoyed the dividend of a stable 
democracy. 
 
We must continue the conversation of how we can 
unite 
our 
divided 
country 
by 
addressing 
the 
National 
question you will I am sure Mr Chairman we agree 
Chairperson 
that 
the 
goal 
of 
a 
united 
nation 
living 
prosperously under a constitutional democracy remains a 
dream. 
 
I now turn briefly and indeed not exhaustively to deal 
with my achievements that I obtained during my tenure at 
10 
Transnet. 
 
My career in Transnet started in 1994 Mr Chair there 
are some who would want you to believe that it started in – 
when Minister Gigaba assumed the position of Minister of 
Public Enterprises it is not true. 
 
I have worked as a senior executive at Transnet 
under various Ministers including the late Minister Stella 
Siqcau, Minister Jeff Radebe, Minister Alec Irwin, Minister 
Brigette Mabandla and Hogan prior to Gigaba’s appointment. 
 
Chairperson during this time I worked as a senior 
20 
executive under many chief executives and also I worked as 
a chief executive myself of various divisions within Transnet.  
But also there were Group Executives such as Sakhe 
Matozo, Mafika Mkwanazi, Maria Ramos and lastly Brian 
Molefe that I served. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 31 of 242 
 
 
When I was appointed as the Chief Executive of 
Spoornet which is the largest division of Transnet I was 
specifically approached by the then Group Chief Executive 
Maria Ramos in 2005 to intervene and apply my skills and 
expertise to effect a turnaround for Spoornet. 
 
I welcomed the opportunity because it was part of 
my dream unfolding.  In the year that I joined Spoornet they 
had made a loss of R100 million despite a turnover of some 
R13 billion at the end of March and to me it was a travesty 
that in the year that I have joined Spoornet, they have 
10 
made a loss of hundred million despite a turnover of 
R 13 billion at the end of March.  And to me it was troubled 
that you could have such a huge turnover and not make 
money, not make a profit. 
 
And it was one of the things that I declared to 
everybody that we will not, not make a profit again.  So 
from that day onwards, we worked hard, 16 to 18-hours a 
day to make sure that we turn around that business.   
 
The following year...  Let me just say that during 
the preceding period, the five year period before I went to 
20 
Spoornet, I had been running the Port Authority Division of 
Transnet which of the ladders contributed to profitability in 
the Transnet.   
 
During 2007, it was two years after I had been 
appointed at Spoornet, the division was renamed Transnet 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 32 of 242 
 
Freight Rail, CFR.  It also became the largest contributor 
to the profits of Transnet in 2008 which was three years I 
joined. 
 
So under my stewardship, TFR overtook the Port 
Authority Division and became the leading division in 
Transnet in terms of the...  I have documented some of the 
successes that I and my team managed to bring to the 
Railways Act 2008.   
 
The success can be attributed, Chairperson, to 
our proper understanding of Transnet’s operation which we 
10 
documented 
and 
which 
contributed 
to 
a 
sustainable 
overall... 
 
If I were to highlight a few there milestones and 
achievements during my tenure at Transnet, it would be 
noted that Transnet became the first ever SOE to be 
accredited and certified as a top employer by the Top 
Employer ’s Institute. 
 
CFR won the best African Railway Operator 
Awards for two years running between 2011 and 2012.  I 
was the National Business Leader of the Year in 2008.  I 
20 
was also the Young Business Leader of the Year in 2004 
which is awards that are awarded by the National Business 
Awards. 
 
At 
TFR 
in 
conjunction 
with 
the 
Glasgow 
Caledonian University and the University of Johannesburg 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 33 of 242 
 
which spearheaded and introduced the first ever university 
accredited railway qualification in Operations Management 
up to master ’s level.   
 
We launched the first ever Chief Executive 
Talent National Programme for future leaders and we 
prided ourselves in achieving a year-on-year growth and 
revenue and profit always far above CPI. 
 
We won various logistics national awards and 
even international accolades for the longest trains 375... 
trains, as an example.  I have been inducted, Chairperson, 
10 
to the Global Hall of Fame for my contribution to work in 
the Maritime Sector.   
 
I have also held positions as the President of 
both the Pan African Board Association between 2003 and 
2004 which is the continental association with all boards in 
Africa.   
 
I was also the President of the Union African 
Railways between 2006 and 2009 and I hold the title of 
Lifetime President, Honour and Lifetime President of the 
Railway. 
20 
 
In 2003, Chairperson, in Durban we hosted the 
World Port Conference which was the first time that this 
type of conference had ever been hosted by on the 
continent of Africa. 
 
I now turn, Chairperson, to the testimony of the 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 34 of 242 
 
report. 
 
Chairperson, 
Todd 
sought 
to 
mislead 
the 
Commission to the effect that I was at TFR not on merit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Just repeat that sentence. 
MR GAMA:   He sought to mislead the Commission to say 
that I was at TFR not on merits but because Gigaba had 
handpicked me so that I can contribute to the project of 
what is now known as State Capture. 
 
A 
phenonium, 
Chairperson, 
where 
you 
as 
Chairperson, are required to make a determination as to 
his 
deformation 
where 
you 
are 
required 
to 
make 
a 
10 
determination as to this nature, form and context as well 
as what characterise this and if it is exists and who the 
key-players are.   
 
Todd’s contention is that I did not qualify for the 
job of Group Chief Executive at Transnet but he does not 
indicate what he basis his false assertions on.  He has not 
professed to the rail or a port’s person who know what the 
qualify the person for the post or the job as the Group 
Chief Executive of Transnet.   
 
I think that his allegations are worse than false.  
20 
They are vindictive and they are vindictive because Todd 
was 
involved 
in 
my 
disciplinary 
hearing 
in 
2009 
representing the company and I will come back to that later 
in my testimony Chairperson. 
 
Todd has never had sight of my performance 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 35 of 242 
 
ratings over the years yet he deems himself an expert and 
has personal knowledge of my performance... at Transnet 
which he knows nothing. 
 
It 
should 
be 
noted 
that 
Transnet 
has 
a 
Performance Management System which eradicates non-
performance.  So if I had non-performed I would have 
known about it.  I would not have been there. 
 
But significantly, Todd makes false assertions 
that there was no evidence regarding the basis upon which 
the Board of Transnet reinstated me which has now been 
10 
contradicted by a number of witnesses and on a number of 
occasions and even by himself as he successfully files 
different affidavits to the Commission. 
 
I will skip my other contribution Chair to another 
day.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   And...  But Chair, I must indicate to you, 
Chairperson, today I am finally delighted to have the 
opportunity to address you.  On all of the matters that have 
been 
brought 
to 
the 
attention 
of 
the 
Commission 
20 
concerning myself and I believe that you will distil the true 
state of affairs from the falsities that have been advanced 
about me before you.   
 
There are still many issues that are outstanding 
that I would wish to address in this forum.  However, I truly 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 36 of 242 
 
believe that my version and narration of events should be 
preferred or above that of journalists’ narrations that have 
been made by people such as Todd. 
 
I believe, Chairperson, that you are envied with 
a desire to determine truth and to remove injustice, that 
you will be fair to all of us who have appeared before you 
and more so of those of us who have been unjustly 
accused by people who have identified us, people who 
have defined us and as their enemies where to be tainted 
and to be defiled without providing the Commission with 
10 
actual evidence. 
 
I have come here, Mr Chairperson, in order to 
provide you with an honest version of events so as to 
assist the Commission in its findings.  Transnet, as a 
discern, was my lifelong passion and place of employment 
and 
it 
provided 
me 
and 
my 
family 
with 
sufficient 
sustenance. 
 
The success of Transnet was my labour of love 
and I would never do to Transnet anything that did not 
advance its growth and development.   
20 
 
I have met and worked with more than 60 000 
colleagues at Transnet who in some shape or form and 
whether to a lesser or to a greater extent relied upon on 
my expertise or who relied on my integrity and who relied 
on my commitment, and that of the countless hardworking 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 37 of 242 
 
individuals who were with me day in, day out and as I have 
indicated, most days at Transnet turns into nights while we 
advanced and protected Transnet’s interest. 
 
My desire to contribute to the building of a new 
nation would be incomplete if Transnet were not to succeed 
in its quest to facilitate well-class logistics to strengthen 
our country’s supply chain.   
 
A successful Transnet to me would no doubt 
contribute to the objectives of creating a sustainable and a 
capable developmental state.  I thank you Mr Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you Mr Gama.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You wish to say anything in response to 
any aspect Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Not at this stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not at this stage? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   We may later say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, I will – I just want to touch on 
a few matters, maybe two or three.  Thank you for your 
statement Mr Gama and thank you for coming to participate 
20 
in the Commission and to put your version and to present 
yourself for rationing on any of the matters that the 
Commission is looking at. 
 
I 
just 
want 
to 
say 
something 
about 
the 
Commission’s Legal Team and your complaints are about 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 38 of 242 
 
prejudice.  It may be that Mr Myburgh intended doing so 
from the point of the Legal Team and he may do so or say 
something at some stage but I want to say something. 
 
To the extent that you were not given documents 
that you should have been given or you were not given 
timeously documents that you should have been given by 
the timeously, to the extent that that situation that is not 
the way the Commission wishes to operate. 
 
But I must say that despite the Commission’s 
best efforts and the Legal Team’s best efforts and the 
10 
Secretariat’s best efforts, there have been occasions with 
different witnesses and different implicated persons, there 
had been occasions where things have not happened the 
way they should have been.   
 
So the acknowledgement can be given and it has 
happened openly and so on, and you may or may not be 
aware that there have been occasions where I have been 
harsh on the Legal Team when some of the failures have 
happened.   
 
So with regard to the special reference to what 
20 
happened in your case, I might not be aware.  I am just 
speaking in general that that – there had been occasions 
when such failures have occurred.  Sometimes with an 
explanation 
that 
gets 
given 
which 
is 
satisfactory, 
sometimes not satisfactory.  So. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 39 of 242 
 
 
But we did, as you may be aware or at least your 
legal team may be aware is that, when we drafted the rules 
we included a provision that says if any person believes 
that they have not been given adequate notice in terms of 
he rules, they may apply to the Chairperson for such a 
relief as would undo that prejudice that they may have 
suffered or that they may fear that they will suffer. 
 
Now, of course, that is just all abrasive.  It is not 
– it might not be very clear but it reflects that intention that 
if there is some prejudice that anybody has suffered, we 
10 
would like to look at how we can mitigate that or how that 
can be addressed.   
 
Of course, you have said that in recent times 
there has been a change of attitude in terms of the Legal 
Team providing information.  So that I have noted but I 
must also say that there was a time in the life of the 
Commission when the Transnet work stream, which is the 
work stream under which you fall, had certain challenges 
because some – there were changes in the Legal Team that 
was handling Transnet and that took some time.   
20 
 
Mr Myburgh was not always here.  He joined the 
Legal Team only from a certain time, last year.  So there 
had been – it had – the Transnet work stream had been 
handled by other people before.  So that also may have 
caused some problems and maybe that might explain why 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 40 of 242 
 
at some time you might have received letters that says the 
Legal Team will look at it and then nothing comes back but 
that is no justification.  It is just to explain that there were 
these challenges. 
 
So I thought I would just touch on that.  And then 
I think I need to say, you will deal with Mr Todd’s evidence.  
I did not understand his evidence to be to the effect that he 
was doubting your competence or performance in terms of 
your work.  I understood him to be saying because certain 
findings had been made against you in the disciplinary 
10 
inquiry, he had a certain view arising out of that, but of 
course, that can be traversed in case I misunderstood him. 
 
I think that is what I wanted to say and other 
than also to say.  It is quite important that you use this 
opportunity to put your side of the story, provide whatever 
explanation because irrespective of what I as Chairperson 
will find, it is important that people know what your version 
is, 
people 
know 
what 
your 
response 
is 
to 
certain 
allegations. 
 
Because, you know, whatever I might find, 
20 
people might say but we heard Mr Gama’s explanation.  We 
will believe what he said.  The Chairman can find whatever 
but we understand what he had to say.  So it is very 
important to use the opportunity to put your side of the 
story and deal with whatever allegations.  So I thought I 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 41 of 242 
 
would just mention that.   
 
But I must also say that I believe that as you 
acknowledge the – that there has been positive change on 
the Legal Team in terms of furnishing you with information, 
documents that my impression also is that, at least in 
terms of what I have seen in the past few days, you and 
your 
legal 
team 
have 
been 
cooperative 
with 
the 
Commission and that is appreciated. 
 
Okay alright.  Let us continue then Mr Myburgh.  
I think we can start. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, I would like to take 
another good shot in trying to admit your affidavit into 
evidence.  So we are in Bundle 7, Exhibit 28.  That is the 
first part that is before you, DCJ, 205. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  I hope we – you and I have 
the same ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, we do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The first part.  And could I ask you 
to go to page 22, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I have got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I am intending to. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 42 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will find an affidavit that starts 
at page 22.  We are only using the black numbers and runs 
through to page 115 including annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remember to move the mic towards 
you again Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:   115?  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  And could I then take you to 
the signature page of the affidavit, page 57? 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Will you confirm that you deposed to 
this affidavit on the 29 t h of January 2021? 
MR GAMA:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And will you confirm the truth and 
accuracy of the affidavit? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you voice goes down Mr Gama.  
So just try and speak up. 
MR GAMA:   Let me sit closer to the mic Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  That is much better.  Did you 
20 
proceed to the second affidavit? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I did not.  Sorry.  Did I miss your 
response?  You confirm the truth and accuracy of the 
affidavit? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 43 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that in respect of the first or the 
second? 
MR GAMA:   The first affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And could I take it one at a time, 
DCJ? 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I ask you, please, I am going 
to admit this affidavit signed on the 29 t h of January 2021 
10 
as Exhibit 28.3.1? 
CHAIRPERSON:   As Exhibit...? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   As Exhibit...? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   28... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Point 3 point 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So the affidavit of Mr Siyabonga 
Innocent Gama which starts at page 22 is submitted and 
will be marked as Exhibit 28.3.1. 
20 
FIRST AFFIDAVIT OF SIYABONGA INNOCENT GAMA IS 
SUBMITTED AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT 28.3.1 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Gama, could you 
then, please, turn to your second affidavit?  That you will 
find commencing at page 116 and it runs through a series 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 44 of 242 
 
of annexures to page 234. 
MR GAMA:   Okay I have got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if we go to the signature 
page of this affidavit.  That you will find at page 169.  And 
would you confirm that you deposed to this affidavit on the 
31 s t of January 2021? 
MR GAMA:   I confirm. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And would you confirm the truth and 
10 
accuracy of the affidavit? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson, could I then ask you to 
admit 
Mr 
Gama’s 
affidavit 
deposed 
to 
on 
the 
31 s t of January of this year, commencing at page 116 as 
Exhibit 28.3.2? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Siyabonga Innocent 
Gama which starts at page 116 is submitted as an exhibit 
and will be marked as Exhibit 28.3.2. 
THE SECOND AFFIDAVIT OF SIYABONGA INNOCENT 
20 
GAMA IS SUBMITTED AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT 28.3.2 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Gama, I 
want to start by asking you a few questions just to make 
sure we all appreciate the time at which you served as the 
CEO of TFR and then as the Group Chief Executive.  In 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 45 of 242 
 
what years were you the CEO of Transnet Freight Rail? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second Mr Myburgh.  We 
probably would need to have Mr Siyabonga’s opening 
statement also admitted but you might wish to deal with 
that later. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I will find a place for that at tea-
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   DCJ, to work out where it would best 
fit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, that is fine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, in what years did you 
serve as the CEO of TFR? 
MR GAMA:   It was between 2005 and 2015. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then I understand, and you must 
correct me if I am wrong, that you acted as the Group Chief 
Executive of Transnet from April 2015 to April 2016.  Is 
that right? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you were then appointed as the 
20 
Group Chief Executive of Transnet in April of 2016? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you held that position until 
October of 2018? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 46 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And as we understand it, you took 
over first in your position as the acting GC and then after 
that had been appointed as GC from Mr Molefe.  Is that 
correct? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Good.  Perhaps I could also ask you 
to confirm, if I have it correctly, that the Group Chief 
Financial Officer under Mr Molefe, Mr Singh, he also was 
seconded and them became employed at Eskom and that 
the Group Chief Financial Officer that served under you, 
10 
effectively Mr Singh’s replacement, was a Mr Pita.  Is that 
correct? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct.  Mr Singh also served under 
me for a brief period when I was acting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that before he was seconded to 
Eskom? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I would like now to turn to the 
20 
question of your visits to Saxonwold and your connection 
with the Gupta’s.  You explain in your affidavit how you 
came to visit the Saxonwold compound of the Gupta’s.  I 
think, if my memory serves me correctly, on one occasion.  
Could you explain that to us, please? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 47 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  Thank you very much.  You want me to 
give background and context? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Anything that you wish to in that 
context, yes. 
MR GAMA:   Okay.  Yes, I had through my interactions at 
Transnet, we had an entity that was called Regiments and 
that was assisting us on a number of operational issues 
together 
with 
McKinsey, 
mainly 
dealing 
with 
some 
reengineering work where we are trying to make sure that 
we improve and increase our capacity around the coal line 
10 
first and foremost. 
 
But also they had done some work for us when 
we were looking at the Maputo Corridor and looking at how 
best we could reengineer that corridor because it was also 
a corridor which was full of – there were many trucks on 
the road, especially to the Port of Maputo. 
 
And so I had on occasion met a fellow by the 
name of Salim Essa.  I think on one occasion in that 
meeting.  And I believe that he was part of Regiments. 
 
I 
then, 
on 
a 
different 
occasion, 
accosted 
20 
Mr Essa.  He was in our offices.  And I had gone to see 
Mr Singh who was in his office.  It was just a few metres 
from mine.  And he was there.  So I spoke to Mr Singh 
briefly and they were together.   
 
And I just said:  Look, can I chat with Mr Singh.  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 48 of 242 
 
We had a discussion.  And then he said to me:  Look, at 
some point, I would like to have a chat with you.  I said to 
him:  No, that is fine.  Just ask Mr Singh to give you my 
number and we can get together.  It is not a problem. 
 
So we left it at that and I think sometime later, 
Mr Essa had then tried to call me.  He called several times 
but I was not available but I think – I really do not have the 
dates Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  Ja. 
MR GAMA:   I do not have the dates. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   But I have ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
MR GAMA:   I have got an approximate time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   To say, I think it must have been around 
October or November of 2015 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR GAMA:   ...when I eventually agreed that, okay, we will 
20 
meet.  He gave me an address and I went there.  It then 
turned out afterwards when I went there that this was 
actually not an office but it was actually the Gupta 
residence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Myburgh? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 49 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, you want to carry on with your visit to 
Saxonwold?  What happened then?  I am sorry, Mr Gama, if I 
may say you are more than welcome to look at your affidavit as 
I am asking you these questions.  Do you want to turn to page 
47? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he thought you might have a further 
question. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So now the further question is, as I 
10 
understand it, you say that Mr Essa effectively invited you to a 
meeting and that is how you found your way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   47 will be the black numbers, Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not the red numbers, you can ignore the 
red numbers, top left corner of which page, black numbers, 47.  
Mr Myburgh is not going to say Transnet 07-047, he will just 
say page 47, so you know what he is talking about.  Okay, I 
think you might wish to repeat your question, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, so as I understand it, you were invited 
20 
to a meeting by  Essa, that is how you found your way to the 
Saxonwold residence of the Guptas.  Could you explain what 
happened there please? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, at that venue I met with Mr Essa, he was 
waiting me outside.  We went inside, we went into something 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 50 of 242 
 
that looked like a boardroom and we sat there and we 
exchanged pleasantries and after a few minutes somebody that 
was introduced to me as Tony Gupta who I later found out is 
also known as Rajesh Gupta.  He came and greeted me and 
we had a discussion.   
 
It was not a very long discussion but Mr Gupta was 
just indicating to me that they had followed my career within 
Transnet and we thought that I had done very well in the 
company and that they had certain businesses and that it was 
their view that at some point maybe we could have a 
10 
discussion around how Transnet and those businesses could 
cooperate going forward but there was not really anything in 
particular at that point in time in terms of what it is that he 
thought that will do but he was saying look, I think we can 
probably meet again at a later date when we have enough time 
and then I can take you through some of the entities that we 
have which I think might have a bearing on some of the work 
that you do at Transnet, so …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this was Tony Gupta talking? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, yes.  So just enquired to him to say what 
20 
would be the nature of that relationship that you are talking 
about but there was not really anything specific.  So I was a 
bit annoyed because one …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you feel like your time had been 
wasted? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 51 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I think the first thing was that I thought that 
I am going to meet Essa at his offices and then I realised 
that no, we are actually at the boardroom of their residence 
and there was not really anything – I mean, if they had told I 
am going to somebody’s home I probably would  not have 
even agreed to the… 
CHAIRPERSON:   And was Mr Essa around as Mr Tony Gupta 
was talking to you? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, no, he was with me all the time.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR GAMA:   In fact he walked me out as I left and I 
expressed my dissatisfaction to him to say look, you should 
not ambush me and bring me to people’s homes when I 
thought that you wanted to talk about the business.  So he 
just said look, I just thought I must introduce you to Mr Tony, 
as he called him because this family does a lot of business 
and, you know, they are influential, I thought it would be 
good for you and Transnet to work with them but obviously 
you are in a hurry but maybe at future date you could fine, 
you know, time to talk about …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you met Mr Tony Gupta was he the 
first Gupta brother that you had met, that you were meeting.  
In other words, you had not met any of the other Gupta 
brothers at that time? 
MR GAMA:   I think at that time the popular Gupta brother in 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 52 of 242 
 
that I had seen in the newspaper was Atul Gupta. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   I always used to see his picture in the news. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  But I had never met him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You had never met him, ja. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, thank you.  So, as I understand it, Mr 
Gama, you say that is the one and only time that you went to 
10 
the Saxonwold residence of the Guptas? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And did you subsequently …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I just want to say it is interesting that 
Mr Gama says – I think that Mr Essa said that the Guptas were 
a very influential family because that seems consistent with 
what Mr Henk Bester says he told him when they had a 
meeting in 2014.  Mr Henk Bester said …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He said we are very powerful, you know, 
20 
something like they were very powerful, we have decided that 
the next boss of Eskom will be Mr Brian Molefe, so Mr Essa to 
you say, you know, the Guptas are a very influential family.  
Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Do you wish to add anything to that, Mr 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 53 of 242 
 
Gama? 
MR GAMA:   No, no, no, I am not privy to – I do not know who 
Mr Bester is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So as you say at paragraph 31.1 of your 
affidavit that was the only time that you went to the Saxonwold 
residence of the Guptas? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Did you after that have occasion to interact 
at all with Tony Gupta? 
10 
MR GAMA:   No, no, I have not. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Did you have occasion to interact at all with 
Ajay Gupta? 
MR GAMA:   No, I have not. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And Mr Essa? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, Mr Essa I did. 
ADV MYBURGH:   In what context did you interact with Mr 
Essa and over what period of time? 
MR GAMA:   I have probably seen Mr Essa maybe four or five 
times, I do not know.  The next time that I would see him was 
20 
in Dubai, a month or two later.  He was always I think in this 
management consulting sort of space, as I understood it then.  
When I travelled to Switzerland, which was to the World 
Economic Forum, on my way back I had a  stopover in Dubai 
and that is where I met him. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 54 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   So that was the next time you met him? 
MR GAMA:   That was the next time that I met him. 
ADV MYBURGH:   I understand, please correct me if I am 
wrong, that you said that you met him subsequently on four or 
five occasions.  Could you describe the other occasions to us 
please? 
MR GAMA:   I probably have met him – I think it was the third 
or the fourth occasion when I met him at the Gupta residence.  
I met him once in Dubai.  I probably met him one more other 
time after he came back to the country. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Chairperson, would this be a convenient 
time to take the tea adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us take the tea adjournment, it is 
quarter past so we will resume at half past.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you, Chairperson.  So we had 
stopped at the point that you were telling us …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, Mr Myburgh?  Okay, thank 
20 
you. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you.  We had stopped at the point 
where you were you were telling us I think about your third 
meeting with Mr Essa.  So you met him – well, you have 
explained how you went to the Saxonwold compound where 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 55 of 242 
 
you met him.  You said a month or so later you met him in 
Dubai and then you last interaction with him, when was 
that and what was it around? 
MR GAMA:   So I think I have met him – I have seen him – 
I did not have a meeting per se, but I am saying I have 
seen him after Dubai, I have seen him somewhere.  I think 
I saw him he was in a restaurant. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, sort of a – you casually saw him? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  Have you ever been to Mr Essa’s 
10 
office which I understand to have been in Melrose Arch? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Had you ever been to his apartment? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So both he and Mr Tony Gupta never 
followed up on what they talked about which seems to be 
that they wanted to have further meetings or further 
discussions to do business together? 
MR GAMA:   No, there was not a follow-up.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR GAMA:   Because I think I had said to Mr Essa that no, 
I was not really interested, you know, meeting people in 
their houses and things like that.  I was quite annoyed I 
think on that day, so I only spoke to him later when we 
were in Dubai and we were talking about – he was thinking 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 56 of 242 
 
about setting up what he called a BEE consulting entity 
that he was thinking about that he thought would be – 
would have a lot of black people, especially women and all 
of that. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Gama, if I could just take you to your 
affidavit please at page 47.  The first time that you met Mr 
Essa, you deal with that at paragraph 31.2.1 where you say 
it was during 20 …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   Page 40… 
ADV MYBURGH:   47. 
10 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Paragraph 31.2.1. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   You say that was in 2015 you attended a 
meeting with Regiments, would that meeting have been at 
the Carlton Centre? 
MR GAMA:   No, not this particular meeting, I think it was 
at TMR. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, was this at a time then before 
you had become presumably the – you acted as the Group 
20 
Chief Executive? 
MR GAMA:    Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, it was probably in the early part 
of 2015. 
MR GAMA:    That’s correct ja. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 57 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you say at paragraph 31.3, 
the next time you met him that was July/August 2015, that 
was in Mr Singh’s office, this then, was at a time when you 
were the acting Group Chief Executive. 
MR GAMA:    That’s correct, it was at the Carlton Centre. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And it was also at the time then, 
before Mr Singh went to Eskom, this must be the time when 
he was reporting to you? 
MR GAMA:    Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And do I understand from paragraph 
10 
31.2.1 and 31.2.2 that you assumed, when you first met Mr 
Essa that he worked for Regiments? 
MR GAMA:    Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And when did you come to learn that 
that wasn’t so? 
MR GAMA:    Much later, much later. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When? 
MR GAMA:    I think – and I think he was also on the same 
page 
with 
me 
to 
say, 
okay 
I 
think 
it’s 
Regiments 
Management Consultant and he was telling me about 
20 
management consulting, but I think much later, it must 
have been sometime in 2016.  When Regiments wanted to 
cede their contacts with Transnet to Trillion then his name 
was not appearing amongst the Directors and it was 
actually Pillay and not Essa that was appearing so then I 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 58 of 242 
 
realised that I may have made a mistaken assumption 
about that, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, I’d like now, to turn to the 
MBA issue, could I ask you to – the alleged assistance 
given to you by Mr Sagar/McKinsey in relation to your 
MBA. 
MR GAMA:    Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps, Mr Gama, in fairness this 
is not something that you dealt with in your affidavit so let 
me take you to the documents that are relevant and then 
10 
we can go through them and then of course, you’ll be 
afforded an opportunity to say what you would like to. You 
were issued with a 33 Notice by the Money Flow team in 
late November 2020, that you find at page 235 of your 
Exhibit and attached to that Rule 33 Notice was an extract 
of an affidavit from a Mr Mazala and that you find, the 
extract commencing at page 240, are you there? 
MR GAMA:    Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I’m going to take you through these 
extracts if I may.  At 240 it states that, 
20 
“The growing body of evidence provided by the 
Commission that suggests a pattern of misconduct 
by Regiments at these entities, this includes, in 
particular, 
Regiments 
having 
entered 
into 
an 
agreement with Mr Salim Essa and other individuals 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 59 of 242 
 
linked, publicly to State Capture engaged in a 
pattern of troubling payments that we were unaware 
of at the time, the work was being conducted (I 
leave open here and in the next paragraph the 
possible exception of Mr Vikas Sagar a former 
partner 
of 
our 
firm 
whose 
circumstances 
are 
discussed, fully below)”. 
 
And then if I could take you to page 243, the 
second paragraph between the two lot, 
“While 
the 
media 
has 
reported 
on 
allegations 
10 
related to Regiments and the Commission has now 
presented evidence related to concerning behaviour 
by Regiments, we have not found evidence that 
anyone at McKinsey knew of this activity at the time 
it was occurring (I leave open here the possible 
exception of Mr Sagar) whose circumstances are 
discussed more fully below”. 
 
And that then brings us to page 244 at paragraph 
7.2.1 between the two dark boxes, 
“MBA assistance in July of 2017 McKinsey was first 
20 
provided information that indicated that Mr Sagar, 
whilst with McKinsey may have helped/coordinate 
research support and draft course work for the MBA 
studies of Transnet’s then CEO, Mr Siyabonga 
Gama in late 2015 and early 2016”, 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 60 of 242 
 
 
And then if you go to page 245, at the foot of the 
page, paragraph 7.2.4.1, 
“In addition to the MBA assistance and the 9 
February 2016 letter (both discussed in more detail 
below), our issues of concern with Mr Sagar also 
stem from the forensic analysis conducted on his 
computer and phone after collection in 2017 as part 
of the investigation”. 
 
And then if I could take you please to page 242 at 
the top, paragraph 7.2.4.2.1, 
10 
“Of particular importance the document set includes 
an email dated 16 November 2015 from Clive Angel 
to 
Mr 
Sagar 
and 
Mr 
Wood 
copying 
Mr 
Essa…[intervenes]”. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Did you say 242? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   246. 
MR GAMA:    Ja, mine is blank . 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mine is blank too. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   246. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, 246 I think you said – you may have 
20 
said 242, okay, alright.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think what’s happening DCJ, is I 
might have been looking at the red numbers, I’m sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughter]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, can I just take you back, I 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 61 of 242 
 
referred you just now to page 243, you saw that part, black 
numbers, you saw that part in the middle. 
MR GAMA:    243, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then 244 the MBA assistance 
part, you saw that 244? 
MR GAMA:    Yes, you read through that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then 245 we’ve dealt with I was 
on 246, where there’s reference to Mr Essa and then I want 
to deal with the next sub-paragraph at 246, paragraph 
7.2.4.2.2, 
10 
“The document set also includes an email response 
dated 18 November 2015 from Mr Sagar to Mr Angel 
and Mr Essa that was sent from Mr Sagar ’s 
personal email address assuming it is authentic, 
which we have no reason to believe it’s not, the 
email suggest that Mr Sagar chose to move his 
communications with Mr Essa off of McKinsey’s 
system to the personal email account”, 
 
So those are the various of the extracts and what 
we do know is that out of caution, McKinsey then made a 
20 
report in terms of Section 34 (1) of the Prevention and 
Combating of Corruption Activities Act, that report you find 
at page 249 and can I direct your attention please, to 
paragraph 2 (c) right at the foot of the page, 
“A company contractor contacted McKinsey 12 July 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 62 of 242 
 
2017 concerning a request he received from Mr 
Vikas Sagar, a former partner of the company to 
provide assistance to Siyabonga Gama (then the 
Acting Chief Executive Officer of Transnet) in 
connection 
with 
Mr 
Gama’s 
MBA 
course 
work 
including Mr Gama’s MBA “Capstone” project in 
December 2015 – January 2016. It will be McKinsey 
commissioned an investigation into the matter which 
revealed the following 1). Mr Gama was enrolled in 
the Trium Global Executive Programme (class of 
10 
2016[2]; it appears that Mr Sagar coordinated 
research 
support 
for 
Mr 
Gama 
on 
one 
group 
assignment on the second assignment Mr Gama 
provided course work materials created by Mr Gama 
and his fellow student team members to Mr Sagar.  
In turn Mr Sagar supplemented this course work 
using company resources and contractors to outline 
and help draft the two chapters which Mr Gama 
submitted as his contribution to the Capstone 
Project. (e) The support commissioned by Mr Sagar 
20 
caused the company to incur costs of R100 000.  (f) 
I’m unaware of any quid pro quo sought by Mr 
Sagar or received by the company in exchange for 
the benefit etcetera”, 
 
Do you want to comment on that? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 63 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:    Yes, thank you very much.  It is true that Mr 
Sagar introduced us a person who was supposedly an 
editor and we were writing a Capstone project, I think there 
were five or six of us…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At least who were doing the MBA? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, the Capstone project, there’s about five 
or six of us who were writing that Capstone project.  In 
fact, a lot of the people had – they were – I was collecting 
information from the different students, let’s call them 
students in order for us to write the final project report.  As 
10 
you will know, with people from different nationalities and – 
I was having difficulties in terms of the manner in which 
they presented, or they wrote, or the writing styles and I 
wanted to have one consistent writing style for the project. 
So, he then introduced me to somebody that he said was 
an Editor and I did not know whether this person was 
contracted to McKinsey or not, I never asked but he said, 
look you can speak to this lady, she’s an Editor she can 
help you with your particular challenges.  So, I then took 
that content and I said, look, this is the work that we’ve 
20 
been doing can you assist us to write it in a particular way 
which she did and that was around Christmas time of – 
December 2015 to around, maybe the 15 t h of January, I 
think the project was due around the 14 t h of January, there 
about so it was a two-week period when people were 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 64 of 242 
 
enjoying Christmas time, I remember that there was no 
Christmas for me…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You had no Christmas [laughter]. 
MR GAMA:    Ja, that particular year, so I went through it, 
she helped me and together with some of the other people 
who then said – we were giving her the contents because 
she wasn’t a subject matter expert to help us to edit it and 
we did acknowledge in our Capstone project, the good work 
that she helped us with in terms of editing and the work.  
That, it is said here, that Mr Sagar contributed or 
10 
supplemented 
this 
using 
company 
resources 
I’m 
not 
familiar with it, it’s something to do with them he never told 
me that this was a McKinsey resource or anything and he 
just indicated to me that this lady could assist us, and she 
did do that.  There isn’t any chapters that Mr Sagar 
contributed for me.  The interesting this, we were doing 
last-mile logistics, Chair, and I our subject matter was a 
place in India, in Calcutta where they have, what is called 
Karana Stores, so this is a global MBA, so you need to 
understand everything that happened in other countries 
20 
and we had a research team that we had dispatched there 
now we were putting together the findings of this thing.  
So, one of the things that I shared with Mr Sagar, who is a 
native of India because that – we were doing last-mile 
logistics about India and he took an interest in it, you 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 65 of 242 
 
know, to say, oh so how far are you now with these things 
that you are doing and – the concept of Kirana stores 
being used as last-mile logistics was something that had 
not been thought of and we came up with an IT system that 
could actually plug into global logistic companies such as 
DHL and other places.  So, it’s like, for instance, you 
wanted to deliver something in the township or in an 
informal settlement where there are no addresses, so – 
and people go to work during the day there’s no-one and 
people will only be there at night and everybody frequents 
10 
this store.  So, if they have the parcel they will then have 
to go there and what we use is the fact that they have a 
cell phone and then we can tell them and then they can 
track it, but they go and fetch it from the Kirana store. So 
that was, sort of the nub of it Chair.  So, I would just share 
with him from time to time, he would say, how far are you, I 
would share with him, no this is where we are, that’s 
interesting, and then he’d say, ja it’s actually quite 
interesting because we’re dealing with global companies 
like Amazon people can order a parcel from Amazon and it 
20 
gets delivered in the Kirana store and we’ve now created 
this software and we’re putting together some warehouses 
in and around this place where you can distribute parcels 
from there. So, that’s really what it was, so I did send him 
some of the information just out of interest and courtesy 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 66 of 242 
 
because he was interested, not that we asked him to do 
anything for us, he wouldn’t be able to do anything for us, 
we had the research team in India that was doing these 
things for us. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, did you pay this Editor? 
MR GAMA:    No, she never sent an invoice. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And as I understand it, did she work 
intensely like you for two weeks over Christmas? 
MR GAMA:    I worked over Christmas she did the work it 
was after Christmas, I think, it must have been for three or 
10 
four days between the 4 t h and the 8 t h of January or 
something, but it was me who was working.  I did most of 
the work, but it was difficult because of the writing styles 
of five or six different people and when I sent the work to 
her, she was able to distil it very quickly, I think she does 
this for a living. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But Mr Gama it seems – I mean who 
did you think was paying this person? 
MR GAMA:    She never sent me an invoice actually, in fact 
it’s something that – you know when you’re in the middle of 
20 
things like this I was just worried about delivering the 
Capstone project, I did, in fact, sometime later try to send 
her an email to say, you know, you never sent me an 
invoice, but I never got an answer. I don’t know, I mean, 
from what I gather here she may or may not have been 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 67 of 242 
 
paid by Mr Sagar, I don’t know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, it does appear from what was 
said to you, that disciplinary charges were brought against 
Mr Sagar and then he and McKinsey parted ways.  So, if 
we go to paragraph two, as I understand it, you deny – we 
needn’t read it again, but you essentially deny everything 
that is recorded there, you say, 
“Well, I might have sent Mr Sagar some of my work, 
but it was only because he was taking an interest in 
it…[intervenes]”. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    I’m sorry, are you – have you gone to 
his affidavit? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, paragraph two of the Section 34 
report at page 250. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Oh, okay, alright, yes continue. 
MR GAMA:    No, this speculation by McKinsey is denied. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Speculation by McKinsey? 
MR GAMA:    That he might have contributed to my course 
work, he wouldn’t have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I don’t know whether you want to 
20 
say you deny that because it may be that you don’t know 
but he made arrangements with the Editor and did pay the 
Editor without you knowing. 
MR GAMA:    No, no, I’m not talking about the payment, 
he’s talking about the two chapters that he says there. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 68 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, I missed that, yes Mr 
Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, the second or the third 
sentence, in turn Mr Sagar supplemented this course work, 
you don’t agree with that, using company resources and 
contractors to outline but you don’t, as I understand it – 
you accept there’s a possibility that Mr Sagar might have 
engaged someone to assist you, that you didn’t know of? 
MR GAMA:    No, I didn’t know of it and he introduced me 
to the lady,  I was in communication with her on email. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then you see it says, 
“The support commissioned by Sagar caused the 
company to incur costs of R100 000”. 
 
Do you have any comment on that?  
MR GAMA:   No, no I cannot comment on it.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What I’d like to explore then, is your 
relationship with Mr Sagar.  When did you first meet him? 
MR GAMA:    Let me also just indicate to you Chair that 
subsequent to these revelations as it were and my MBA 
programme did an intensive investigation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, your MBA programme? 
MR GAMA:   They did an extensive investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the institution? 
MR GAMA:   The institution. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 69 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   And into this work and I participated, and they 
are quite happy in terms of what happened and transpired 
here and there’s nothing untoward in terms of them 
…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Them being [Indistinct – audio distorted]. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I cannot recall, Mr Myburgh when I met Mr 
Sagar and he was working for Mortens[?], Mortens has 
been a transfer from at least 2005 and I think at some 
point he must have been one of the consultants that came 
through, I don’t know at what point that he came through.  I 
10 
worked with him quite a bit, I think, around 2012, so I don’t 
know when I first met with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, what you can say, I would imagine is 
by, 2015 you had known him for quite some time, for a 
number of years? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I think I met him around 2012. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you then, continue working with 
him when you took up the position as the acting Group 
Chief Executive of Transnet in 2015? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You’ve seen on that portion of the 
affidavit that I’ve read to you that he seems to have 
interacted, at least at a point, with Mr Essa, presumably 
you didn’t know anything about that? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 70 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:  No, I didn’t know anything. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say that your global MBA Trium 
they conducted an investigation after these revelations? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Would you be prepared to share 
those documents with us? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  I’d like now, to turn to a 
different topic and that’s your re-instatement at TFR as the 
CFO in February of 2011, Mr…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I – as CEO not CFO. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   CEO, I’m not going to make you 
someone else, I’m sorry.  So, it’s your re-instatement as 
CEO.  Now, Mr Gama, I think it’s important to explain that 
the main focus of…[intervenes]. 
MR GAMA:   Where – which section do you want to refer 
me to? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, we’re not in any particular 
section.  It’s important to explain in relation to your re-
instatement that the main focus of the Commission’s 
20 
investigation is whether or not your re-instatement was the 
result of any political instruction or pressure, that’s the 
main focus of the instruction and flowing from that, really, 
the main target of the investigation or focus of the 
investigation is Mr Gigaba and also the Board, because it 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 71 of 242 
 
was the Board that decided to re-instate you, you would 
have seen that, correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, it was the Board…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe one could just say, Mr Myburgh, 
whether 
 
there 
was 
political 
pressure 
or 
political 
interference or whether even without political interference 
there was something untoward that made the decision – 
that made the Board to make the decision. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In a manner of speaking. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, in other words, Chair, to your 
point, something other than the issue of prospects of 
success.  So, what is important for you to appreciate as we 
go through this topic is the – the actual target of the 
investigation is not you, the target is rather, the people 
who decided to that, the Board, I take it you appreciate 
that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja I also wanted to emphasise that 
because you did not re-instate yourself. 
MR GAMA:   It would be quite impossible Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughter] ja so as you approach the 
evidence and the issues that will be raised with you and 
questions, you must remember that the primary focus is – 
relates to those who made the decision to re-instate you, 
rather than you – you come in, simply because they were 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 72 of 242 
 
supposed to have regard to certain things in making those 
decision, okay alright. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, Chair, I have been a case study in this 
Commission where I think, people have made numerous 
inferences and where my name has been brought in but 
nothing to do with what I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no it’s important for you to 
understand that when I say what I’ve just said and when Mr 
Myburgh says what he has said, namely the focus is on 
those who made the decision to re-instate you, you need to 
10 
appreciate that that is not to prevent you from making an 
input into the discussion, it’s not meant to do that but it’s 
just to indicate that since you did not re-instate yourself 
the focus is on those who made the decision. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So, I think, perhaps put another way 
Mr Gama, I mean what is going to form, really, my 
questioning of you is not whether you think you were 
correctly re-instated, I’m quite sure you do, but rather what 
20 
motivated the Board to re-instate you, do you appreciate 
that?  
CHAIRPERSON:   And it may well be, I’m sorry – it may 
well be that on many issues you might have nothing to say, 
and ask the Board, so – but where you want to say 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 73 of 242 
 
something, feel free, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So let us start off with the 
questioning 
section 
political 
influence 
or 
interference.  
Perhaps we can start with the evidence of Barbara Hogan.  
 
 
 
Now we have a transcript of the relevant portion 
perhaps I could just ask you to turn behind you to Bundle 
BB15 and this is Transnet Bundle 2.   
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You have it? 
10 
MR GAMA:  I have got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I ask you please to turn to page 
216.  Now when Ms Hogan gave evidence she testified about 
the stance adopted by the former President in relation to you 
and could I ask you please to go to 216 to line 20 and this – 
this discussion appears to have been had at a time when you 
were suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry what page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  216. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At line 20 he says: 
“Chair I was extremely shocked the President 
would not hear of any candidate except 
Siyabonga Gama” 
And we talking about the candidate for Transnet GCE. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 74 of 242 
 
‘I 
informed 
him 
how 
professional 
the 
selection process was.  I informed him that 
he was facing some serious misconduct 
charges that the board in terms of the PFMA 
was obliged to investigate these charges.  It 
was not just going ahead and under these 
circumstances it would not be in the interest 
of Transnet to appoint a Group CEO who was 
facing you know whose time would be caught 
up with defending himself in a misconduct 
10 
but 
even 
over 
and 
above 
that 
I 
was 
recommending Mr Maseko.  On the basis of 
the recommendations made by the Transnet 
the 
recommendations 
made 
by 
the 
professional evaluation agency.” 
Now can I then ask you to turn to page 22 3 and if I could 
ask you please to have regard to line 3 where Ms Hogan 
says: 
“Yes it actually shocked me I okay you know 
he then said to me you may not appoint 
20 
anyone to the board because the board also 
had 
to 
have 
changes 
until 
Mr 
Gama’s 
disciplinary was over because I said to him 
we cannot appoint him until the disciplinary 
is over if that is the candidate that you are 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 75 of 242 
 
insisting on.” 
And if I could take you please over the page to page 224 and 
direct your attention to line 13.  Ms Hogan continued: 
“No at the same meeting should he wanted 
me to go ahead with the appointment of Mr 
Gama.  I said I cannot do that.  We kind of 
compromised.  He then said – he said alright 
we will wait until the disciplinary process is 
over.  I did not agree to that – sorry I did not 
agree to that.  But we then agreed that I 
10 
would provide him with further information 
which I then did.” 
If you go to page 227 in a similar vein at line 9. 
“He was insisting firstly that I go ahead and 
appoint Gama.” 
Now you would have seen that that is opposite Mr Makena’s 
name that it clearly was Ms Hogan because the Chairperson 
directed a question at her. 
“He was insisting firstly that I go ahead and 
appoint Gama.  I said I could not.  He was 
20 
facing misconduct charges and he was not 
the preferred candidate he then said that no 
appointment to translate must be made until 
the disciplinary case against Mr Gama is 
concluded.  I was concerned about that and I 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 76 of 242 
 
said I would him with further evidence.  I was 
already remember I was only one month into 
the job but I was already feeling that the 
President was exceeding his authority here 
and I was truly shocked you know.  When you 
explain to the President that a person is 
facing misconduct charges you expect a 
certain response to say – sorry that says oh 
well if that is the case let us look at the 
preferred 
candidate 
that 
the 
board 
is 
10 
recommending.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  It looks like Mr Myburgh the transcribers 
may not have made it clear that part of what you are reading 
you are reading was what she said.  It looks like it was the 
evidence leader. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I have made that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  DCJ yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the context makes it clear I think. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes absolutely Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That it is she who is talking. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then if I could take you please to 
page 250 and what now happened is that the evidence 
leader read into the record her statement relating to the 
evidence that she had given.  The statement there you see it 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 77 of 242 
 
at paragraph 11 recorded: 
“I 
was 
shocked 
and 
disappointed 
when 
President Zuma informed me that he was 
adamant that Mr Gama was his only choice 
for the Group CEO.  I informed him that that 
was not possible and that Mr Gama was not 
the board’s choice and I could not override 
the board as they had undergone a very 
professional selection process.  I further 
informed President Zuma that Mr Gama was 
10 
the subject of an inquiry into procurement 
irregularities and that it would be very messy 
to 
appoint 
a 
Group 
CEO 
who 
could 
potentially be facing fairly serious charges.” 
Two lines below that. 
“President Zuma said that if that was my 
view no appointment whatsoever was to 
made 
at 
Transnet 
until 
Mr 
Gama’s 
disciplinary process was over.  We agreed 
that I would provide him with more detailed 
20 
information to further apply his mind.” 
You see that?  And then if you go to page 253 there is 
another quote from her statement. 
“Mr Gama was formerly charged by Transnet 
and later suspended on 1 September 2009.  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 78 of 242 
 
Immediately before and in the days following 
his suspension Mr Jeff Radebe “Gama will 
become 
CEO” 
Minister 
Siphiwe 
Nyanda 
“Gama is being persecuted like Jacob Zuma 
that also ANC.  The SACP and ANC Youth 
League under Julius Malema at the time all 
issued 
strong 
and 
harsh 
statements 
in 
support 
of 
Gama 
accusing 
Transnet 
of 
persecuting him.  This was reflected in 
numerous statements and media reports.” 
10 
Did you have occasion to see those media reports at the 
time of your suspension? 
MR GAMA:  Maybe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe even before your suspension. 
MR GAMA:  I think – I think it would be – I may have seen 
some – seen some newspaper clippings now which are 
reduced and I cannot really read what was said there but I 
guess if I was in the middle of that storm I would have read 
some of it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So there you seem to have quite a lot 
20 
of political support amongst the people, Minister Radebe, 
Minister Nyanda who we will come back to in due course 
etcetera. 
MR GAMA:  When you say I seem to have the political 
support from the ANC, the SACP, the Youth League, the 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 79 of 242 
 
South African Transport Union as it is written here how does 
that bring about a situation of state capture? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well it depends what is behind this Mr 
Gama. 
MR GAMA:  No I am just asking because… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I think – I think allow Mr Myburgh to 
pursue his line of questioning. 
MR GAMA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes as I said some of the things you might 
have nothing to say because people may have been talking 
10 
about you and you are not part of that or making whatever 
statements but some you might willing to say something. 
MR GAMA:  Yes no it is fine I see that he is formulating a 
hypothesis Chair.  So he is at places that he wants to pose 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay well he is in the – bringing to your 
attention some of the matters that may appear to be relevant 
to – how to make the – your reinstatement.  Of course and 
your counsel in due course might say no they are irrelevant 
but that is the context he -  he wants to bring this to your 
20 
attention and then where you are able to comment you may 
comment where you are not able to it is fine.  Yes Mr 
Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Could we then go please 
to page 267 and if I could direct your attention to line 22 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 80 of 242 
 
again Ms Hogan. 
“No you know I did await the outcome of the 
disciplinary hearing but once that outcome 
you know once he found guilty on the three 
counts and dismissed on all three counts the 
Deputy 
Minister 
and 
myself 
initiated 
a 
process to appoint a new Transnet board and 
that was – that was then a year after all of 
this had happened and it was then towards 
July/August 2010.” 
10 
So that was following your – your dismissal.  You as I have it 
this is what is recorded in the Settlement Agreement which 
we will come to.  You were dismissed on the 29t h of June 
2010 does that accord with your recollection?  29 June 2010. 
MR GAMA:  Okay I am going to have to record it as a sad 
day ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then can I take you please to page 
277 Ms Hogan says at line 3. 
“Well Mr Gama was fired at the end of 2010.  
I was fired by the President at the end of 
20 
October 2010.” 
She goes on to say at line 10. 
“That Mr Brian Molefe was appointed as the 
CEO of Transnet.” 
And a few lines below that. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 81 of 242 
 
“Then Mr Gama was reappointed as the CEO 
of Transnet Freight Rail.  It was a couple of 
months later on the grounds that they had 
reviewed 
the 
sanction 
and 
had 
an 
independent review.  I did not quite know 
what that was about and that the board felt 
that the sanction it had been applied was too 
harsh.  Chairperson it was now a different 
board from the one that was in existence 
during your time. Yes this was the board that 
10 
he had been appointed by Minister Gigaba 
and who succeeded me.” 
And then if I can take you to page 278 at line 18 Ms Hogan 
talks 
of 
a 
memorandum 
that 
was 
prepared 
by 
her 
department.  This was after your dismissal.   
“It was a submission to cabinet for the 
appointment of a new board to Transnet.”   
And she then two lines below that  
“Confirms 
also 
asks 
you 
signed 
that 
memorandum on 27 October 2010. She says 
20 
yes” 
And then if you go to page 279 also towards the foot of the 
page at lines 4 – 24 Ms Hogan. 
“So now the President has said I can go 
ahead – I cannot go ahead until Gama is 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 82 of 242 
 
dismissed.  Gama is dismissed.  Will send 
the details of the judgment – the entire 
judgment 
to 
the 
President. 
 
Started 
processing a cabinet memorandum for the 
appointment of the new Transnet board.  
That is post Gama’s dismissal? Yes.  And it 
is really in that context that she explains as 
she put it that she was fired at the end of 
October 2010.” 
And we know then that she was replaced by Minister Gigaba 
10 
with effect I think it was from the 1 January that year.  Now 
Mr Gama did you – did you know anything about this? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you know that you enjoyed the 
support of former President Zuma to be appointed as the 
next Group Chief Executive of Transnet? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you come to learn that Minister 
Hogan appears to have fallen out of favour in relation to – to 
you? 
20 
MR GAMA:  I do not know that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Do you – did you come to learn of that 
in the press or anytime afterwards? 
MR GAMA:  No I do not know 00:15:59 anything to do with 
me or that it was one of the things I do not know.  I do not 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 83 of 242 
 
know.  I do not 00:16:07. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think .. 
MR GAMA:   I think it is a question that you must pose to Mr 
Zuma. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Mr Chair I must at this stage I have been 
quite patient listening to what has been put to my client and I 
did 
not 
want 
to 
unnecessarily 
object 
to 
this 
line 
of 
questioning but I fail to appreciate and I say this in the 
context of what was previously indicated to my client by Mr 
Myburgh and even respectfully by yourself but this line of 
10 
questioning is not aimed at establishing whether he had a 
role to play or even a part in his reinstatement.   
 
Now he is being questioned as to his knowledge of 
matters which really have nothing to do with him.  It is in the 
context of him having been told but it is not alleged or 
insinuated or suggested in no manner of means that you had 
any role to play in that.  
 
In the context of that it is my submission that this line 
of questioning is wholly irrelevant.  If that is not what it 
seeks to establish then Mr Myburgh must make his position 
20 
clear because it is not relevant.  Unless it is of course 
suggested that my client had some role to play which is then 
a contradiction in what was put to him this morning to the 
extent that Mr Myburgh finds it appropriate to refer to the 
evidence of Ms Hogan and press article.  That may be 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 84 of 242 
 
evidence before you.  It is irrelevant for my client in that 
context to be called upon to deliver some kind of response or 
even an opinion.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I think our position is that we 
certainly do not intend to question Mr Gama about the merits 
of the decision to reinstate him in other words whether he 
thinks it was a good or bad decision in labour law but it is 
always been our case and Mr Gama knows this because of 
the 3.3’s that have been issued and the questions that have 
10 
been posed to him that there is an investigation into whether 
or not some influence – political influence or otherwise was 
brought to bear on his reinstatement.  He was given a 3.3 I 
think you already know in relation to Mr Hogan’s evidence 
and one of the questions posed to him in I think it was his 
second 3.3 was the question of any and all interaction that 
you had with former President Zuma and or former Minister 
Gigaba regarding your reinstatement as the CEO of Transnet 
Freight Rail.  So those things are bound up and I am simply 
pursuing that line of inquiry. 
20 
MR SOLOMONS SC:  Mr Chair if I might… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SOLOMONS SC:  Be permitted a short reply. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SOLOMONS SC:  It is not in answer to my objection.  If 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 85 of 242 
 
that is what Mr Myburgh seeks to achieve it is a simple 
approach put it to the witness.  There is no relevance to 
the line of questioning explored by him.  He is now 
obfuscating the issue.  It is not what I put in my objection.  
I said it was irrelevant to ask him whether he had comment 
on this.  It was suggested to him this morning in 
unambiguous terms that he played no role.  It is in the 
context of that that I say it is irrelevant.  If he says well I 
want to put questions directly to him in relation to that then 
do so.   But do not – do not go and obfuscate matters that 
10 
is not my objection with respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think what – I think what – I think 
part of the inquiry is to determine whether the decision to – 
the board’s decision to reinstate Mr Gama was arrived at 
because at least in part of any considerations that may be 
relevant to what the commission is looking at. 
 
Now I take it that Mr Gama wishes to dispute any 
suggestion that in reinstating him the board may have 
acted because of any considerations that should not have 
been taken into account.   
20 
 
Now of course I am talking within the context of – of 
the commission.  And if he would seek to dispute or oppose 
any such proposition or line to the extent that the legal 
team may want to say if Ms Hogan’s evidence before the 
commission is true – if it is found to be true for example 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 86 of 242 
 
that in circumstances where the board of Transnet had 
gone 
through 
professional 
selection 
criteria 
and 
recommended a certain candidate and not Mr Gama but the 
former President Mr Zuma took the stance that Ms Barbara 
Hogan says he took namely or that position of Group CEO 
of Transnet I want Mr Gama and nobody else and if you tell 
me that he may be facing or he is facing disciplinary 
processes he cannot be appointed at this stage because he 
still faces that the position will have to remain unfilled until 
those processes have been completed because that is part 
10 
of what Ms Barbara Hogan said. 
 
It may well be that when – that the legal team could 
look at the circumstances surrounding his reinstatement 
and say there may well be a connection with the stance 
allegedly taken by President Zuma in regard to how much 
he insisted that the – Mr Gama should be the Group CEO 
which he did end up being of course and that will be dealt 
with later. 
 
It may well be that it is fair to highlight those things 
that the legal team might think they will ask me to have 
20 
regard to so that Mr Gama might say I hear what you say 
but look at this and that and that and that therefore on the 
- whatever may have happened on the basis of the 
following facts or factors the board’s decision had nothing 
to do with those things it just have to do with the merits of 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 87 of 242 
 
the SZCEO.  So there is – there is that possibility to say if 
in the end the – it is possible that there is a risk that the 
legal team might argue that even if it is not because of 
anything he did but his reinstatement was at least in part 
based on that political influence it might be that it is fair 
that he must know exactly what the legal team is thinking 
and be able to say no but on the merits I should have been 
reinstated or something like that. 
 
That is the thinking that I have about it.  Okay 
alright. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you probably say let us leave it 
there Chair. 
MR SOLOMONS SC:  Out of respect I am not going to say 
anything for the effect Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  No thanks.  But the idea 
and I know that – well in my own mind I think you all 
accept the idea is just to make sure that one does not have 
a situation where Mr Gama has not had an opportunity to 
deal with something that might be relied upon later on.  It 
20 
is just to try and be fair.  But again where – where he has 
nothing to say you know it is fine.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you.  Perhaps I could take 
you to page 58 of Bundle 7 your exhibit. 
MR GAMA:  My exhibit? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 88 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Your exhibit BB28.  If you could turn 
to page… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that a different bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Bundle 7 BB28 if you could go to 
page 58.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Myburgh always remember so…. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Bundle 7. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The bundle that helps me.  Bundle 7 ja.  
10 
And what is the page number? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  58 – 58.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Are you there Mr Gama?  This is your 
second Rule – sorry Regulation 10.6 Notice to produce an 
affidavit.  Could you go please to page 60 at paragraph 1.7 
at the foot of the page you were called upon to specifically 
address 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
allegations 
in 
the 
aforementioned affidavits (and annexures) the following. 
“1.7.1 Any and all interactions that you had 
20 
with former President Zuma and or former 
Minister 
Gigaba 
regarding 
your 
reinstatement 
as 
the 
CEO 
of 
Transnet 
Freight Rail in 2011.” 
Do you see that? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 89 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could we please then go to your 
answer to paragraph 1.7.1 and that you will find at page 
47.  Are you there at 47? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You see that you at paragraph 29 
answer at paragraph 1.7.1.  do you see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And your answer is: 
“I repeat what is contained in paragraph 6.3 
10 
above.” 
You see that?  So let us then go to paragraph 6.3 above.  
That you find at page 30.  And your answer at 6.3 towards 
the foot of the page is that 
“I am there to believe that my reinstatement 
followed 
after 
intense 
discussion 
and 
debate concerning the topic by the Transnet 
board.  I assume the value I added to 
Transnet as referred to in paragraph 3 
above and I will have played a role in the 
20 
board’s deliberation.” 
You see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Perhaps I could pose the question to 
you again.  It is posed at paragraph 1.7.1 of the Regulation 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 90 of 242 
 
10.6 Notice and that is what interactions if any did you 
have with former President Zuma and or former Minister 
Gigaba about your reinstatement. 
MR GAMA:   None. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You did not say that in your affidavit. 
MR GAMA:   H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You do not deal with that question in 
your affidavit. 
MR GAMA:   I do not...  Okay.  Can I read it for you and I 
quote. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR GAMA:   6.4: 
“It has been brought to my attention that the 
Commission 
is 
also 
investigating 
whether 
erstwhile 
President 
Zuma 
and/or 
erstwhile 
Minister Gigaba may have attempted to secure 
my reinstatement...” 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   “I emphatically deny having had knowledge of  
such attempts until such time that I became 
20 
aware 
of 
such 
allegations 
during 
the 
Commission’s proceedings...” 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  I do apologise. 
MR GAMA:   So... ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [Indistinct]  ...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 91 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Oh, so no.  No, it is not what other people 
telling you but I was not at closed meetings.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I suppose if the cross-reference 
were to 6.3 and 6.4 then that confusion might not have 
arisen.  So you ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Close quote. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...deny having any knowledge of 
such attempts? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Did you have ever occasion 
10 
to meet President Zuma, former President Zuma? 
MR GAMA:   When? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, ever. 
MR GAMA:   H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ever. 
MR GAMA:   Have I met President Zuma? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  Personally.  Have you met 
him? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When? 
20 
MR GAMA:   He was there to launch locomotives in 2014 or 
2015.  I do not know the date.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that the only occasion that you 
met him? 
MR GAMA:   No, he is officiated on a number of Transnet 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 92 of 242 
 
projects what we did out of the market demand strategy.  I 
do not know the date. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So apart from those, let us call it 
business official meetings, have  you met him? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Not about this, anyway. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, I am asking you.  Have you 
met him?  I will not tie you to a subject. 
MR GAMA:   No, no.  I have not had any personal meetings 
10 
with President Zuma.  That did not happen. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Have you had personal meetings 
with Mr Gigaba? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I had had a meeting with Mr Gigaba. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When was that? 
MR GAMA:   A personal meeting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon? 
MR GAMA:   I am saying I have had a meeting with 
Mr Gigaba. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR GAMA:   It was after my reinstatement at Transnet.  He 
asked me meet and I have met with him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What did you meet him about? 
MR GAMA:   He wanted me to assure them that I would 
give support to the Group Chief Executive of Transnet, 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 93 of 242 
 
Mr Molefe and make sure that I supported him so that the 
company can succeed.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And when would that meeting have 
been? 
MR GAMA:   Sometime in 2011, probably around April or 
May of 2011, after I had been reinstated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that within the – his seeking that 
assurance from you?  Was that within the context of the 
fact that you had previously also applied ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Oh ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...appointment to that position? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that was now occupied? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But that would have been around the 
time of Mr Molefe’s appointment? 
MR GAMA:   After Mr Molefe had been appointed. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   After? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you also applied for that 
position, as I understand? 
MR GAMA:   I applied for it in 2009. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 94 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But you confirm that you applied for 
it this time as well. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now let us deal then with Mr Gigaba.  
We know that he is appointed as the new Minister from the 
1 s t of November and he then appoints a new Board of 
Directors with Mr Mkwanazi as the Chairperson, correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now you would have seen that at the 
first meeting that Mr Mkwanazi had with Mr Gigaba, 
10 
Mr Gigaba tell him, at least according to Mr Mkwanazi, that 
the fairness of your dismissal should be reviewed.  Do you 
know anything about that, of the stance of Mr Gigaba? 
MR GAMA:   No, I was not at that meeting.  Chair, maybe 
just to a bit of context which I do not know whether 
Mr Myburgh knows or does not know.  I was dismissed at a 
particular day as he said.  I appealed that dismissal.  
When I appealed that dismissal ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I know you used in your affidavit the 
term appeal as you do now. 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is understandable because you 
are not a lawyer. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it is technical you referred to an 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 95 of 242 
 
unfair dismissal just to the Bargaining Council. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not an appeal but you institute 
proceedings to challenge your dismissal.  So I am just 
making that because I saw in your affidavit you used that 
term but I know what you mean. 
MR GAMA:   No, thank you.  Thank you for schooling me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR GAMA:   [laughs]  You know these matters much more 
than many...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR GAMA:   You are quite correct.  But I think as a result 
of my referral of the unfair dismissal to the Transnet 
Bargaining Council, there was a meeting at the Bargaining 
Council whereas the appellant or whatever name you 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is called applicant. 
MR GAMA:   Applicant, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Transnet or TFR would be the 
respondent.  Ja. 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes, yes.  So as the applicant, I adduced 
certain 
arguments 
around 
a 
matter. 
 
Then 
Transnet 
requested 
that 
the 
matter 
be 
adjourned 
so 
that 
an 
opportunity could be given to Transnet and myself to 
engage on the matter and see whether or not we could not 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 96 of 242 
 
settle this matter.  
 
So when Mr Mkwanazi gets into the arena, he is 
taking over from that process where the discussions 
between me and Transnet that have been asked, let us 
discuss this, let us see if we cannot settle this. 
 
And I can tell you Chairperson, I did not want to 
go back to Transnet in terms of the settlement discussions 
that we are having.  I just wanted to see how much money 
they could give me to go away. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  That is quite interesting.   
10 
MR GAMA:   So... H’m.  I am saying that there were 
discussions that are taking place as a result of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But part of what you are saying is.  I am 
not the one who was pushing to be reinstated.  If they gave 
me ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   No, I said to them pay me so much.  I will 
leave you in peace. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  H’m. 
MR GAMA:   And you can do your shenanigans without me, 
because even the circumstances of my being charged, they 
20 
knew it had never happened at Transnet before where 
instead of people saying to you, we think there has been a 
transgression of this nature.  How can you resolve it?   
 
Auditors at Transnet, they come to management 
and they say:  Manager so and so, this is what has 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 97 of 242 
 
happened.  Are you aware of it?  How do you plan to 
remedy it?   
 
When it came to Game, they were saying you 
have done something but we will not tell you.  We will not 
tell you what we think you have done.  So we will tell you 
when we give you the bundle at the disciplinary instead of 
saying these are the issues. 
 
Or if they tell you, they would give me half...  
Half is too much Chair.  They will give me a quarter of the 
information.  They will come to me and say:  Here is the 
10 
last page of what you signed.  Do you remember?  Is this 
your signature? 
 
So I was charge in those circumstances where it 
was clear that there was something else.  I was only 
charged as a consequence of my application for a post as 
the GCF of Transnet.   
 
If I had never applied to the GCF of Transnet in 
2009, I would never have been charged.  So, and people 
were scrapping around.   
 
And 
Chair, 
there 
is 
a 
succession 
plan 
in 
20 
Transnet.  And you can go and ask for them in June or 
September 2008 and say:  And who was the person that 
was earmarked to take over from Maria Ramos?  You can 
go and ask them and maybe they will give you that 
document.   
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 98 of 242 
 
 
And then the decision not to follow their own 
succession plan, you can also go and ask them why.  I had 
not been trusted that time.  So Chair, I am saying there is 
a lot of context to this thing.  And sometimes when you 
hear and you – I am being asked whether it is Zuma, there 
is always somewhere where organs say that Mantashe as 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   That is the same thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR GAMA:   And you have to ask the question, what was 
the context because I do not think they just woke up one 
day and they said:  Oh, okay, it is Gama.  It was the SACP.  
It was the ANC.  I do not know.  But the actual discussion 
that I am being asked about, I was not a party to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR GAMA:   I am not privy to any presidential discussion 
with Cabinet Ministers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Now Mr Myburgh has put a 
certain question and I am not sure whether this has 
20 
answered it.  If it has not, Mr Myburgh, you can put your 
question again. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  No, I do not think it has.  I was 
dealing with the issue of the first discussion between 
Mr Mkwanazi and Mr Gigaba.  And I had asked you whether 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 99 of 242 
 
you knew anything about the stance that Mr Mkwanazi said 
Mr Gigaba adopted and that is that the fairness of your 
dismissal should be reviewed. 
 
And as I understand your answer, you say:  Well, 
Mr Mkwanazi picked up as the new chairperson, there had 
been preceding negotiations.  Is that – did I understand 
your evidence correctly? 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  Well, when I engaged with Mr Mkwanazi, 
he said to me:  Look, do not entertain these things of us 
paying you a lot of money to go away.  The business is 
10 
suffering.  We would want for you to continue to make a 
contribution.  And because I knew him, I changed my mind.  
He had been my GCE before.   
 
I said to him, yes, I will stay but let us then 
discuss how we deal with it, because his issues were that 
Transnet...  In fact, what he said to me.  I think that within 
four months of going cash negative.  He said:  Look, in 
four months’ time the company is not going to be able to 
pay salaries for the employees because of what is 
happening at TFR and I needed to go and fix this thing.  I 
20 
agreed and that is how we had an issue – a discussion 
about settlement.   
 
And at that time he said to me:  Look, if you 
agree that you can come back then we can discuss the 
reinstatement.  I have to go back to my board colleagues 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 100 of 242 
 
to discuss this matter and then we will have another 
discussion.  That is where we were.   
 
So as far as I am concerned there was that 
process, Chair, that you have described.  It is not an 
appeal.  There was that process and out of that process 
then 
came 
the 
discussion 
that 
I 
was 
having 
with 
Mr Mkwanazi. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  If I could go back to the 
discussion 
that 
Mr Mkwanazi 
with 
Mr Gigaba. 
 
What 
Mr Mkwanazi said is that it was clear to him that Mr Gigaba 
10 
had some information about your dismissal.  He said that 
he referred to condonation of procurement.  He spoke 
about such things.   
 
And what Mr Mkwanazi assumed is that he knew 
that because, according to Mr Mkwanazi, he assumed that 
you had been speaking to Mr Gigaba.  Do you want to 
comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I had not been speaking to Mr Gigaba.  
Remember, you just told me and the Chair earlier that 
Ms Hogan was the Minister of Public Enterprises  So there 
20 
is 
nothing 
that 
I 
would 
have 
been 
discussing 
with 
Mr Gigaba.  I did not know that Mr Gigaba is going to 
become the Minister of ...[intervenes]  
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
This 
is 
a 
discussion 
that 
Mr Mkwanazi says he has and ...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 101 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Did he give you a date ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, you see, this is the tricky part 
of the – of Mr Mkwanazi’s evidence.  He says it was in 
October.  You will recall Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the end of October. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At the end of October. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And he seem to stand by that.  It 
was put to him by the Chairperson that it could not have 
been in October, end of October.  It must have been after 
10 
the 1 s t of November because that is when we know 
objectively when Mr Gigaba was appointed.  But if I recall 
that evidence correctly, Chair, he did indicate that he met 
with Mr Gigaba in his capacity as he being the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So I think it is more of a date issue 
than ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think if they did meet before 
1 November, it would only have been if Mr Gigaba had 
been told that from 1 November he was going to be the 
20 
Minister of Public Enterprises.  That is the only thing I can 
think of.   
 
But 
in 
the 
end, 
whether 
they 
met 
on 
the 
31 s t of October or early in November, it might not really 
matter.  It is more the content of the discussion that may 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 102 of 242 
 
be important.  And if that discussion related to what would 
be Mr Gigaba’s portfolio from the 1 s t of November. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So to answer it.  It is either end of 
October or early November because I think Mr Gigaba has 
dealt with that in affidavits.  He has not testified yet and I 
think that he admits that such a meeting took place but I 
think he says it was early November. 
MR GAMA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So the simple proposition is that on 
Mr Mkwanazi’s 
evidence, 
Mr Gigaba 
knew 
about 
your 
dismissal case.  He knew about the controversy in relation 
to the condonation of procurement irregularities and he, in 
that context, assumed that you had been speaking to 
Mr Gigaba.  You say you have not done that? 
MR GAMA:   No, and as I say, there would have no reason 
for me to do so because I did not even know that 
Mr Gigaba was going to become the Minister of Public 
Enterprises, but two, this was a very public matter and 
20 
people wrote thesis around this in 2010. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what Mr Mkwanazi also says is.  
He thought that you or he assumed that you had spoken to 
Mr Gigaba because when you were suspended, you had 
lobbied any Ministers. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 103 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   That is not true. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you not lobby Ministers? 
MR GAMA:   I went could(?) and I stayed with my father 
and I planted tomatoes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now I want to deal with the 
involvement of Mr Mhlangu.  We know Mr Mhlangu, he was 
the advisor to Mr Gigaba. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are two or three minutes before one 
o’clock.  I do not know whether you want to start or you 
10 
want to start after two? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am happy to start after two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It may be more convenient. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay let us take the lunch 
break now.  We will resume at two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue.   
ADV MYBURGH:   Chairperson, Mr Singh and his counsel 
20 
are in attendance.  I am sure you are aware, as we are, 
that there is something of a concertina now of witnesses.  I 
said to them that perhaps I would raise that and you may 
be prepared with your direction to release them and maybe 
we can set a time as to when they should come back. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 104 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH:   I am sorry, I should perhaps have raised 
this with you in chambers, but... 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, that is fine.  Is your plan that 
after Mr Gama you would call Mr Singh or Mr Gigaba? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Well, I am in the – I have got a double 
problem, DCJ, I do not know, I think I am really in your 
hands.  Mr Gigaba, I think is formally scheduled to follow 
Mr Gama insofar as that was the plan but that was based 
on the fact, you will remember, that we agreed with Mr 
10 
Singh because his wife was giving birth that he would give 
evidence on Thursday and Friday.  We would have 
prepared to have Mr Singh directly after Mr Molefe given 
that they deal with common ground. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Singh, as I understand the 
position, is ready to give evidence on all matters relating 
to Transnet.   
ADV MYBURGH:   I think he is (indistinct – recording 
distorted) 
CHAIRPERSON:   (indistinct – recording distorted) issues 
20 
that he must deal with later. 
ADV MYBURGH:   I understand, DCJ, that he filed an 
affidavit recently.  I have not seen that affidavit, I assume 
my colleague confirmed that it deals with all the – insofar 
as there were outstanding issues, that it deals with them. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 105 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   That I would have to confirm though. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine.  What is your 
estimate of how long – when we will finish with Mr Gama?  
Five, half past five, six, or…? 
ADV MYBURGH:   I would think so, yes, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  So one option is for us to 
take whoever between Mr Singh and Mr Gigaba who can 
finish in a day and take one who will not finish in a day to 
another time. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, well, I think that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But another approach is to look at the 
subject matter and then say well, it makes better sense to 
start with so and so even if he might not finish in a day.  
So if you had planned to have Mr Singh testify after Molefe 
then maybe that is what you should try and do but then we 
can talk about maybe starting tomorrow with him. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, DCJ, if I could perhaps go back to 
your first proposal.  If I was to choose who could be 
finished in a day I think Mr Gigaba can be because we 
20 
know that we are confining that to Transnet and there is 
really only two issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Singh, of course, can never be 
completed in a day. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 106 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   There is the added complication that I 
have not had an opportunity to study his affidavit.  Of 
course, I should be – hopefully I can do that overnight but I 
am in your hand, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not what the position – what view 
you will take after reading his affidavit. 
ADV MYBURGH:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess what is true is that with regard 
to someone like Mr Singh you can probably finish a day 
10 
without getting to that affidavit, depending. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, if that is possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So it is really six of one and half a 
dozen of the other.  We can certainly start with Mr Singh 
and then finish halfway through his evidence or we could 
deal with Mr Gigaba and finish what we have.  We are in 
your hands, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I am easy too, I am easy too, but 
based on the fact that you had planned that Mr Singh 
20 
should come after Mr Molefe, I think we should start with 
Mr Singh after Mr Gigaba – after Mr Gama but also I am 
aware that with regard to Mr Gigaba there are certain 
developments 
that 
make 
him 
not 
finish 
everything 
tomorrow. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 107 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, I would say also that I would 
probably feel more comfortable holding Mr Gigaba over so 
as to deal with him all at once instead on a piecemeal 
basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja.  No, no, no, I think that is how 
we should proceed.  So I hope that helps counsel for Mr 
Singh?  Yes.  Mr Gigaba’s legal team is not here as we talk 
about these things, they are not here. 
ADV MYBURGH:   No, they are not but we can get hold of 
them and at least we have …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is right and then in that event 
maybe they can be here tomorrow morning and talk while 
they are here about what is proposed to be done. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Sorry, would we start then at half past 
nine tomorrow, Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   We can start at half past nine tomorrow 
as well. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you.  Alright, Mr – sorry, may I 
20 
continue? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may continue. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you.  Good afternoon, Mr Gama.  
I had just turned to a different topic and that actually does 
refer to Mr Gigaba.  You know, Mr Mhlangu, he was Mr 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 108 of 242 
 
Gigaba’s adviser? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I know him. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So the chronology of events that flowed 
after the first discussion between Mr Gigaba and Mr 
Mkwanazi was that in January there was a discussion 
between Mr Mhlangu and Ms Mkwanazi where Mr Mhlangu 
in fact puts Mr …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   January 2011, nè? 
ADV MYBURGH:   January… 
CHAIRPERSON:   I must be 2011 because Mr Gama was 
10 
reinstated in February. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or at least his settlement agreement was 
in February. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, it is January 2011.  You are 
correct, the discussion was in – at the end of October or at 
the beginning of November 2010.  So going into the next 
year, Mr Gama, the sequence or chronology of events is 
that Mr Mhlangu contacts Mr Mkwanazi and Mr Mhlangu 
puts Mr Mkwanazi in touch with Sbu Gule of Denys Reitz.  I 
20 
take it you do not know anything about that. 
MR GAMA:   No, I do not. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  So if I could then take you 
please to – just bear with me, sorry.  If I could take you to 
Transnet bundle 2, that should be in the boxes behind you 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 109 of 242 
 
somewhere.  Yes, if you could please turn to – so this, 
Chairperson, is Transnet bundle 2, EXHIBIT BB15.  If I 
could ask you to go to page 3?  So what follows Mr 
Mkwanazi having been put in touch with Mr Gule by Mr 
Gigaba’s adviser is then a meeting which takes place on 
the 22 January and I assume, DCJ, that that should in fact 
be 11 and not 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, that page 3? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, that – are you talking about the 
10 
first paragraph? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Well, it is the date, it says 22 January 
2010 but then paragraph 1 refers to 22 January 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, no, no, it should be 2011, not 
2010. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Now what it reflects, Mr Gama, is that 
there was a meeting attended by Mr Mapoma and Mr 
Mkwanazi on behalf of Transnet.  Mr Langa, I understand 
he was your attorney at the time, is that right? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Together with yourself and then Mr Gule 
and Sangoni, they were two attorneys from Denys Reitz, 
would confirm that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And what the note reflects is that there 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 110 of 242 
 
was 
a 
private 
discussion 
amongst 
Transnet 
and 
its 
attorneys and then there as a discussion with you.  I would 
just like to take you please to paragraph 4 at the foot of 
page 3.  So this of course now needs to be seen in the 
light of Mkwanazi’s interaction with Mr Gigaba, which I 
have explained to you, and Mr Mkwanazi says at this 
meeting or consultation, explained that he would like to 
assist Mr Gama where reasonably possible, his intention is 
to bring him back into his, the Chairman’s office, he wants 
Mr Gama to assist him on a number of strategic issues, he 
10 
however needs good motivation to do so.  His view is that 
if he is provided with an opinion setting out that there had 
been some unfairness towards Mr Gama at the board 
meeting on 16 February he would persuade the other board 
members to make the decision to bring Mr Gama back into 
the organisation.  Did Mr Mkwanazi ever convey this to 
you?  Did he ever convey that to you, Mr Mkwanazi? 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, did he ever say to you he 
would like to assist you and he would like to bring you 
back to the Chairman’s office and he would like you to 
20 
assist him on a number of strategic issues and that he just 
needed a good motivation to do so and if he could get an 
opinion setting out that there had been some unfairness 
towards you he believed that he could persuade the board 
to make the decision to bring you back.  Did he ever say 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 111 of 242 
 
that to you? 
MR GAMA:    No, no, no.  What he said to me was he was 
no 
interested 
in 
the 
discussion 
about 
me 
getting 
compensation and going way, that he would like me to 
come back to the company and that is what he said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   So I guess this is the part when we had not 
…[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   You were in a separate meeting. 
MR GAMA:   I do not think we were in this …[intervenes] 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   No, no, it does reflect that. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   But as Mr – and of course it needs to be 
seen in the context of the discussion you had with Mr 
Gigaba that Mr Mkwanazi accepted that what he was really 
looking for here was some friendly legal advice, he just 
needed something that showed some unfairness so he 
could persuade the board members that you should come 
back.  You say he did not raise that with you? 
MR GAMA:   No, no. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright and then what we do know is that 
– just to continue with the chronology, there was then some 
advice prepared and if I could take you to that.  It was 
prepared by Mr Mapoma and then there was some input by 
Deneys Reitz and the product that was then produced you 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 112 of 242 
 
find at page 16. 
MR GAMA:   On one six? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja, one six.  And this ultimately did 
serve before the board and what I want to just direct your 
attention to is that Deneys Reitz – and you can comment 
on it, if you want – they added only two paragraphs and 
that is paragraph 10 and 11 on page 17.  And really the 
high-water mark then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Myburgh, I think I have 
lost you or you have lost me. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Page 17, DCJ, one seven.  The high 
water mark of their advice is at paragraph 11.  This is all it 
says: 
“It is accordingly our view that there is a probability 
that the bargaining council or a court considering 
the appropriateness of the sanction of dismissal of 
Mr Gama may reach the conclusion that dismissal 
was no appropriate having regard to the challenge 
on sanction advanced by him.  In that instance the 
court may either award compensation to Mr Gama 
20 
or find that a lesser sanction ought to have been 
opposed and therefore order is reinstated.” 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Now you may have read that Mr 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 113 of 242 
 
Mkwanazi described this as a very poor opinion and it was, 
this piece of advice serves before the board but in light of 
the fact that it was considered poor, what Deneys Reitz 
were required to do was then to provide and augmented 
opinion, as it was called.  And that then brings us to page 
19.  Now this is an opinion rendered on the 22 February 
which is in fact after the board had taken the decision to 
reinstate you and what it reflects and I am going to refer 
you to two paragraphs is in paragraph 1.1 at page 20, it 
records that: 
10 
“There 
are 
various 
opinions 
which 
have 
been 
obtained from reputable firms of attorneys with 
regard to the prospects of success of Mr Gama in 
successfully 
challenging 
his 
dismissal 
by 
the 
company.  All the opinions, including ours, which we 
gave after perusing documents pertaining to the 
disciplinary enquiry were of the view that Mr 
Gama’s chances of successfully challenging his 
dismissal were not good.” 
And then the only other thing we need to have regard to, 
20 
that is of material relevance, is at page 22, paragraph 4.  
You will see that that is a cut and paste of the earlier piece 
of advice where there say there is a probability that the 
conclusion may be different. 
 
Now Mr Mkwanazi accepted that this opinion was 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 114 of 242 
 
contradictory because in paragraph 1.1 at 20, it says 
advice have been given by a number of firms including 
theirs, the prospects of success were not good and then, of 
course, it ends off on this basis that there is some chance 
of Transnet being unsuccessful and he accepted that this 
was not an acceptable opinion. Do you have any comment 
to make on that? 
MR GAMA:   Well, I was not at the meeting so I do not 
know anything about the sequence of events. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Sure. 
10 
MR GAMA:   And, as you say – and the thing that you just 
read for me is not dated, it does not have a date on it. 
ADV MYBURGH:   The first piece of advice that I read to 
you, you will see that, if you go to page 15, that was sent – 
Mr Mapoma prepared the memorandum, he sent to Mr 
Sangoni, Mr Sangoni from Deneys Reitz settled it and sent 
it back to Mr Mapoma on the 15 February a day before the 
board meeting.  So this first piece of advice served before 
the board. 
MR GAMA:   Okay, that is the one where number 11 says 
20 
that then they reach the conclusion that dismissal was not 
appropriate. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   So that is on the 15 February 2011. 
ADV MYBURGH:   That is right, yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 115 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And then what happens is there is the 
board meeting, despite the fact that Mr Mapoma – sorry, Mr 
Mkwanazi is of the view that this is a poor opinion and it 
requires to be augmented, the board nevertheless decided 
to reinstate you, you are now on the 16 February.  And 
then when asked to augment their opinion they then 
produce, as he said, the contradictory opinion that I have 
taken you to.  Do you have a comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I do not, I was not party to this, I do not 
10 
know anything …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   You have seen Mr Todd’s opinion in the 
documents that have been sent you. 
MR GAMA:   No, I have not. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  Well, maybe I should take you – 
would you please go to Transnet bundle 3, EXHIBIT BB17?  
And could I ask you please to turn up page 65 and I call it 
an opinion but it is really in the form of a report.  You will 
want to page through it, Mr Gama, you will see that it is 
very comprehensive.  It deals with the investigation that 
20 
preceded the disciplinary enquiry, I will just go through the 
headings, initially: 
“Attempts to convene the inquiry. 
Gama’s High Court application. 
Attempts to schedule a disciplinary enquiry. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 116 of 242 
 
Gama’s subsequent objection to Adv Myburgh SC. 
Gama’s refusal to accept the appointment of Adv 
Antrobus 
SC 
proceeding 
to 
proceed 
by 
…[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   Sorry, you are swallowing your words, can 
you speak slower? 
ADV MYBURGH:   At page 72: 
“Gama’s refusal to accept the appointment of Adv 
Antrobus SC.” 
At page 73. 
10 
“Decision to proceed by way of disciplinary enquiry 
instead of arbitration.” 
74 …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is too fast, Mr Myburgh.  Ja? 
MR 
GAMA: 
 
 This 
document, 
Chair, 
has 
not 
been 
discovered to us so we have never [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
ADV MYBURGH:   This is part of Mr Todd’s affidavit, it has 
been given to you. 
MR GAMA:   It is a document being prepared on 2 
20 
February 2011? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes.  And then if you have a look at 
page 74: 
“Disciplinary enquiry and outcome” 
And then he talks about the summary of the findings, page 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 117 of 242 
 
74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79 and 80.  Then he has a heading at 
81: 
“Dealing with the question of sanction.” 
He deals with that at page 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87 and 
88, 89 he then has a heading against that backdrop of: 
“Gama’s 
weak 
prospects 
of 
success 
in 
the 
bargaining council arbitration.” 
Do you see that?  It seems it is 26 page opinion. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, it has not been discovered to us. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  Well, what I think is perhaps 
10 
important is that Mr Mkwanazi himself accepted that it is 
quite difficult to compare the Bowmans’ opinion to what 
boiled down to one paragraph or two paragraphs really in 
the 15 February opinion.  Do you have any comment on 
that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I do not have any comment on what 
Mkwanazi has said. 
ADV MYBURGH:   I am taking you through the chronology 
to show you that Mr Mkwanazi may very well have acted on 
instruction or under the influence of Mr Gigaba and in 
20 
relation to this very issue, Mr Mkwanazi in fact accepted in 
his evidence, Mr Gama, that he had not contacted Mr Todd 
in relation to this matter because he really did not want to 
hear that Transnet might succeed at arbitration.  Do you 
want to comment on that? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 118 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   I do not know what Mr Mkwanazi, I was not… 
ADV MYBURGH:   So it is your case …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   I do not whether I can be asked to comment 
on Mkwanazi’s comments. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Let me …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, there might be no – you might have 
nothing to say but you might say well, I am surprised that 
Mkwanazi said you did not want to hear an opinion that 
said Transnet may succeed because on the merits of my 
case it was clear that there had been unfairness, so I do 
10 
not know what he was looking for, the unfairness was 
there. 
MR GAMA:   No, I think the first time that I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am giving you an example. 
MR GAMA:   No, I am saying this is the first time that I see 
this Todd document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   I do not know if Mr Mkwanazi ever had a copy 
of this document and if so; when did he have it because in 
all the documents that …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have seen. 
MR GAMA:   That I have seen that went to the Transnet 
board and all of that and that was in front of the board, 
there was never any reference to a court document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean that you saw after your 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 119 of 242 
 
reinstatement or…? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MR GAMA:   So that is why I am saying I have never seen 
this document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   I do not know if Mkwanazi ever had it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   I cannot really comment on it, I have not even 
read it. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, well just for the sake of 
completion, Mr Mkwanazi did have it.  Now …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   All I am saying is I do not when he had it and 
all I have seen in the minutes of the board of Transnet is 
that they considered opinion from Deneys Reitz.  That is 
what I saw. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think in his evidence he conceded that 
he had seen it before the board made the decision, this 
one and he did speak about other opinions as well. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, well it was the 15 February opinion 
20 
which was referred to as the Deneys Reitz opinion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   As you will remember, Chairperson, it 
was already drafted by Mapoma with Deneys Reitz’s input. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 120 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   But what I am interested in finding out 
from you, Mr Gama, is what did Mr Mkwanazi – when did 
you first start interacting with him?  Was it before the 
meeting that you attended with Deneys Reitz on the 22 
January 2011? 
MR GAMA:   No, I think it was on that day. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And you …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   He was in the company of Mr Gule. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And you have already recounted to the 
Chairperson but perhaps you could just repeat it, that you 
10 
say he told you right from the outset – what did he say? 
MR GAMA:   He said to me – because what I had wanted in 
terms of the settlement was that I get compensation.  Then 
he said no, his preference is that I need to come back to 
Transnet and work, especially because the business was 
suffering and, as I said to you, probably in his own words 
he said in the next four months we might not have enough 
money to pay salaries, I need you to go and fix that 
[indistinct – audio distorted].  So it was in that context that 
I said to him no, that is fine, and prepare to come back and 
20 
let us put aside the discussion about compensation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe I would ask this, which I was 
going to ask later, if you – if the idea of reinstatement 
came from him because you were looking at being given 
compensation, the issue of the reinstatement being with 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 121 of 242 
 
full back pay, did it come from you or did it come from him? 
MR GAMA:   Sorry, Chair?  The full back pay? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I am saying you have just told me 
and you told me earlier that what you wanted was 
compensation. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Mkwanazi said his preference 
was that you should come back and he gave his reasons.  
So my question is whether you were the one who insisted 
that if you were reinstated you should be given full back 
10 
pay for the time that you had been out of Transnet or 
whether that idea came from his side? 
MR GAMA:   Well, the concept of reinstatement, Chair, is 
exactly that, that you get full back pay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   But it was cheaper to pay me back than what I 
was asking, it was far, far cheaper. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, are you going to share to ask by 
any chance what you were asking for or you don’t feel 
comfortable to share? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Apart from as much as possible 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   It was far, far cheaper to pay me back 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And to take you – to reinstate you then? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 122 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   To reinstate me then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   To pay you the amount you had in mind? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, now let me then switch back 
to Mr Gigaba and his advisor Mr Mahlangu, remember you 
meet him now 22 January, you say that was the first 
meeting that you had with Mr Mkwanazi, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I ask you please to go to 
10 
Transnet bundle 1, it is also part of the BB15 exhibit, and 
this is - I want to take you to Mr Mahlangu…[intervene] 
MR GAMA:   You said bundle 1? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   BB15, bundle 1, I want to take you 
to Mr Mhlangu’s affidavit please.  
MR GAMA:   Okay, page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let us start with page 175. Now 
attached to Mr Mhlangu’s affidavit were two emails that he 
had sent to Mr Gigaba.  The first email you find at page 
178, you see that?  That is dated the 18 t h of January 2011, 
20 
now it says in the second bullet point, now I understand 
that Transnet and this must have been before you even met 
Mr Mkwanazi: 
“I understand that Transnet may be nearing a 
settlement with Gama, I have obtained the details of 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 123 of 242 
 
the settlement and then brief you accordingly. I 
suggest that you socialise the President and his key 
aids (formally and informally) on the proposed 
settlement.  It is intended that the forthcoming 
Board should consider and authorise it.” 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I see that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you would confirm that this would 
have been before you had even spoken to Mr Mkwanazi on 
10 
what you have told us. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I do not know the dates, I know that there 
was a meeting between Mkwanazi and myself and Langa 
and Gule at, I think at Inanda Club. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon? 
MR GAMA:   At Inanda, Inanda Club, and then there was 
another meeting at the Indaba.  So I am not sure, I cannot 
tell you which one took place before which one, but I think 
this one where we were showing the minutes is probably 
the second meeting. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Oh I see, I understood you to say 
that it was the first.  
MR GAMA:   No, I cannot remember where exactly, where 
we met them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I seem to remember from Mr Mkwanazi’s 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 124 of 242 
 
evidence that the meeting which had Mr Gule was first, I 
think that one was the one with Mr Mkwanazi, ja. 
MR GAMA:   He was always with Mr Mkwanazi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, even before the other one.  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay, 
I 
understand 
that, 
but 
I 
understood, my impression was that the Inanda Club one 
was the first one but it could be the other way around. 
MR GAMA:   It is possible but he was always with him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But at the Inanda Club because I am 
10 
going to come to that, was Mr Mkwanazi in the presence of 
lawyers because as we have it and of course, what I am 
putting to you is just one side of the story.  But what we do 
have is Mkwanazi I think and Mr Mapoma saying the two of 
them were there at Inanda together with you, not with the 
lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No lawyers.  
MR GAMA:   It is a long time ago Chair, but my recollection 
is that he was always, maybe the lawyer he was with was 
Mapoma but he was with a lawyer.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR GAMA:   I have never met him without, he was always 
with a lawyer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is your recollection that your own 
attorney was there as well or not? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 125 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That he, Mr Langa was there? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay in both occasions? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then if I could take you to the 
second email.  This is another email Mr Mahlangu reporting 
to Mr Gigaba, I am going to take you just to the first 
paragraph: 
“Dear Minister 
10 
At my meeting with the Chair, now he is meeting 
with 
Mkwanazi, 
he 
acknowledged 
that 
the 
advertising of the GC position was a mistake in the 
light of Gama’s response to the advert the Board 
seeks guidance on the way forward despite the 
ongoing, without prejudice discussions.” 
We can accept that that is the settlement discussions.  
“G insists on staying on the list, he was informed 
through his lawyer of an offer to reinstate him, no 
loss of benefits or contribution towards his legal 
20 
costs.  My recommendation that the issue regarding 
his discipline and appointment of the GCE be dealt 
with separately.” 
You see that?  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 126 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So what we see here is that Mr 
Mahlangu was meeting together with - Mr Mahlangu and Mr 
Mahlangu was then reporting back to Mr Gigaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may have said Mr Mahlangu on 
both, it is Mr Mahlangu meeting Mkwanazi. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, well Mr Mahlangu was meeting 
with Mr Mkwanazi and then Mr Mahlangu was reporting 
back to Mr Gigaba, I beg your pardon. 
MR GAMA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You see that Mr Gama? 
10 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I see that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, and what Mr Mkwanazi 
accepted, is that he was in effect reporting back to Mr 
Gigaba through his advisor, Mr Mahlangu. 
MR GAMA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now turning to Mr Mapoma, Mr 
Mapoma says three things that I would like you to comment 
on, and I will take you to the relevant portions.  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is Mapoma I think. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mapoma. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mapoma, and he was the 
Transnet lawyer.  He says: 
“That from the outset when he started assisting Mr 
Mkwanazi, Mkwanazi told him that he had been 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 127 of 242 
 
instructed to reinstate you, and that he wanted to 
find a way to do so cleanly.  He said he assumed 
that the instruction had come from former President 
Zuma.” 
You want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I was never present in those meetings 
between Mapoma and Mkwanazi, so I am not privy to that, 
so I cannot comment on that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So then we come to something 
where you were present and that is the Inanda meeting 
10 
because Mr Mapoma also talks about this, and the 
evidence that he has given is that at this meeting, he was 
told by Mr Mkwanazi that this was a settlement negotiation.  
He said that the settlement negotiations broke down 
because you wanted to be appointed as the Group Chief 
Executive. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I think Mr Mapoma would have been 
mistaken. 
 
I 
think 
I 
have 
read 
somewhere 
his 
statement…[intervene] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I can take you there if you 
20 
want.  
MR GAMA:   Ja, where is it? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja, if you to bundle 1, BB15.  
MR GAMA:   Ja, page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Page, I think it is page 8, just bear 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 128 of 242 
 
with me for a second.  No, I have referred you to the wrong 
exhibit.  It is exhibit BB16, I do beg your pardon and this is 
in bundle 3.  The part that I am questioning you about Mr 
Gama that you say – I assume it is the passage you 
referring to is I think at page 8, para 19 where he says: 
“During a break, Mr Mkwanazi briefed me that Mr 
Gama was to be reinstated and we have to meet 
with Mr Gama because later Mr Mkwanazi asked me 
to accompany him to meet Mr Gama at the Inanda 
Estate on the day, which was a weekend.  I am not 
10 
sure if it was a Saturday or Sunday, the meeting 
happened between Mr Gama and Mr Mkwanazi, I 
waited for them to finish.  There was nothing to do 
after this meeting, as apparently, Mr Gama and Mr 
Mkwanazi could not reach consensus on the terms 
of the reinstatement.  According to Mr Mkwanazi at 
the time, Mr Gama wanted to be reinstated as the 
CEO 
of 
Transnet, 
and 
Mr 
Mkwanazi 
was 
not 
agreeing to that condition.  They also could not 
agree on the issue of the fees that had to be 
20 
repaid.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, my comment is as follows.  I could never 
have asked to be reinstated into a position that I have 
never occupied and so it would be absurd in the extreme 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 129 of 242 
 
for someone to say, reinstate me as CEO of Transnet, 
because I had never occupied that position.  
The – I could only be reinstated as the CEO of TFR, 
I think that is probably what he may have meant to say I 
wanted to be reinstated as the CEO of TFR.  So I cannot 
really say anything further, I think Mr Mapoma could 
probably be mistaken, because I knew that if for anybody 
to be appointed as the CEO of Transnet, you have to go 
through a particular process. 
And that process involves both the Board and the 
10 
Minister, and from the Minister it even goes to cabinet.  So 
I could not Chair have asked to be reinstated as CEO of 
Transnet, which is the position that I have never held.  So I 
think Mapoma may have been mistaken in terms of what 
Mkwanazi may have said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Of course, there was at this time a 
vacancy in the GCE position, correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, there was a vacancy, but it was not one 
where I would want to be reinstated to, I never occupied it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But it is a position that you wanted 
20 
because you applied for it. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I had applied for it but there were no new 
processes they had advertised it.  What I asked Mkwanazi 
if it in relation to that, I had asked him a question that 
since we are having this discussion, and you have now 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 130 of 242 
 
advertised this position do you think I should apply or I 
should not, have 
and he did not have an answer. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But Mr Gama did you not really want 
to be reinstated so that you could become the GCE, was 
that not ultimately what you wanted to do? 
MR GAMA:   I had never Mr Myburgh been the GCE, I had 
been suspended and charged when I applied for that 
position.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
10 
MR GAMA:   So I had never held the position.  So you 
could not reinstate someone to a position that he had 
never had. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, but that is not, that is not the 
proposition that I put to you, so I beg your pardon.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, okay unless between Mr Mapoma 
and Mr Mkwanazi in that conversation that Mr Mapoma 
says they had during the break, unless between them, 
there was some misunderstanding what was sort to be said 
was that you had said, you want to be the Group CEO we 
20 
cannot talk about reinstatement, because the point you 
made about reinstatement is correct.  
Unless they used the wrong terminology, but the 
idea was that maybe you said look, there is a vacancy right 
now, I am now putting my own words Mr Gama, you know, 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 131 of 242 
 
my record, my track record I have performed very well, 
wherever I have been put in Transnet now here is a 
vacancy, why do you not appoint me to that position. 
So I am just saying unless somebody used the 
wrong word, the wrong terminology but the idea was that 
maybe that is what you said. 
MR GAMA:   No, it would have been preposterous Mr 
Chairman of me to do such a thing it is unlike me and it is 
not me, and it did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
10 
MR GAMA:   And so I think, and I am trying to interpret 
something here for Mr Mapoma, I think Mr Mkwanazi would 
have said since we have advertised the GCE position 
Gama is asking whether he should apply. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Mr Myburgh.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, I just wanted to ask you 
this, I mean why were you not - moving onto a different 
issue, was it not your ultimate aim to become the GCE so 
that really being reinstated into the position of CFO, CEO 
rather of Transnet Freight Rail was simply an immediate 
20 
stepping stone.  Was that not really what you wanted the 
GCR post? 
MR GAMA:   I had applied for the position a year earlier. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, the answer is yes, presumably. 
MR GAMA:   I had applied for that position, so I had 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 132 of 242 
 
ambition but my ambition was done properly, I had follow 
whatever processes was there.  I could not say to 
Mkwanazi no, now appoint me as the GCE, he did not have 
those powers.  So I would not ask a man to do things that 
he cannot do. 
It was a logical step but it was not at all costs and 
that is why I went back and I assisted Transnet in terms of 
TFR. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, can I take you to another, the 
last paragraph I want to deal with in relation to Mr 
10 
Mapoma, can you turn to paragraph 27 please at page 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Myburgh I thought it was 
going to be just one reference so I told her not to 
bother…[intervene] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Transnet bundle 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will need to have it Ma’am, bundle 3 
what page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Page 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, Mr Gama, you had been at 
Transnet since ’94 you said, is that right? 
20 
MR GAMA:   1994. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1994? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Were you aware whether each time there 
was a vacancy in the position of Group CEO of Transnet 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 133 of 242 
 
there would be advertisements and different candidates 
would be interviewed or whether sometimes somebody who 
was considered to be suitable would just be appointed.  
MR GAMA:   Ja, it really just dependent on them, but there 
was always a process of the - in terms of the articles of the 
company, 
the 
CFO, 
and 
the 
GCE 
the 
Board 
would 
recommend to the Minister, and the Minister in cabinet 
would then make a decision on that appointment.  
So even if it was not advertised, there will still be a 
process that would be followed and in that particular case, 
10 
there was then an advertisement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no I am thinking about that issue in 
the context of your saying you could not Mr Mkwanazi to do 
what he had no power to do, because I take it that if the 
power lay with the Minister or cabinet the Board could 
certainly recommend and one takes it that the Board's 
recommendation would carry a certain amount of weight 
with either the Minister or the candidate or both.  
So, even if it was something that was not unheard 
of in Transnet or in SOE’s for a Group CEO to be appointed 
20 
without 
advertising 
the 
position 
and 
inviting 
various 
candidates so, it could well be that you would not have 
been if you did, you would not have been asking him to 
make the appointment, you would have been asking him to 
make a recommendation and that he should take his Board 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 134 of 242 
 
on-board and make a recommendation that look, here is 
somebody that we as the Board with his, and he has a 
track record within Transnet. 
MR GAMA:   No, Chair even if it had happened before, 
because it did happen before. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR GAMA:   But after that there had been a recordal that 
the Board would give the Minister at least three names 
from which to choose from. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MR GAMA:   So in order to arrive at those three names, 
you need to go through the process at least. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR GAMA:   You could not just meet somebody at the 
airport and say I like you let me put you on the list, it does 
not work like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, I was going to take you 
then to the last paragraph that I want to ask you about in 
Mr Mapoma’s affidavit at paragraph 27, so it is at page 12.  
20 
Are you there?  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It says: 
“Mr Mahlangu called, these are telephone calls, 
then put pressure on me to the reinstatement of Mr 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 135 of 242 
 
Gama, accusing me of causing the delay.  Telling 
me number one, he wanted to get it done quickly.  
He never mentioned any name, he stopped calling 
me when I sternly told him to stop calling me, and 
that I do not report to him nor to the Minister nor to 
no one and that I was assisting Mr Mkwanazi in 
implementing the Board's decision.” 
I presume you have no knowledge of that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I have no knowledge of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I just want to mention this and 
10 
again you might not be able to say anything.  It is 
interesting that say Mr Mapoma’s evidence included him 
saying that, Mr Mkwanazi had said, I think he said Mr 
Mkwanazi had said he had been instructed to reinstate you 
but Mr Mkwanazi I think denied that, but I think that is what 
Mr Mapoma’s said, that point one. 
Point two, we have a situation where Mr Mapoma 
says Mr Mahlangu called him and put pressure on him to 
finalise your reinstatement and accused him of possibly 
delaying and told him that number one, he wanted to get it 
20 
done quickly.  And you have said in your evidence, I think 
in your first meeting with Mr Mkwanazi, he made it clear 
that his preference was that you should be reinstated, you 
should come back.  
So I am just mentioning that when one looks at a lot 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 136 of 242 
 
of 
these 
pieces, 
they 
all 
seem 
to 
suggest 
that 
reinstatement, not necessarily in your mind, but in the 
mind maybe of other people your reinstatement seems to 
be a proposal as opposed to compensation or any other or 
you getting nothing. 
MR GAMA:   No, no your quite right Chair, I abandoned the 
notion when Mkwanazi indicated to me that his preference 
that I go back, in fact he was saying, I do not want to pay 
you so much money to go away.  I would rather reinstate 
you and you come back to work and we fix the problems at 
10 
the company.   
So I think that was the issue, then as for Mapoma, 
Mapoma I think for me he was advising Mkwanazi because 
he would come to the meetings, but he did not really say 
anything in the meeting.  But then I guess outside of the 
meeting, they were having the discussion, so I do not know 
how Mahlangu would then call Mapoma to ask him to 
expedite the reinstatement, because I do not think that 
Mapoma per say was the one who sees to it that particular 
issue.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And well maybe I could mention and Mr 
Myburgh will indicate if he has a different recollection.  
That I think I Mr Mkwanazi denied Mr Mapoma’s evidence 
that during the break, in that meeting with you that he told 
Mr Mapoma that you wanted to be reinstated in the position 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 137 of 242 
 
of Group CEO, Mr Mkwanazi denied that part of Mr 
Mapoma’s evidence if I recall correctly. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well I am not sure on that DCJ but 
what I do know it really - it might have been one of those 
things he could not remember you see. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, he could not remember, yes, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He said to me he did not confirm the 
version.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay I think Mr, wants to say 
something. 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:   Mr Chair, I wanted to raise this 
earlier and I thought in fairness to Mr Gama it ought to be 
put to him that whilst that may have been the version of Mr 
Mapoma it was denied, and in fact, what Mr Chair with 
respect 
is 
alluding 
to 
is 
that 
very 
denial 
by 
Mr 
Mahlangu…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I was about to come to him, the 
Mahlangu one. 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:   Yes, but there was also denial by 
Mr Mkwanazi, I am struggling to find the document, but 
20 
there certainly was and I just think in fairness it ought to 
be put that that was not a one sided version that can be 
accepted on the face of it.  It was something that was 
denied by a subsequent witness, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, I was also going to say, if I recall 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 138 of 242 
 
correctly, Mahlangu denied…[intervene] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, Mahlangu expressly denied 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes okay. 
MR GAMA:   I also do not think that Mkwanazi would have 
agreed to that because it did not happen. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, just I suppose in fairness as 
well and Mr Chair, you would be better apprised of this 
than me because it is in the very early days of the 
Commission. 
But 
as 
I 
understand 
President, 
former 
10 
President Zuma also took issue with Ms Hogan’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, you are right.  The former 
President Mr Zuma, when he gave evidence in July I think 
of 2019, Ms Barbara Hogan’s evidence was put to him in 
terms of him allegedly having insisted that for the position 
of Group CEO of Transnet he wanted you and nobody else, 
he denied that, the one, the one part which I must mention 
is that the, the proceedings during that week when the 
former person was giving evidence were interrupted at a 
certain stage I think on Wednesday because he had 
20 
complaints about how he was being questioned. 
 
As 
a 
result 
of 
which 
the 
proceedings 
were 
adjourned and there were discussions among the lawyers 
and for the rest of the week his evidence did not continue 
and he indicate, it was agreed that he would come back to 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 139 of 242 
 
continue. 
Of course where the Commission is with him now is 
public knowledge, but one of the issues that I still wanted 
to raise with him was this.  That on Ms Barbara Hagen’s 
version, the reason why or rather let me put it this way.  
On her version, which must be common cause, the position 
of group CEO of Transnet remained unfilled until she had 
left and she left at the end of October 2010. 
Now she had been speaking to the former president 
about the filling the position some time I think in 2009, and 
10 
she said the only reason why the position was not filled for 
such a long time after she had spoken to the former 
president, was because the former president was not 
prepared to have anybody else, anybody else appointed to 
the position except you, and she said there was a 
candidate, 
Mr 
Sipho 
Maseko 
whom 
the 
board 
had 
recommended and she also had no problem with that 
candidate, but the former president wanted only you. 
So what I had hoped the former president would 
clarify later, if he came back, is what on his version the 
20 
reason was why the position of group CEO was not filled 
over such a long period in circumstances where there was 
a candidate that had been recommended by the board, 
which the minister was happy with and he does not appear 
to have raised any issues with that candidate or about that 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 140 of 242 
 
candidate.  
That of course has not been asked to him, because 
he has not come back, but that he definitely denied having 
said that he wanted you and you only to be appointed.  Mr 
Myburgh?   
MR GAMA:  Thank you Chair.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, thank you.  I have found the 
relevant passage.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is, can I just read it to you?  It is at 
10 
page 145.  You do not have this in front of me, you but on 
day 285.  I was questioning Mr Mkwanazi about this very 
issue and you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You intervened and you rolled up the 
controversy and I will read the whole page, because it 
deals with this.  So I think everyone is half right here.  Mr 
Mkwanazi said: 
 
“I suspect that Mr Mpoma might have got his 
facts wrong there, because the position of 
20 
Transnet group chief executive was a position 
where 
there 
was 
a 
parallel 
process 
to 
interview etcetera, etcetera.  So I suspect that 
Mr Mpoma might have meant is the position of 
chief executive Transnet [indistinct – audio 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 141 of 242 
 
distorted].” 
 
I suspect that is what he meant, and then you said 
Chairperson: 
 
“Well, I do not think he was confused because 
he gave, his evidence was clear.  He said I 
asked him.  I said that Gama had been 
dismissed from the position of CEO of QRF.” 
 
Mr Mkwanazi said: 
 
“You did sir, I recall.” 
 
And then you said: 
10 
 
“Yes, and yes but he said that Mr Mkwanazi 
told me that the reason why they did not agree 
is that he was now, he wanted to be appointed 
or to use the word reinstated as group chief 
executive officer and Mkwanazi said that he 
rejected that.  He wanted him to be reinstated 
in the position of CEO QRF which is the 
position from which he had been dismissed.” 
 
That is what he said.  You were summarizing what 
Mr Mpoma said.  Mr Mkwanazi then responds to your 
20 
question at line 22, saying: 
 
“Well, Mr Mpoma said that and I suspect Mr 
Gama 
might 
have 
said 
that, 
but 
clearly 
Chairperson I could never agree to a position 
like that.” 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 142 of 242 
 
 
That 
takes 
us 
to 
the 
end 
of 
that 
page, 
so 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you are right.  Everybody is half 
[indistinct – audio distorted]. 
MR GAMA:  Ja, and I state Chair that I would not have 
asked to be reinstated as the CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no the one point which I want to raise 
as we looked at this issue, is that against the suggestion 
you made and I think you emphasized that it was just your 
thinking, that maybe Mpoma, Mr Mpoma must have been 
10 
talking about reinstatement to the position of CEO of TFR.   
 
It would seem to me and I would like to hear what 
you have to say that given Mr Mkwanazi’s attitude towards 
having you back, it is difficult to think that that could have 
your demand to be reinstated to TFR could have led to a 
[indistinct – audio distorted] because that is what you 
wanted.  
 
Ja.  Okay.   
MR GAMA:  In fact, and it is just a proposition.  My 
suspicion about this thing is there was somewhere where 
20 
Mkwanazi wanted me to work in his office.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR GAMA:  And I suspect that is what this was about.  
Where ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Was he also acting group chief executive 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 143 of 242 
 
at the time? 
MR GAMA:  Yes, he was but he was the Chairman of the 
company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was both Chairman and acting group 
chief executive? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  So he was like an executive Chairman.  
So he, I think because of the work load that he was having 
in that position, he wanted somebody who could assist him 
and I did assist him for a while in that office.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
10 
MR GAMA:  So my suspicion was he wanted me to do that, 
but it was not an existing position.  It was not a position 
per se.  It was there because he was the Chairman and it 
is something that will fall away because non-executive 
Chairman do not really have to go to the office.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
MR GAMA:  I think that is what it was and probably we just 
have that discussion where I have said I did not want to 
rotten the corner of his corporate when I could be in an 
operational environment.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
MR GAMA:  It was a proposition. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  But I think it may have been that.  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 144 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja, yes.  
MR GAMA:  And not anything else.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I want to move then to another topic 
and that is I do not know if you know this or you came to 
learn of it, but the corporate governance nomination 
committee in early February were confronted with the 
difficulty as to whether you should be allowed to be put 
forward as a candidate for the group chief executive 
position. 
10 
 
Are you aware of that? 
MR GAMA:  I have read that in the last two weeks or so 
when you send me some ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And ...[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:  Some minutes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what happened there, I am not 
sure we necessarily need to go to them, but you will be 
aware of the fact that there is a policy or procedure within 
Transnet that as a general rule does not allow someone to 
be appointed if they have previously been dismissed, but 
20 
Transnet has a discretion to override that and in this case 
the discretion was exercised in your favour.  
 
Presumably that must be common cause.  
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And are you aware of the fact that 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 145 of 242 
 
that decision was taken despite the existence of a senior 
counsel’s opinion that cautioned against that? 
MR GAMA:  Sorry, a cautionary? 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
Senior 
counsel’s 
opinion 
that 
cautioned against the exercise of the discretion allowing 
you to throw your hat in for the position of GCE.  
MR GAMA:  No, no.  I am not preview to all of those 
intricacies.  As I said I just saw this in minutes recently but 
it did not really concern me.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Of course the problem that arose and 
10 
this was, it is the minutes I think that you speak about.  Is 
that at this stage and you although contesting the sanction 
of dismissal but you intended to do it arbitrationally, you 
accepted your guilt in relation to three charges as I recall. 
 
Is that correct?  In other words you accepted that 
you were guilty of this conduct but what you intended to 
contest as you were entitled to do, was the question of 
sanction.  
MR GAMA:  That is correct.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that was the difficulty but despite 
20 
that, the committee decided that you could be put forward.  
Did you then attend an interview for the position of group 
chief executive? 
MR GAMA:  Sorry Mr Myburgh.  I am not really sure what 
you are asking.  You speak a bit fast. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 146 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Did you attend an, were you 
shortlisted and did you attend an interview for the position 
of group chief executive? 
MR GAMA:  Yes, I did.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Moving forward in the chronology, we 
know then that on the 16 t h of February 2011 the board 
resolved to reinstate you.  You would have seen that, 
correct?   
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what Mr Mkwanazi has testified 
10 
about is that they did that principally on the basis that your 
procurement deviations ought to have been condoned.  You 
have seen that.  
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What we know then is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Just make sure you are loud 
enough Mr Gama so that you will be recorded.  Your 
answers will be recorded. 
MR GAMA:  Okay, let me come forward a bit Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Yes, Mr Myburgh?   
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What we know then is that a 
settlement agreement was entered into and perhaps I could 
take you to a copy of that agreement.  Could you turn to 
BB15, Bundle 1?   
MR GAMA:  Okay, let me just move this one.  Okay.   
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 147 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page Mr Myburgh?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I will take you to page 36, please and 
this was an agreement it seems Mr Gama, if you go to page 
40 and 41, that was signed by you on the 23 r d of February 
and by Mr Mkwanazi the previous day.  Correct? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Can I just ask you before we get to 
the content of this agreement, did you negotiate this 
agreement directly with Mr Mkwanazi? 
MR GAMA:  Ja, over a period of time with Mpoma and 
10 
Mkwanazi. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Mpoma as I understand it was 
assisting him, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  There is something that I neglected 
to ask you and that is in your discussions with Mr 
Mkwanazi, did he ever tell you about what Mr Gigaba had 
asked him to do? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I am sorry.  In the negotiations that 
20 
happened over a long time as you say, involving you and 
Mr 
Mkwanazi 
you 
say 
and 
Mr 
Mpoma 
assisting 
Mr 
Mkwanazi, were your attorneys also assisting you in those 
negotiations?   
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 148 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So he does not tell you at the 
beginning of his discussion with Mr Gigaba? 
MR GAMA:  No.  As I said I always understood and known 
that everything that led to the settlement agreement that I 
have, was as a result of my referral of my unfair dismissal 
to the bargaining council. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did he ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  So everything that I did, there was never any 
mention to me that no, there is any politician or anyone 
10 
that is involved in it.  We were just talking about what was 
before us and to say how do we resolve the matter.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you never got a sense from your 
interaction with Mr Mkwanazi that he was reporting to the 
minister ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  No, no. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Via Mr Mhlangu? 
MR GAMA:  No, no. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So let us then go through the terms 
of this agreement and let us start with the preamble.   
20 
MR GAMA:  Ja.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It has the normal sort of stuff.  At 
2.1, unfair dismissal dispute has arisen between the 
parties.  Following your dismissal on the 29 t h of June, it 
records that you had referred an unfair dismissal dispute to 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 149 of 242 
 
the bargaining council and that the parties were now 
engaging in a settlement.   
 
What was agreed was that you would return to 
Transnet with effect from the 23 r d of February so that was 
the date of your signature.  
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that you would resume your 
duties as the CEO on a later date, on 1 April. 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why was that? 
10 
MR GAMA:  Because Mr Mkwanazi wanted me to help him 
in his office.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.   
MR GAMA:  He had a backlog of things.  He said I have 
got a backlog of things in my office.  They are all strategic 
issues.  I need you to assist me.  I have got a new PCE, he 
is still going to be getting to his feet.  I just need you to 
help me with all of these things and that is what I did.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that to say between the date of the 
conclusion of the settlement agreement and the 1 s t of April 
20 
when you would resume or return to the position of CEO of 
TFR, he wanted you to help him during that time in his 
office? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.   
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 150 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:  He wanted me to help him with some issues 
there.  I did not really stay that long.  I did not 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  How long did you stay? 
MR GAMA:  I think it was about a month.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  Then Mr Molefe asked me to go back quicker. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR GAMA:  To TFR. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR GAMA:  And so I think sometime in March, Mr Molefe 
had asked me to go back.  It was an interesting position 
because it was the position where if the GCE wanted 
something, he would write to the Chairman but now it was 
coming through me.  
 
So now I could either you know recommend to the 
Chairman not to listen to the GCE or not.  So it was 
untenable.  So I needed to go back and do what I needed 
to do.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
20 
MR GAMA:  It was TFR, so ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I was under the impression that you 
were given this period just to have to yourself before 
returning to work, but you would be paid.  
MR GAMA:  No, no I was working.  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 151 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes, 
but 
of 
course 
the 
settlement 
agreement does not make, does not touch that.  It does not 
say anything about what you have just told us is that you, 
you or that period you would be working in the Chairman’s 
office.  
MR GAMA:  Ja, no he gave me boxes like this.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Okay, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Then if we get to the 
business part of this, paragraph 3.2: 
 
“Any employment benefits that were due to him 
10 
for the intervening period of 30 June 2010 to 
23 February 2011 in terms of his employment 
contract shall be deemed to be fully restored.” 
 
And then it says: 
 
“That a full restoration of benefits entails the 
following.  The payment of your short term 
benefits, payments of your long term benefits, 
the restoration of your salary ...” 
 
Over the page, you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then, so you were placed really 
in a position as if you had not been dismissed financially.  
Is that correct? 
MR GAMA:  Ja, it was restoration as a status quo. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Paragraph 3.3: 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 152 of 242 
 
 
“Mr Gama is deemed to have served his six 
month final written warning.  Final written 
warning will be deemed to have been effective 
29 June 2010 to 29 December 2010.” 
 
Is that right? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So you were given a final warning 
that it had no teeth, really.  Is that correct? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And how did that come about? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is a strange sanction.  That is why Mr 
Myburgh 
is 
asking 
because 
you 
were 
involved 
in 
negotiations.  Maybe you can throw light as to how it came 
about.   
MR GAMA:  Yes, no it was a final written warning for six 
months, because as you know I had made an admission of 
misconduct and we agreed that this was negligence, but it 
was not willful negligence and as a consequence of that, 
then they required that to show that I had taken that 
accountability and responsibility, I should accept a final 
20 
warning.  
 
But because I was being reinstated and restored, so 
it has started on the day after my dismissal.  So it allowed 
me to be able to then go back to work having served the 
...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 153 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  On a clean slate? 
MR GAMA:  The final written warning and being able to 
focus on my work.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I suppose it also allowed you to apply 
for the position of GCE with effectively a clean record?   
MR GAMA:  No, if you look at the date of this settlement 
agreement, it says 23 February. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
MR GAMA:  2011, the GCE had already been appointed.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Was that before then? 
MR GAMA:  Ja, no he had already been appointed.  He 
was there, he had been appointed earlier.  I think it started 
maybe two weeks before this.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  
MR GAMA:  So ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now Mr ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  It had nothing to do with that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What I was getting at really when I, I 
mean I understand why you were given a final warning, but 
20 
what I was trying to find out is this idea that the final 
written warnings served whilst you were not in the employ 
of the company is a bit unusual, is it not? 
MR GAMA:  I was in the employ of the company, I was 
restored to the date of dismissal.  This was part of the 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 154 of 242 
 
negotiation.  That is why the negotiations they took longer.  
We negotiated.  You know, negotiations is a give and take.  
We negotiated a lot of things.  
 
This is what we finally agreed to.  If you think my 
negotiation skills were good, that is fine.  But we 
negotiated.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You see Mr Gama, it is at this point I 
just want to repeat.  You are not an accused person here, 
you are not an implicated person.  What we are trying to do 
is to find out what the facts were in relation to this 
10 
settlement, and yes I mean one of the issues that you 
touch on that was very important to our investigation, and 
that is how is it that you really on the face of this 
agreement took Transnet to the cleaners?   
 
You know, you talk about give and take and 
bargaining, but where is that reflected in this agreement?  
You get everything, you get a final warning which had 
expired and then you get a very generous cost payment 
which we will come to in a moment.  
 
I mean what caused Transnet, and perhaps we can 
20 
ask you to help us with this.  What caused Transnet to 
capitulate almost completely it seems? 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Particularly, 
before 
you 
answer.  
particularly in circumstances where as you have said, you 
were admitting guilt in regard to those three charges and 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 155 of 242 
 
one access that they did not include findings of, they were 
based on negligence if I recall correctly. 
 
So when one looks at this settlement, and one if 
one has a background and has read the judgment, the 
Chairperson’s judgment, quite frankly I got shocked when I 
saw it.   
 
I got shocked.  I could not understand how any 
employer would have gone as far as they went, and maybe 
it is because your negotiating skills, but it might not be 
your negotiating skills, it might be something else on the 
10 
part of Transnet.  
MR GAMA:  No, no thank you very much for asking the 
question Mr Chair.  I think it would perhaps be helpful to 
look at the context again you know, because I think context 
is everything.  I said to you earlier this morning, that here 
was an employee, a CEO of a division who have been 
charged.  
 
But given a quarter of information about what was 
happening.  Where in fact the internal auditors would have 
said to me here are the issue, how do you propose to 
20 
remedy this particular situation, and there were about six 
or 
seven 
employees 
who 
had 
actually 
gone 
against 
instructions that I have given them to go out and on a 
tender for security services.  
 
On the last day, they catch me when I am in a hurry 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 156 of 242 
 
and they say look, you need to sign this.  It is the end of 
the tender process.  Everything has been done as you said 
it would be done and I do not look at it because I am 
thinking that they followed the process.  
 
When somewhere in the middle, they stopped and 
they did not do it, normally what would have happened in 
Transnet, they would have come to me and said this is 
what has happened and then one of the things that I would 
have done, would have been to discipline these employees 
in terms of what they do, but also would have been to 
10 
them, go and ask for a condonation because there was this 
open and available in Transnet to say a misrepresentation 
has occurred.  
 
I have been misled by my employees.  They said to 
me they have gone out on a tender when in fact it was a 
confiner 
and 
because 
that 
kind 
of 
irregularity 
in 
procurement, you are able to go to the delegated authority 
and say to them yes, there is misrepresentation that has 
occurred.   
 
I would like that the actions that have happened be 
20 
condoned and these are the steps that we are going to 
take to make sure that something like this does not re-
occur.  That had been hidden from me.  This board and I 
explained to Mkwanazi, in the negotiation, for instance and 
that is why you will see there was a report by Nkonki. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 157 of 242 
 
 
There was an employee, I am not going to ... who 
had exceeded his authority by 750 million, had never been 
charged and were made aware and was allowed to retire.  
If the auditors had picked this thing with me, I had 
exceeded my authority by four million.   
 
I was charged.  I am not going to say all of the 
other things that happened in the middle.  I was charged.  
The second one was in circumstances where the legal team 
had said to me here is an agreement, we have now 
prepared it, everything that was supposed to be done, 
10 
including the resolution etcetera.   
 
Everything is in here, you just need to sign here.  
There was 244 page document.  I was then tasked that 
there was a missing paragraph in the 244 page document, 
that I thought was there but was not there, and having 
regard to input and advice from the legal team, who were 
always aware and have been aware for some time that this 
was how things was going to happen, we had remedied that 
at some point.  
 
At a later date we remedied it, but on the eve of the 
20 
appointment of the GCE at Transnet, it was pulled out.  It 
was pulled back.  We had remedied this thing in 2008 and 
nothing was said about it, but in February of 2009 when 
there was a new GCE that needed to be appointed, they 
then said by the way you had signed that agreement and 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 158 of 242 
 
you never, there was this paragraph that was missing in 
this 244 page document.  
 
There had never been a CEO in Transnet who was 
charged and disciplined for the actions of his employees.  
Alternatively there had never been a CEO in Transnet who 
was not informed by the internal auditor that this is 
actually what is happening, so that I could be able to 
remedy this particular issue.  
 
So when we were having the settlement discussion, 
we also have regard to the unfairness that had been visited 
10 
on me.  We were having regard to whether or not I should 
have been charged in the first place.  Although I said yes, I 
have been negligent not actually having done one, two, 
three.  
 
However, it was glaring to everybody that it was not 
willful negligence, it was glaring to everybody that I had 
not been dishonest.  It was glaring to everybody that no 
fraud had been committed or perpetuated by me.  So we 
were having this discussions and then saying what is the 
most appropriate way to try and restore me? 
20 
 
Mkwanazi had been in Transnet, he knew about 
these processes.  That there are condonations that take 
place.  In fact, that board if I can give an example, there 
had even been a company that has been appointed on the 
pipeline.  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 159 of 242 
 
 
The new multi-product pipeline in Transnet which 
had been appointed irregularly.  They had spent 1.7 billion.  
They had gone through that board, they have been paid the 
1.7 billion when they have been irregularly appointed.  
Which means the contract was not couture and the cost 
had gone up to 3.2 billion. 
 
They had to condone those actions that has taken 
place and here was Gama who had exceeded his authority 
by four million rand, in circumstances where he had been 
misled into thinking that these employees have actually 
10 
implemented what he had asked them to implement, which 
was to go out on a tender process for the security service.  
 
Which they perpetuated to the last day to say yes, 
we have gone out to tender and I then because I was in a 
hurry, I do not get time to actually sit down and look at it 
and I am thinking that they have done what I had asked 
them to do.  
 
I just look at the last page and as a result of that, I 
become 
this 
negligent 
person. 
 
So 
those 
were 
the 
circumstances in which we were negotiating.  There was a 
20 
list I think, of about 42 condonations that had taken place 
you know, during that period.  This thing of me being 
charged Chair, they were looking for anything in order to 
charge me.  
 
When 
Mkwanazi 
and 
myself 
were 
having 
this 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 160 of 242 
 
discussion, we then said I said no, I agree in future you 
are now saying that if your legal people sign a document 
and say no, everything is fine, maybe I correct ... I should 
have said to them just show me that paragraph, but these 
are people that we trusted their bona fides.  
 
We trusted their intent.  There was not anything that 
we would lose.  In fact, we had everything to gain in terms 
of building the 50 leg new at the Transnet facilities 
because we were pursuing a project Chair, where we 
wanted 
Transnet 
to 
eventually 
manufacture 
its 
own 
10 
locomotive.  
 
So there were a lot of things that we wanted to 
learn, but then the people at Transnet engineering were 
supposed to have cooperated in terms of helping us with 
that.  They did not make the premises available.  So it was 
a whole context ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It was all of those factors that you 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  Ja, it was all of those factors that said it is 
most appropriate to re-visit this thing, to make sure that 
20 
the unfairness and the harm and the hurt that I have gone 
through be restored.  So we were having this discussion 
and it took many days.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR GAMA:  But we ...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 161 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  We were quite thorough and methodical about 
it.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course, against what you have said in 
support of saying there was unfairness, that is how you 
argued your case to Mr Mkwanazi, against that of course, 
the position was that one there had been a disciplinary 
process and I think it is fair to say it was quite a thorough 
disciplinary process, because it seems to have run, been 
running almost like a trial.  
10 
 
You know, I think I am under the impression that it 
was more than ten days of hearing, Chaired by somebody 
not from Transnet, but rather somebody from outside, an 
experienced lawyer.  You were given an opportunity to be 
represented by lawyers of your own choice, Transnet was 
represented by lawyers of its own choice.  
 
Whatever you wanted to put before the Chairman of 
the disciplinary inquiry, you say to him this is unfair, I 
should not even have been charged in the first place.  All 
of those arguments you had had a chance to put them 
20 
before the Chairman and this Chairman had made findings 
against you. 
 
So I am just saying why you may have put to Mr 
Mkwanazi what you have said, against that there were 
these considerations as well.  You would accept that, I 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 162 of 242 
 
would imagine.  
MR GAMA:  Yes, no that have happened, but what have not 
been taken into account in getting to the sanction that they 
got into was that the first offender when it was not gross 
negligence, it was found guilty or the sanction of dismissal 
did not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Was too harsh. 
MR GAMA:  Yes, it did not apply.  In terms of Transnet’s 
own code of good practice.  So those things have not been 
brought into bags, and I think in the dying days of the 
10 
actual trial, because it cost me quite a lot of money.  I 
think I could not even go to the, what is it called?  
Aggravation? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Aggravation, ja.  Ja.   
MR GAMA:  I did not have the resources.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  
MR GAMA:  You know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  The mitigation for the other side.  
MR GAMA:  Yes, that mitigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 
MR GAMA:  I had already paid five million rand plus from 
the High Court, because I paid money from the High Court 
and when I was being paid in 2011, it was a part refund of 
money that I had already paid.  So it was all of those 
...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 163 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  All of those things.  
MR GAMA:  Those issues that we were dealing with.  So 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, so that is fine.  
MR GAMA:  And all of it was technical discussions that 
looked at the context of what had happened.  There were 
people and instances and incidents within Transnet that 
was very similar.  The Nkonki KPMG report came to the 
same conclusion. 
 
That there was no one at Transnet other than Gama 
10 
that 
had 
ever 
been 
charged, 
disciplined, 
fired 
for 
something 
that could 
have 
been 
rectified 
inside 
the 
company if people were just being fair to one another and 
they followed their own processes to deal with it.  
 
Yes, it was like a [indistinct – audio distorted] trial.  
The way that it was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, it might not be appropriate to refer 
it like that, but ja you know it was a disciplinary hearing 
that was Chaired by a member, a senior member of the 
Johannesburg Bar and there were lawyers on all side. 
20 
MR GAMA:  The manner in which Chair, Transnet had done 
it ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  It was very, ja I withdraw that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 164 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:  I do not want to be offensive to anyone.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Mr Myburgh?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, thank you.  Mr Gama, I suppose 
just to end off on that I have got two points.  When you say 
I asked you just coin the phrase, how did you take them to 
the cleaners and ultimately what you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What you have explained to the 
Chairperson was that that happened because really of the 
unfairness of your dismissal, correct? 
10 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But you still accepted a final written 
warning valid for six months.  
MR GAMA:  How does someone who admits misconduct, 
who accepts a sanction one below dismissal, how do they 
land up then and I must ask you this, not as an accused 
person, not as an implicated person. But how do you then 
land up taking them to the cleaners?   
MR GAMA:  Taking who to the cleaners? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In the settlement agreement you got 
20 
everything and more than you could have got.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Effectively he is saying Mr Gama the 
...[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well, you said ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  The settlement agreement must be 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 165 of 242 
 
looked as at the outcome of negotiations.  It looks like you 
walked all over Mkwanazi and Transnet and just they gave 
you whatever you wanted.  He says how did this happen. 
MR GAMA:  Take me to your next negotiation sir.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is your skills.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama, can you give us some 
insight into that, because again you are here to assist us 
in this investigation and I do not know, it is difficult 
because you are so obviously an interested party in this, 
but it strikes one as strange.  
10 
 
I will just ask you to comment on that.  Was it just, 
you talk it down to your negotiation skills or do you say 
that frequently? 
MR GAMA:  Ja, no there is nothing else to this really.  
There is nothing else other than context.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MR GAMA:  And there was a context to this and Mkwanazi 
was right at the tail end of it.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR GAMA:  It was well reported and recorded and in the 
20 
country. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You see ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  The settlement agreement is really an 
indication of the intent to restore.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no I think you have indicated 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 166 of 242 
 
what in your view ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  I do not think there was any other sinister 
thing on the part of Transnet, but yes I negotiated hard.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Because I must just tell you and just 
to give you insight, you might have seen or read the 
evidence of Mr Mkwanazi.  I mean I asked him whether he 
could have done, and perhaps it was a bit flippantly, 
whether he could have done a worse job.  
 
I think it is a very difficult position for Transnet to 
defend.   
10 
MR GAMA:  I do not know.  As I said, it was an issue for 
them 
on 
my 
part, 
but 
I 
think 
they 
understood 
the 
unfairness, they understood the inequity.  They understood 
the pain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Much better than the Chairperson of the 
disciplinary inquiry, ja I would imagine you would say.  
MR GAMA:  Yes, the Chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry 
have done whatever that they have to do ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR GAMA:  Within the context of what they had been 
20 
given.  So but with them, if I say to you this is a matter 
where I probably should never have been charged in the 
first place because it could have been fixed, through 
processes that existed in the company.  
 
In circumstances where I was not being provided 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 167 of 242 
 
with full information in terms of what was going on, until at 
the disciplinary hearing and even at the disciplinary 
hearing I still did not have all of the information that I 
required to be able to defend myself properly. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Gama, have you ...[intervenes]  
UNKNOWN:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
UNKNOWN:  Mr Chair, there is an important aspect I wish 
to raise and it is not my purpose to suggest that you are 
being misled, but to make a notice statement to the effect 
10 
of Transnet could not have done a worse job, it is not 
correct.  
 
In fact it is a document introduced by the legal 
team, in their possession and within their knowledge, when 
they sought the advice from the [indistinct – audio 
distorted] attorneys, I just want to for the record, quote 
one 
caption 
which 
is 
contained 
in 
the 
penultimate 
paragraph of the advice and recommendation that they 
make, once they were seized with a request to consider Mr 
Gama’s position and this is what it says and I quote: 
20 
 
“Mr Gama is a highly experienced executive 
and the Transnet executive and the company is 
still in need of his skills as it embarks on the 
anticipated growth path and contribution to the 
national fiscus and job creation.” 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 168 of 242 
 
 
Then the final paragraph: 
 
“The solution to the problem at hand was 
simply this.” 
 
This is the recommendation: 
 
“The solution is the proposed settlement.” 
 
Now in fairness to my client, how can Mr Myburgh 
put such an outrageous statement to him, it could not have 
done a worse job, when the Commission is in possession of 
this document that explains the rational for the settlement 
agreement.   
10 
 
On its owner terms, with respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, you will get a chance if you wish to 
make use of it, to re-examine Mr Gama and then you can 
raise such matters.   
UNKNOWN:  Just one thing ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
UNKNOWN:  To be put in perspective and objectively to my 
client. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
UNKNOWN:  Thank you Mr Chair.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course you will remember that in 
his rates provides that opinion after they have indicated 
that Mr Mkwanazi said he just needed an opinion that 
would motivate, to enable him to take Mr Gama back.  So 
ja, okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 169 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Mr Gama, when you were 
explaining to the Chairperson your feelings of unfairness 
and you touched on we know although you did not deal 
with it directly, you explained the circumstances in relation 
to GNS, that charge and also the circumstances in relation 
to 50 like new.  
 
You explained that you and Mr Mkwanazi over a 
period 
of 
time 
dealt 
with 
that 
and 
came 
to 
an 
understanding in relation to how unfairly you were treated.  
What you do not mention at all, is the fourth charge which 
10 
was that of unwarranted criticism of Transnet and its 
executives.  
 
If you could perhaps go to bundle 3, Exhibit 16.  If I 
could ask you please to turn up page 88. 
MR GAMA:  Eight eight? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now this is part of what we have 
referred to or I have referred to as the Todd opinion, but 
what I want to do, just above paragraph 60, there is a 
paragraph which Mr Todd quotes from the findings of the 
Chairperson. 
20 
 
Are you there?   
MR GAMA:  I am just ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So just above 60. 
MR GAMA:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That last paragraph of the quote.  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 170 of 242 
 
This is an extract from the Chairperson’s findings on 
sanction: 
 
“Transnet 
submits 
that 
no 
employment 
relationship 
can 
continue 
to 
exist 
in 
the 
circumstances of this public attack on its 
executives and on Transnet itself.  In short, 
Well’s evidence on this aspect set out above is 
overwhelming 
and 
uncontradicted. 
 
This 
charge goes to the heart of Transnet’s loss of 
faith in Gama and there can be no doubt that 
10 
dismissal is the only appropriate penalty for 
Gama’s conduct under this fourth charge.” 
 
In other words, what the Chairperson said is that 
you stood to be dismissed on that charge alone.  When you 
talk about the unfairness of your dismissal and you 
articulated here, you make no mention at all of this.  
MR GAMA:  Ja, no thank you very much for reminding me.  
Chairperson, 
sorry. 
 
I 
thought 
in 
Zulu 
before 
I 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You are allowed to think in Zulu first and 
20 
then translate.  
MR GAMA:  Yes, yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I can tell you that ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  It was the grass that was suffering when LFM’s 
... so Chairperson, what had happened here is that during 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 171 of 242 
 
the course of all of this, there had been such utterances 
there that have been made against mainly Wells.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, do you say mainly something? 
MR GAMA:  Mainly Wells. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, Mr Wells.  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  Ja, ja.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Was acting group CEO at the time.  
MR GAMA:  Yes, yes and maybe one or two Transnet 
executives and these utterances were made by my legal 
counsel, not necessarily by myself but I reconciled to the 
10 
fact that he was my counsel and that therefore I should 
take responsibility for that.  
 
After it had happened, I had apologized to Wells 
that it had happened in the manner in which it had 
happened.  Wells had accepted the apology, but then went 
on to say that he could not accept the apology for the 
company and that in his view, that there was therefore, 
what is the legal term?   
 
There was a breakdown. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Breakdown in relationship. 
20 
MR 
GAMA: 
 
There 
was 
a 
breakdown 
in 
the 
trust 
relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the trust.  
MR GAMA:  Or in the employment relationship.  But Chair, 
in terms of that, I think there is a case, there is the Louw 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 172 of 242 
 
case that we could probably refer to.  That breakdown 
applies in instances and circumstances where dishonesty 
has been found.  
 
In this case, there was no dishonesty that had been 
found.  Yes, there was the altercation, words were 
exchanged and as a result of that, certain pain have been 
caused, but it is something which we believe that did not 
apply to this particular set of circumstances.  
 
So when I took the final written warning, it was in 
circumstances where all of those things were taken into 
10 
account, but also to say it would not have been a 
dismissible offence on its own, especially in circumstances 
where there was no finding of dishonesty. 
 
Yes, there was a breakdown in trust as they 
indicated but it was not a dismissible, the sanction of 
dismissal on its own could not have held. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  I would probably go back to that law and 
indicate some more if you wanted to, but it was my and our 
belief that the, that breakdown could not have resulted, 
20 
especially in circumstances where it was not myself, that 
had actually made whatever those utterances were, but I 
did reconcile to it to say it was my legal counsel, and I 
accepted that and as a consequence of that, I offered an 
apology to Wells.  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 173 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama, there is a lot of labour 
lawyers in this room ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  There is what? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  There are a lot of labour lawyers in 
this room, as you may know and if you I do not think you 
are going to persuade them that in terms of labour law the 
employment relationship is only broken down if you act 
dishonestly.  
 
That is by no means the law.  So that is the first 
10 
proposition.  The second proposition which I want to ask 
you about, is you say well, we looked at this and we 
decided but what about what the Chairperson had found.  A 
highly respected senior counsel who knows of labour law, 
when you say we just decided.  
 
How did that happen?  The third thing I want to put 
to you, is if you are talking about you and Mr Mkwanazi, Mr 
Mkwanazi said many times that he in fact forgot completely 
about this charge.  He never, ever considered it and in fact 
he conceded that if he had then that in itself was sufficient 
20 
to sustain your dismissal and ought to have caused you not 
to be reinstated.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, he said that.  
MR GAMA:  No, he may have said that, but Mr Mkwanazi 
does not even know what has been said in terms of those 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 174 of 242 
 
words, those discussions because he had not been there 
when it happened.  So my sense Chair, is that it is always 
difficult for me to re-visit that time period in my life.  
 
But my sense is Chair, everything put together, we 
discussed it, we negotiated.  I took responsibility, even for 
things that have not been said by me.  I took that 
responsibility.  I went further.  I apologized to Wells for 
what had happened.  
 
Wells accepted the apology, but he did not want to 
accept it on behalf of the company.  But he accepted it 
10 
personally, and so I am just saying all of those things 
taken together, and I think the negotiation, it is very 
difficult for me to say what was on my opposite side’s mind 
when they agreed, because I do not know. 
 
But I put context to them and I think they were very 
receptive to the context that I had put to them.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You see, Mr Gama, I mean the thing 
is the board also seem to have forgotten about the fourth 
charge, because as you know, your reinstatement is agreed 
to fundamentally because of the procurement condonation 
20 
issue.  
 
I mean, was there any talk at all of this fourth 
charge during these negotiations, because Mr Mkwanazi 
said nothing about that.  In fact he said he forgot about it.   
MR GAMA:  Ja, it is such a long time ago that we in future 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 175 of 242 
 
I would like to take maybe minutes of the negotiations so 
that one can be able to refer to them.  I do not have any 
minutes of the actual negotiations.  I do not know whether 
we discussed that particular issue or not.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  But I think everyone was alive to the fact that I 
had actually offered an apology to Mr Wells.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe it would be fair, would it not be, to 
say that maybe all of you forgot about that particular 
charge, because Mr Mkwanazi according to Mr Myburgh 
10 
and I think he is right, said he had forgotten about that 
charge and if he had remember it, that would have been 
enough to sustain the dismissal. 
 
Therefore 
he 
would 
not 
have 
agreed 
to 
your 
reinstatement, and when it comes to you, when you were 
relaying to me what you were discussing with him, my 
impression was that you were also focusing when you were 
giving your evidence, you know, you were  focusing on that 
procurement one.  
 
Not on this one.  Is it possible that all of you for 
20 
whatever reason, did not focus on this one?   
MR GAMA:  Ja, I cannot remember Chair.  I think I would 
go along with your proposition Chair that we probably did 
not  ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 176 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:  Put too much focus on it.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Can we please go back 
to the settlement agreement, Bundle 1 BB15, page 38?   
CHAIRPERSON:  I see Mr Myburgh we have ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  Sorry, BB? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just gone past four. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe we could take a short adjournment 
now and then resume later. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Shall we take a ten minute adjournment, 
so we will resume at quarter past four?  We adjourn.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Gama 
Transnet Bundle 1 BB15 page 38 the Settlement Agreement.  
Are you there? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I just want to take you and I think this 
might be the last paragraph that I need to take you to in the 
Settlement Agreement.  Paragraph 3.5  
“Transnet will make a contribution equivalent to 75% 
of Mr Gama’s taxed legal costs incurred during Mr 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 177 of 242 
 
Gama’s high court application and in respect of his 
unfair dismissal dispute referred to the Transnet 
Bargaining Council.” 
You see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Just so that we – we understand and I 
ask you to confirm that the reference to the high court 
application that was an application that you brought to stop 
your disciplinary hearing? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That you lost with costs?  Is that right? 
MR GAMA:  Painfully so Mr Myburgh yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja I am sure – I am sure – when I – 
when I count out the number of attorneys and senior counsel 
I feel your pain.  You – I need not take you to the judgment 
we have seen it before.  I think there were two sets of 
attorneys or even more and senior counsel.  So despite that 
what was agreed is you would get 75% of your costs of those 
proceedings.  Is that right? 
MR GAMA:  Ja that I would be refunded 75%. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then you would be refunded as 
well in respect of your unfair dismissal dispute referred to 
the Bargaining Council what did you understand that to 
mean? 
MR GAMA:  It was the disciplinary hearing. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 178 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why would it include the disciplinary 
hearing? 
MR GAMA:  Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why would it include the disciplinary 
hearing?  It talks about an unfair dismissal dispute referred 
to the Transnet Bargaining Council. 
MR GAMA:  Because the – the – you will have a disciplinary 
hearing and then it leads to that dispute – the unfair 
dismissal dispute as well.  So both of them – if the 
disciplinary hearing did not take place there would not be an 
10 
unfair dismissal dispute. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But at the same time that… 
MR GAMA:  So it was always our understanding and the way 
that Transnet treated it that … 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MR GAMA:  It is both the labour dispute and the high court 
dispute – that is the most elegant way of describing it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I just want to put to you – I mean firstly 
you are in the company I think of Mr Mapoma and Mr 
Mkwanazi? 
20 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But it is capable I think on a – on a 
proper legal construction for labour lawyers who are familiar 
with this you get dismissed and then a dispute that is 
referred to the Bargaining Council is a separate thing but I 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 179 of 242 
 
do not know if you want to comment any further.  That you 
say is how you and others interpreted it – fair enough. 
MR GAMA:  Yes – ja, no our interpretation is that it is the 
whole labour dispute. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think – I think that maybe – maybe 
there is room for non-lawyers maybe not non-lawyers in 
general 
maybe 
non-labour 
lawyers 
I 
am 
not 
sure 
to 
understand it in that way but I think the – the correct – I 
think the correct understanding would be that until you are 
dismissed there is no unfair dismissal dispute.  Ja.  So when 
10 
he talks there for when the Settlement Agreement talks about 
your costs in respect of your unfair dismissal dispute 
referred to the Bargaining Council it can only be talking 
about costs that you have incurred after the dismissal 
dispute had arisen or had been referred to the Bargaining 
Council.  Anything that happened before there was a 
dismissal dispute is not included.  That – that I think is the 
correct understanding.  But you – you may say you 
understood it in a certain way together with whoever else.. 
MR GAMA:  Ja I am – I think all the parties who were 
20 
negotiating Chair we understood it be the labour dispute in 
its entirety.  The way it is framed here is as you say it but I 
think as you say when lay persons such as ourselves 
sometimes have a – but I certainly know what the intent was.  
The intent was to say the labour costs and the high court 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 180 of 242 
 
costs yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know about Mr Langa who 
was your attorney but I understand you know the attorneys 
who were representing Transnet. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Mr Mkwanazi and the board to have 
specialists labour law department and Mr Ghule who was in 
my law firm at some stage I know him to be a labour lawyer.  
So – so – ja okay.   
MR GAMA:  Ja, no. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
MR GAMA:  It is a difficult one for us non-labour law people 
but we – I know what the intent was at least – but I think 
maybe the way that it could be framed may be slightly 
unfortunate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now Mr Gama you of course lost your 
high court application fairly and squarely and you did not 
appeal – why? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – I am not sure whether you have a 
reasonable expectation that he will say fairly and squarely. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes well I mean you lost your high 
court application – you did not appeal.  What on earth 
caused Transnet to agree to pay 75% of your costs in that 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 181 of 242 
 
failed high court application? 
MR GAMA:  No Mr Myburgh before I go there this is the 
other thing with the law when you appeal you go through the 
same Judge who – who blew you and then he says no I do 
not – your chances of succeeding elsewhere are not there.  I 
did appeal.  I did appeal for … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you did appeal. 
MR GAMA:  It was not upheld. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Application for leave to appeal. 
MR GAMA:  Yes, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GAMA:  I did ask for that application for leave to appeal 
but it was exactly the same Judge that we went to but that is 
what I do not understand because the Judge – all the Judge 
says well I gave you my verdict no other Judge will give you 
any other verdict. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course Mr Gama you do know that 
all – many of appeals that happen happen because the same 
Judge who found against you whoever – or whoever appeals 
said well I will give you the – the right to appeal against my 
20 
judgment. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And sometimes they are successful in their 
appeal sometimes they are not.  So the system does work. 
MR GAMA:  Ja somebody was saying to me you know you 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 182 of 242 
 
should have gone to the labour court to (inaudible). 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But Mr Gama what caused Transnet 
from your perspective to agree to this in circumstances 
where they had won that application and it was separate 
from these proceedings – the labour court proceedings who 
labour proceedings as you put it? 
 MR GAMA:  Ja I think it came through from the fact that I 
was saying to them that if there was not this intention to 
charge me and discipline me in circumstances where I 
believed that there could have been very uncostly relief that 
10 
could have been done inside the company itself without 
having to charge me and all of those things.  It was really 
that context that – that permitted to say I only really went to 
court because I had nowhere else to turn.  I mean I do not 
think people go to court because they want to go to court.  If 
– if I can get relief on a matter through mediation and a 
discussion that is always my preference.  We only go to 
court because we are no longer talking – we are no longer 
having a fair basis on which we could meet.  We do not have 
– we do not even have an arbiter so the court becomes the 
20 
arbiter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you moving away from this cost leaf? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I am. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 183 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No I just want to say Mr Gama this 
Settlement Agreement including this part is one of those 
things that makes one say what was going on with the 
board?  Because when they entered into this Settlement 
Agreement with you this high court application had long been 
finalised and passed and then your application for leave to 
appeal had been dismissed there was not risk of it being 
resuscitated as I understand the position.  It was something 
that had happened quite some time earlier and they had won 
and the court had said you must pay their costs.  Now they 
10 
are only faced with a labour dispute where you have referred 
an unfair dismissal dispute to the Bargaining Council.  There 
is – there was no way that the result of the Bargaining 
Council the dispute in the Bargaining Council could result in 
the Bargaining Council reversing the high court order about 
the costs.  The court had said you must pay them – the 
costs.  There was no risk of that being changed.  So one 
would have expected that they would – if you ever raised 
that issue they would say look that is finalised you had an 
opportunity to appeal, you failed we are not entertaining that 
20 
– that has been finalised.  We can talk about only this 
dismissal, this dispute because this one is still pending.  You 
see.  Now not only the one option may have been that they 
say okay we are not going to enforce our costs order against 
you even though we have a right to do so.  Even that would 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 184 of 242 
 
have been problematic but for them to say even though you 
lost Mr Gama – even though the court you – said you must 
pay us our legal costs we are going to pay you 75% of your 
legal costs.  It is just something unthinkable.  It is difficult to 
understand to those – to many lawyers you know who – who 
know how these things get – how matters get settled.  So it 
is one of those things and you might not be able to explain it 
you know because as you said earlier on you are not – you 
were not in their minds when you were negotiating but if you 
might be able to say well I think it is what I have already told 
10 
you Chair about the unfairness and so on and so on there 
was nothing else that I could but it is one of those things 
that are just difficult to explain and I think Mr Mkwanazi had 
difficulty in explaining it himself.  So you might be able to 
say Chair I cannot say anything but I understand what you 
are saying but you know the board must explain itself. 
MR GAMA:  Ja.  No Chair I – I do understand.  In fact you 
have given me a lesson in terms of some of these costs 
because some of it – we always read about the stats but we 
do not really understand how it works. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  And you would know in here there was costs of 
Counsel and ever shares and whatever.  I had already paid 
some of these to – to Transnet.  So because of the 
restoration – I do not know whether we call it restorative 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 185 of 242 
 
justice if there is such a word but in terms of the restoration 
they were trying to meet me some – somewhere.  They did 
not meet me the full way because – also what I found Chair 
when people talk about taxed legal bill they are not talking 
about your bill they take your bill and they reduce it.  So 
although I – I had paid about R5 million in legal costs in 
which 75% would have been R4 million I think – I think I only 
got R2 million back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Well part of what – why I am 
putting this to you is to enable you to see that this is one of 
10 
those features that of the Settlement Agreement that make 
one ask the question was there something else other than 
the merits of the matter that was influencing the board to 
settle the matter on the terms of which it has settled.  Why 
were they going out of their way to do something that is not 
usually done?  That is the kind of (inaudible). 
MR GAMA:  No to me I think Mkwanazi was quite eager that 
we go and we fix the business and I think he was repaid 
within six months.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
20 
MR GAMA:  And – because that business went to the moon 
Chair.  It made a lot of money.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But – but I am tempted to think that even if 
they did not offer to pay you 75% of your legal costs in the 
high court matter if they reinstated – if they offered you 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 186 of 242 
 
reinstatement you would have come back?  You would not 
have said – because you… 
MR GAMA:  They offered me reinstatement in circumstances 
where I thought I would get much more compensation.  I – I 
– it is me who asked for the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  The costs. 
MR GAMA:  The debt to be met halfway on the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  I was on a limb I was planting tomatoes and I 
was not making enough money to pay my legal costs from 
10 
the tomatoes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Well I must just say to you 
something I wanted to say earlier on.  You said that you had 
demanded a very high amount of compensation from them 
you did not want reinstatement it was Mr Mkwanazi who 
made you change your mind and … 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Accept 
that 
maybe 
you 
should 
be 
reinstated.  You did not tell me how much you had demanded 
and you may not need to mention it but I can tell you that it 
20 
is generally accepted in these types of disputes that the 
Bargaining Council would not have had power in this type of 
case to award you more than twelve months or compensation 
equal to twelve months remuneration.  If you made a case of 
victimisation of being dismissed because of race and so on 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 187 of 242 
 
the highest it might have done is to go to 24 max so I am 
just mentioning that. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because Mr Mkwanazi if you demanded 
quite a big amount he should have sought legal advice and 
should have known that at the Bargaining Council he could 
not get your illicit number. 
MR GAMA:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you.  Just to add to what the 
10 
Chairperson said about costs I just want to point out as well 
that a Bargaining Council arbitrator would never have been 
able to award you your costs of your disciplinary hearing.  
They have no such power.  So that is why you got a deal it is 
so much better than what the best outcome would have been 
for you at the Bargaining Council.  You want to comment on 
that? 
MR GAMA:  Ja well I mean there was lots of offers, there 
was all kinds of things.  I am – I am well aware of some of 
those things probably now as Chairperson has indicated and 
20 
as you indicate the twelve months, 24 months type of – so – 
but I had asked for certain amount based on my youth and 
the number of years ahead of me and – and the manner and 
way in which it had been done. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Perhaps just one last point as well is 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 188 of 242 
 
that in a Bargaining Council arbitration where an employee 
admits guilt and is prepared to accept the final written 
warning or is given one very seldom would that person be 
reinstated without any loss of benefits at all. 
MR GAMA:  Well I am – we were not of the Bargaining 
Council we had a situation as I say to you I – we negotiated 
and this – this document is the result of that negotiation.  At 
the moment you are giving me a master class on – on labour 
issues that I have always relied on other people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I suppose in a way now you – you 
10 
understand that these were probably questions that might 
have been harder for Mr Mkwanazi to ask – answer than for 
you because you say you were on the other side of the table.  
But you understand how they require an interrogation 
certainly from Transnet’s perspective.  I am going to – I am 
going to turn to a different topic and I just want to outline for 
you seven concessions that Mr Mkwanazi made in relation to 
the decision to reinstate you. 
 
The first one was that he accepted Mr Gama you 
might have seen this that fundamentally what led the board 
20 
to reinstate you was that Mr Mkwanazi told them that he had 
a list of contraventions comparable to your case that were 
condoned.  You accepted that that is – was fundamentally 
the cause of the decision to reinstate you. 
 
And the concession that he made is he accepted that 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 189 of 242 
 
that was wrong.  He accepted that your case were actually 
not comparable to those on the list.  Want to comment on 
that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes he should not have conceded to that 
because it was comparable.  I do not think he should have 
conceded to that but maybe it was late in the afternoon and 
he was tired.. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The second concession that he made 
is that the board could not have come to your assistance on 
the grounds of condonation because you never applied for it. 
10 
MR GAMA:  Yes I could not apply for condonation in 
circumstances where the information was not being given to 
me.  I think I have indicated that Chairperson earlier today 
that this one was like going to war and you just have a knife 
and your other hand is tied at the back and you know that 
you have to fight but you – you not sure what it is that you 
are fighting with it was a bit fuzzy. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thirdly… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – I am sorry.  At a certain stage 
whether before the disciplinary hearing started or during the 
20 
disciplinary hearing you – you became aware that you were 
charged with something that could be taken care of if you 
were 
– 
if 
you 
initiated 
or 
requested 
or 
applied 
for 
condonation is it not?  That is correct. 
MR GAMA: Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 190 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it not true that you did not initiate that 
even if you got to know it late because as long as you had 
not been dismissed you remained an employee of the 
company and therefore you should have been able to say 
well now that I know that this is something that can be 
condoned I am initiating the condonation process and let 
them refuse it if they refuse it. 
MR GAMA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But initiate. 
MR GAMA:  No, no the – Chair that could have been done 
10 
except that when we are so standard Chair you do not come 
to work.  You go to your 00:24:19 and that is all you do.  So 
it was during my suspension that I was now given the 
information and I was being given the bundles like this to 
say here is the information and that is when you can then 
say okay now I have the information now I know what I 
should have done.  But why did you not give me the 
information?  So – but at that time there is nothing that you 
could do.  By the time I came back to the company the 
contract itself had long expired or been cancelled so it was 
20 
not – it was no longer – so there is not the condonation that 
you go and ask for because it was no longer in place that 
contract has been cancelled or it had expired.  I think it was 
cancelled in January of 2010 I only came back in February of 
2011 so it is thirteen months later. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 191 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I think – I think after you had been 
dismissed I do not think it would have applied. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The issue of condonation. 
MR GAMA:  Yes, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know.   
MR GAMA:  So if – if before I have been charged that is why 
I was saying I would not have been charged if I had been 
told what was going on with this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  But you accept the point do you 
10 
not that even if you got to know this while the disciplinary 
process was on you had the opportunity nobody could 
prevent you you were still an employee of the company to 
say now that I know that you are charging me with something 
that could be condoned and the policies of the company 
allow me to apply for condonation I am now applying – let us 
postpone this disciplinary hearing pending the outcome of 
my condonation application.  And then you put all the 
motivation you – you could put to them and see how they 
could dismiss it in the light of the evidence that you – you 
20 
say there was. 
MR GAMA:  If one could remedy the situation like that one 
could have done that but this is a situation now people say 
no, no you have now been charged you must just deal with 
this but – all you can raise is that no but you are being 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 192 of 242 
 
inconsistent in the manner and way in which you do things 
because if you had told me because like I said to you Chair 
before these types of things that – we have got a system of 
internal controls in the company.  The part of the system of 
internal controls is that the internal audit if there is such a 
thing they will pick it up and then they will alert you and then 
they are able to deal with it.  With this one the internal 
auditors we used as forensic auditors to investigate a case 
where I had to be charged.  It was not a matter – it was not 
the normal managerial management thing and – so they were 
10 
not sharing with me because they were dealing with this 
thing in a particular way.  Because as I say my charges were 
in the serious circumstances.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you and the third concession 
made by Mr Mkwanazi that seems to me maybe of some 
importance is that the board had failed to consider the fourth 
charge which was deserving of dismissal in itself.  I think we 
have already dealt with that.  
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The fourth concession is he said that 
condonation could never be granted – never have been 
granted in relation to the 50 like locomotive charge.  So it 
was not something that could be condoned.   
MR GAMA:  No it could be condoned.  Condonations apply in 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 193 of 242 
 
four different circumstances.  You ask for a condonation 
where you have paid some monies without a contract being 
in place.  You ask for a condonation where you went into a 
confinement when you should not have.  You apply for a 
condonation where you enter into a contract for a longer 
period than it should be and you apply for a condonation 
where it – I think it is called management oversight where 
there has been management oversight of course you could 
apply for a condonation.  And it was an oversight matter and 
as soon as it gets picked up – the most important thing is 
10 
that in management it is the dynamic situations that things 
happen.  It is what you do as soon as you know what is 
happening that is important.  But you cannot do anything if 
you do not know.  And this one as I said it had been cured in 
2008 by August 2008 we had cured this and now you will 
even see when they were presenting the evidence, they were 
saying no we know that this thing has been cured but we 
now went out of our way to find out how it could have 
happened.  Who should we hold responsible for it.  And 
that is what happened on the... 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And he also conceded that the first 
charge...  Oh, sorry.  That it would have been inappropriate 
to grant condonation in respect of the GNS charge.  Your 
case was that there was a fraud that was committed and 
you were found to have acted negligently by, it seems, 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 194 of 242 
 
having signed, effectively, blind document.   
MR GAMA:   There was a misrepresentation that was made 
to me and I signed the document in circumstances where I 
was not aware that they had abandoned the actual tender 
process that we had asked them to follow and they moved 
it into a confinement.   
 
I then said, when I found out what the issues 
were, that indeed it was some kind of scam that the 
employees and the GNS people had done and that it should 
have been dealt with much, much differently. 
10 
 
But it was not a fraud that was perpetrated by 
me.  It was a fraud that I wanted to pursue that was 
perpetrated by about six or seven employees, in fact.  And 
I know that eventually they – they had disciplined only two 
employees but there were many people in that chain. 
 
In terms of our internal controls, again, who 
should have picked this up to say:  No, we were asked to 
go out on tender.  Now they say, no, somebody at the 
group level stopped the tender process but they never 
came back to us at the division to say the group has 
20 
stopped the tender process.  What do we do? 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course you accept, do you not, 
criticism that you were wrong to sign such an important 
document without reading it? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 195 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the sixth concession was 
that, and I think we accept this between us, that the third 
charge, of course, had nothing to do with procurement at 
all. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think it is actually the fourth charge 
but you know which one you are speaking about. 
10 
MR GAMA:   It used to be the fourth charge but the third 
charge had fallen away as it became the third charge. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
And 
then 
ultimately 
what 
Mr Mkwanazi conceded is that the board’s decision to 
reinstate you was indecisive and that in hindsight you 
ought not to have been.   
MR GAMA:   H’m.  I do not know what other board 
members will say because they had applied their mind.  So 
I do not know if other board members would agree to his 
concession.  I do not know if you have canvassed the 
20 
views of other board members because he did not make the 
decision on his own.   
 
And I think when you have got more minds 
dealing with the matter, it assists you in terms of getting 
that input.  So I do not know if other board members of 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 196 of 242 
 
Transnet would agree with Mr Mkwanazi.   
 
But I think it is neither here nor there.  It is what 
he says.  I cannot disagree with that he says.  I do not 
know the context and the circumstances under which he 
says that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The important thing, I think, is that 
he accepts, Mr Gama, that fundamentally what led the 
board to reinstate you is that he told the board that he has 
got a list of similar contraventions which he accepted was 
wrong.   
10 
 
I think – we see – we know as a matter of fact, if 
you go to the minute, we know who – I think – perhaps you 
remember – was it a unanimous decision of the board to 
reinstate you?  You can have a look at the minutes.   
 
So when we accept that there was that decision.  
Of course, Mr Mkwanazi was here and he gave evidence 
and we dealt only with him but I am quite sure that we 
know the other board members supported this decision but 
only he has ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe what we can tell Mr Gama as 
20 
well, Mr Myburgh, is that before Mr Mkwanazi came to give 
evidence in the Commission about this matter, he was sent 
correspondence 
from 
the 
Commission 
and 
the 
same 
correspondence was sent to many other board members of 
that time, maybe all but it might not be all but quite a 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 197 of 242 
 
number.   
 
And one of the things that he was asked to do 
and the other members of the board were asked to do is to 
depose to an affidavit and deal with your reinstatement or 
their decision to reinstate you and justify it and justify the 
terms of the settlement agreement.   
 
There are some affidavits that the Commission 
received from some members who – I think there may have 
been two members of the board who were against the 
settlement or the reinstatement. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja, that is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I cannot remember, there were two but 
the others were in favour.  There are members of the 
board, who in their affidavits say, they think their decision 
was justified but I do not know whether after they would 
have listened to what Mr Mkwanazi being questioned on 
these matters and hearing his answers, I do not know how 
many of them might say:  Look, in the light of this 
particular...  Because he was the one who was negotiating 
with you, maybe they might change their minds but there 
20 
may be some who will not change their minds.   
 
But I just want to say, we do have affidavits and 
if they have never been sent to you, if you would like to 
see affidavits from them, that can be arranged and you can 
get them where they seek to indicate their reasons.  But I 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 198 of 242 
 
think luckily the reasons seem to be the same. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Their reasons.  So, but no other board 
member has come to testify other than Mr Mkwanazi and 
we do not know what they – how they would deal with the 
questions that were put to Mr Mkwanazi.  Ja. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Myburgh. 
MR GAMA:   Noted. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja.  I think that was the last 
10 
concession that I wanted to put to you in relation to the 
decision to reinstate.  Then in relation to the terms of the 
settlement agreement.  These are the concessions that 
Mr Mkwanazi made.   
 
He said that you should not have got – and this 
is on the assumption that you were then to be reinstated – 
he said you should not have gotten full back pay as if you 
were innocent of everything.  You want to comment on 
that? 
MR GAMA:   Well, I do not know.  I mean, if he says I 
20 
should not have gotten full back pay, that is what 
reinstatement is about.  But if maybe he wanted to 
penalise me somehow, he should have done so at the 
negotiation.  I do not think – maybe he tried that or not.  I 
cannot remember the aspects of the ...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 199 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he was questioned with regard to 
this issue within this context, namely, that the Bargaining 
Council, if the unfair dismissal had not been settled and 
had proceeded to the Bargaining Council, the Bargaining 
Council arbitrator who would have arbitrated the dispute, 
would not have been bound to give you full back pay even 
if he reinstated you.   
 
He would have had – he or she would have had 
power to reinstate you, give you full back pay if he or she 
thought that the case – that you deserved that in the light 
10 
of all the circumstances.   
 
But he could also have decided to make the 
reinstatement not to be fully retrospective and he could 
also have said:  Well, in the light of the fact that the 
applicant accepts that he was properly found guilty of three 
charges, serious charges, I am not going to reinstate him 
with any back pay.  I will reinstate him only with – 
prospectively which means you will get no back pay and so 
on.   
 
Of course, it would have – other options might 
20 
have been there.  So that - Mr Mkwanazi was being asked 
questions around this issue in the light of that, that of – 
just because you may have deserved to be reinstated, the 
legal regime not would not have forced the arbitrator to 
give you full back pay.  He or she would have had the wide 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 200 of 242 
 
discretion and he would have had to take into account that 
you were not innocent.   
 
You yourself admitted guilt in regard to serious 
charges.  Therefore, having regard to the need to be fair to 
the employer and the employee, the arbitrator may have 
awarded reinstatement, maybe without the – if he went the 
route of reinstatement.  That was the context. 
MR GAMA:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   No, in fact, a good point...  [laughs]   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Gama, then he also 
conceded that you should – Transnet should not have 
undertaken to pay your IP(?) costs.  I think we have 
already addressed that.  And that you should, similarly, not 
have been paid your cost in the labour matter.  This, in 
circumstances, where you had admitted guilt on three acts 
of misconduct. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, it was the outcome of the negotiations.  I 
mean, we considered a lot but we negotiated this.  So I am 
20 
not sure where we are – where that puts us but... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he may have considered a lot in 
the negotiations too.  [laughs]   
MR GAMA:   [laughs]  I mean, we started a new negotiation 
with the Commission.  [laughs]   
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 201 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Yes? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, in fact, if my reading of 
the transcript is correct.  Mr Mkwanazi went so far as to 
state 
that 
he 
would 
not 
be 
opposed 
to 
chairman 
recommending to the President in his report that steps 
should be taken to recover the costs of settlement from 
members of the board.  I mean, that I show... 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is how he ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...extensive ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...his concession were, ultimately. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, yes.  Which is why I think it is important 
to canvass the views of the board because I do not have 
context ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...to all of the concessions. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then, and I think this highlights, that 
you are not the implicated party here. 
MR GAMA:   Okay? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It was in light of these concessions, 
20 
concession in relation to reinstatement, concessions in 
relation to settlement agreement.  Effectively, he concedes 
the decision to reinstate was indefensible.  He, effectively, 
concedes that the decision to grant you all those benefits 
under the settlement agreement was indefensible.   
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 202 of 242 
 
 
The question that was then canvassed with him, 
is well, you know, what made you do this.  And he was 
asked by the Chairperson:  In the light of the concessions 
that you made, how do you settle?  How do you reinstate 
him?  How do you give him back pay? 
 
Of course – and I read from page 242 of 
Day 285: 
“Of course, how do you even undertake to pay 
his legal fees?  It is something that is so 
difficult to understand.  Except if one says that 
10 
there was some other agenda.  That the board 
was pursuing in wanting to get Mr Gama back.  
It was not a question of there is some 
unfairness in the dismissal.  It was not just a 
question of:  Are we likely to lose this case of 
arbitration.  It was other considerations.  Can 
you understand why I am saying that?...” 
 
And Mr Mkwanazi said: 
“I 
understand 
what 
you 
are 
saying 
Chairperson.” 
20 
 
The Chairperson says: 
“Can you fault it?” 
 
He says: 
“I cannot fault it Chairperson.” 
 
So just to make the point that he said that in the 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 203 of 242 
 
light of the concessions that he made.  I understand 
entirely that you do not agree with them but he himself 
accepted in this hearing that when you look at this and it is 
placed under the microscope from his perspective as the 
chairperson 
of 
the 
board 
and 
also 
the 
person 
who 
negotiated 
with 
you, 
it 
was 
consideration, 
careful 
consideration 
as 
to 
whether 
there 
was 
not 
perhaps 
something else at play. 
MR GAMA:   H’m.  Well, I do not know.  I mean, he was 
negotiating.  So.  Did he say there was something else at 
10 
play? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, I put a proposition to you.  He 
says – the Chairperson asked him can you fault it and he 
says:  I cannot fault it.  And fundamentally, what was put to 
him is:  Except if one says there is some other agenda that 
the 
board 
was 
pursuing 
in 
wanting 
to 
reinstatement 
Mr Gama. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words, what I was putting to 
him is.  One hoped that as the chairperson of the board at 
the time and having being involved in the negotiations, he 
20 
would be able to explain these things and make us 
understand 
that 
there 
was 
nothing 
wrong 
with 
the 
settlement agreement.  That the terms that appeared very 
strange, there was good justification for them to be 
included in the settlement agreement. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 204 of 242 
 
 
But after he given evidence and made all these 
concessions, certainly I was still left with the question:  
Why did you agree to settle the matter on these terms?  
Because he was not able to explain them properly.   
 
And then I was saying:  Well, to the extent that 
we seek to establish why it is that Mr Gama that was 
reinstatement in the first place and reinstated on these 
terms.  The question still remains.  Was it because of the 
merits of his case or was it because of something else that 
maybe we have not been told.   
10 
 
That basically was the context of the question.  
And you might not be able to say much about that.  
MR GAMA:   Yes, Chair thank you very much.  I might not 
be able to say much about it except that I think I have said 
much and enough in terms of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The negotiations. 
MR GAMA:   ...the fact that even the charging I have 
talked to, Chair, about the context.  I think he might not 
remember now because it is a bit some time ago when we 
were negotiating.  It is more than ten years ago.  He might 
20 
not remember the context. 
 
But I also think that the fact that you have more 
than one board member, it is to give checks and balances 
in terms of the decision you are making.  And they could 
not be – or if there were 15 board members, you could not 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 205 of 242 
 
have had 13 of them agreeing and two disagreeing, you 
know. 
 
I know you always have somebody dissenting but 
if the 13 of them had agreed, I think it is in the context of 
what was happening.  As I said to you.  No one, no Chief 
Executive at Transnet has ever been charged for the things 
that I had been charged for.  No one.  And it will remain 
like that.   
 
And then one day I will write a book and I will be 
clearer in that book in terms of what was at play. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, just when you write your 
book, do not forget about the fourth charge because again 
you have missed it out.   
MR GAMA:   Uhm ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mkwanazi conceded that he and 
all the board members, they did not – and you see that 
from 
the 
minute 
– 
they 
reinstated 
because 
of 
the 
condonation issue.  There is no consideration of the fourth 
charge.   
MR GAMA:   Ja, I will write that down too. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR GAMA:   Maybe I was lucky. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I then turn to the issue of costs 
and I do not want to detain you long in relation to things 
where we know some of the facts.  You may be able to help 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 206 of 242 
 
us with a few others.  Could I ask you to turn to 
Mr Mapoma’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay before you got there Mr Myburgh.  
Mr Gama, I see that in Clause 4 of the settlement 
agreement, you and Transnet agreed to that, that the terms 
of this agreement will be kept confidential and would not 
be disclosed to any third party unless that was required by 
law or by an order or in order to enforce the conditions.   
 
Why did you think these terms of the settlement 
agreement should be confidential and not be known by 
10 
third parties?  This Transnet is a government entity.  It is 
taxpayers’ money that was involved in settling the matter.  
Why should that remain confidential between the parties? 
MR GAMA:   It is a standard clause that we have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  There was no particular 
discussion on it? 
MR GAMA:   No.  It is just, you do not want anyone to 
wake up and give this the public and say this is – it is just 
a standard clause where we have it in all settlement 
agreements at Transnet to say you keep it confidential.  It 
20 
is an employer/employee relationship.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR GAMA:   That...  if a court of law wanted to have a 
copy of it, we will give it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no.  I think the ...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 207 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   So I think similarly the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  It is fair to say that the clause did 
have something to allow for that to say...  But even if it 
was not there, when there is an order of court, then there 
is an order of court. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just that, particularly, when the 
settlement 
agreement 
has 
some 
of 
the 
terms 
and 
conditions 
that 
we 
are 
talking 
about 
which 
appears 
unusual.  When you see this clause, it is like the parties 
10 
did not want anybody else to know that your reinstatement 
was on these terms because they are unusual. 
MR GAMA:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, okay alright. 
MR GAMA:   No all of them are ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you DCJ.  Could I ask you, 
please, 
to 
go 
to 
Mr 
Mapoma’s 
affidavit 
where 
he 
summarises ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   At which page are we? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The first two cross-payments at 
Bundle 13, Exhibit BB-16, page 29.  Sorry, page 31.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have found it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you have it Mr Gama? 
MR GAMA:   Page 31, yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 208 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, can I just say, if it any time 
you feel you want to refer to your affidavit that you put up, 
you are more than welcome to ask me and I will direct you 
it.  Alright? 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So what Mr Mapoma says at 
paragraph 12 is that: 
“Two payments were made to Langa Attorneys 
when I was at Transnet.  Firstly, they were 
paid R 1 016 000,00.   
10 
On 28 March 2011 being 75% of the tax costs 
incurred by Transnet with bone fide... in the 
high court litigation.   
Secondly, they were paid R 1 720 000,00 on 
9 June being 75% of the tax costs by a private 
tax consultant incurred by Mr Gama in the high 
court litigation, his disciplinary inquiry and his 
referral to the Bargaining Council...” 
 
Now can we just deal with the first and can you – 
do you know anything about this, how you came to be paid 
20 
75%, not of your costs in the high court, but 75% of the 
costs incurred by Transnet with two different sets of 
attorneys in the high court? 
MR GAMA:   I am not sure I follow the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay ...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 209 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   If you say it was paid – incurred by Transnet.  
If you are talking about the cost order.  There is a cost 
order against me and I paid to Transnet an amount.  I think 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Myburgh ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...and I think this is 75% of that amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I think just allow Mr Myburgh to 
explain his question to you. 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You know, I think before I do that 
10 
Chairman, if you do not mind? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You said something which we have 
not heard before.  I am not suggesting you are acting 
improperly in any way.  It is just in our investigation, it has 
not come out that you ever paid something and that is why 
this is such a radical process.  Are you saying that you had 
actually met the cost order in the high court judgment and 
that you were now being reimbursed for that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he also mentioned that a little earlier 
this afternoon. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 210 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I made a note in wanting to come 
back to that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could you just explain that to us?  I 
mean, do you have records and the likes?  Because, 
Mr Gama, it is something, obviously, if we can get to the 
bottom of that, then our investigation has come to an end.  
Is that what happened here? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, that is what happened.  In fact, I tried to 
go to the bank so that I could get this but the bank says 
10 
they only keep this information up to ten years.  So when I 
asked for this information, I think it was in November 2020 
and so they say they could only give me up to – my bank 
statement, up to November 2010.   
 
These high court costs were incurred between 
September 2009 and before I was dismissed, probably 
around April.  And during that time, I paid because 
Transnet was sending me a sheriff.   
 
So I paid through the bank but unfortunately I do 
not have the – those records.  I do not know if – the bank 
20 
just said to me:  Look, we cannot – we can only back ten 
years.  They have shown up to the ten years but this was 
more than ten years ago.  It happened... 
 
In fact, I know that the payment took place in 
December of 2009 when I paid this to Transnet.  They 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 211 of 242 
 
actually did an order into my bank and I paid at that time.  
So I was looking for those bank statements so that I could 
show that I paid that cross order there, the Eversheds.  
The cost order plus some – what was it – they had a senior 
counsel and all of that, that was, ja ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Eversheds and Bowmans because 
they were two separate firms. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And do I understand correctly from 
what you say ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR GAMA:   No, Bowmans was still saying that I still owed 
them some money at some point in 2011, I think. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Oh, I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR GAMA:   But the others ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you had settled. 
MR GAMA:   No, I did then settled Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remember about how much you 
had 
paid 
to 
settle 
Eversheds’ 
costs 
including 
counsel...[intervenes]  
20 
MR GAMA:   It was close to a million rands Chair.  I just 
cannot ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you cannot remember. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And had you paid Bowman Gilfillan 
anything because we know – just so that in fairness to you, 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 212 of 242 
 
let me just tell you the chronology, Mr Todd early on says 
that Mr Mkwanazi had instructed him to hold off on the 
execution I think of the cost order, they were on the point 
of doing that.  That would have been in early 2011.  I can 
take you to the affidavit.  So did you …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I have seen that, I am aware of that, I 
…[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Did you ever settle the Bowmans’ bill? 
MR GAMA:   I guess it would have been settled at the time 
when I was refunded. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, but you did you ever pay anything?  
As you say, you paid Eversheds, did you ever pay anything 
to Bowman and Gilfillan? 
MR GAMA:   I cannot remember how much they had been 
paid.  My sense is probably that there must have been a 
shortfall and they were now – I think that there was 
R400 000 that they were pursuing at some point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that Bowmans …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   Ja, at the time when we were doing the 
settlement, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but say as far as Bowmans were 
concerned you do not remember having made any payment 
to them. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you say – ja, it is Eversheds that you 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 213 of 242 
 
remember that you made payment. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So nothing to Bowmans? 
MR GAMA:   I do not know, I do not remember – they 
cannot give me – and it was always good those times, 
there were still cheques, you could see the cheque on your 
statement. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So, Mr Gama, just so that we can 
perhaps follow this up further.  The R1-odd million payment 
that you made, did you make that physically to Eversheds 
10 
Attorneys, you did not make it to Transnet? 
MR GAMA:   It went to Transnet and then Transnet paid it. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Because that is something that I have 
asked Transnet to look at and they have hunted high and 
low and they cannot find. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, they must look from the 1 December 2009 
to the 31 December 2009, they will find it. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And it would come from you, not from 
Langa Attorneys? 
MR GAMA:   No, they got it from my account. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, we will have a look at that.  And 
then you are aware of the third [indistinct – dropping voice] 
MR GAMA:   Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH:   That you see at BB17, it is the next 
divider.  Could I ask you please to turn to page 842 still in 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 214 of 242 
 
bundle 3, the same one you have there, turn to 842, it 
should be right at the back.   
 
Now this is the affidavit of Mr Todd at 842, you will 
see it deals with the first payment at paragraph – sorry, I 
will let you get there.  I deals at 842, paragraph 6(a) deals 
with the first payment that we have dealt with.   (b) deals 
with the second payment and then perhaps just to fast-
forward this, if you go to page 844, so those were – those 
first two payments were made in 2011.  Then he deals with 
the fact that in  - at 844, paragraph 7, four years later, in 
10 
April of 2015, Transnet then made a further payment to 
Langa Attorneys, for an additional amount you see of 1.399 
million.  Do you know anything about this? 
MR GAMA:   No, I know that there have been some monies 
that Langa had been complaining very bitterly that certain 
monies remained outstanding for a long time and those he 
had said related to his own bill.  So I have seen this, I 
never really entangled myself with these matters. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Did you ever receive this money? 
MR GAMA:   Sorry? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Did you receive the money or was it 
paid to Langa and did they keep it? 
MR GAMA:   No, this one was not for me. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, so your explanation is that is 
really something that they need to explain, not you, as I 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 215 of 242 
 
understand. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   The other two payments you accept you 
received. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Can I just take you, whilst we are there, 
to page 854 of bundle 3, so it is just a few pages on.  This 
is a letter from Langa Attorneys attached to Mr Todd’s 
affidavit.  I just want to direct your attention to paragraph 
2.  It says that: 
10 
“We confirm...” 
And this deals with the issue of costs in this particular, the 
third payment: 
“We confirm that when this matter was settled it 
was agreed in writing with the then Minister of 
Public Enterprises that the costs incurred by Mr 
Gama, our client, would be borne by Transnet.  It 
was further agreed that Transnet would contribute 
75% towards the bill incurred by Mr Gama.” 
I just want to ask you about the statement that it was agree 
20 
with the Minister of Public Enterprises. 
MR GAMA:   No, I am not aware that it was agreed with the 
minister, I know that it was agreed with Transnet. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Do you have any idea where you 
attorney might have got this from? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 216 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   No, you are going to have to ask him.  He 
probably meant that Transnet is a public enterprise, I am 
not sure.  You are going to have to ask him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I see that he says it was agreed in 
writing with the Minister of Public Enterprises.  So there 
must be a document somewhere. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Reflecting that agreement involving the 
Minister of Public Enterprises. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So, Mr Gama, what then happens, you 
10 
were reinstated in February of 2011 and four years later or 
so you become the Group Chief Executive, correct? 
MR GAMA:   Acting. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Acting, a year after that.  April to April 
you then became – you were appointed into that position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It has been a long day, I think maybe 
everybody’s voice has gone down except mine, so… 
ADV MYBURGH:   I will speak up, thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  Now I want to turn to another 
20 
topic please and that is GNS and Abalozi. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Gama, I think it is important for us to 
look at this thing quite narrowly and perhaps also just to 
…[intervenes] 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 217 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Sorry, we look at this thing? 
ADV MYBURGH:   To look at it narrowly. 
MR GAMA:   Narrowly. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And to focus really on the paragraphs 
where it is stated in the 3.3 notice where it is alleged that 
you are implicated because a lot of the events in relation 
to GNS and Abalozi traversed in Mr Todd’s affidavits do not 
deal with you at all. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So, for example, what we know is – and 
10 
I will just ask you to confirm this …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   Sorry, which bundle are we at now. 
ADV MYBURGH:   We will come to that now. 
MR GAMA:   Okay.  Just let me sketch the kind of general 
architecture of GNS.  What we know is that litigation was 
instituted against them, I think that might have been at a 
time when you were suspended or not there.  Then you 
came back into the organisation, you played a limited role 
– and we will come to that – but ultimately, there was a so-
called Newpin and what the risk committee decided, of 
20 
which you were not a member, was that the litigation – the 
action should be withdrawn. 
 
And then, what we also know, and we dealt with 
this with Mr Molefe, is that he then negotiated with Abalozi, 
not you, and ultimately there was a settlement concluded 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 218 of 242 
 
and it was I think a process by Mr Singh.  So risk 
committee you are not involved in, settlement and ultimate 
payment you are not involved in.  Let us detract one or two 
things relative to the time that you came back into the 
organisation until it is dealt with by the risk committee. 
 
So could I take you then to Mr Todd’s affidavit?  I 
want to …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   Is it in bundle 3? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja, it is in bundle 3 and if you can go to 
page 486 to begin with.  In fact if I could ask you to turn 
10 
forward, you know, he gave more than one affidavit dealing 
with this.  Could you – just give me a second please?  Yes, 
what happened – and Mr Todd deals with this at page 63.  
Could you go there?  I just want to get the chronology 
right.  You will see that at …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   Page? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Page 63(e). 
MR GAMA:   63, oh so we are moving away from 
…[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja, we are going to the beginning of that 
20 
file.  Still bundle 3, but 63.  You need to turn …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   633? 
ADV MYBURGH:   63. 
MR GAMA:   Oh, at the beginning? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 219 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, 2486, I though you said 486. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I was also there, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Okay, so 63, paragraph (e) he says that: 
“Transnet terminated the contract with GNS and 
later issued summons to recover 95.5 million that it 
had paid to GNS.” 
And he attaches the summons as annexure 8 and that you 
find – perhaps I could ask you to go there, at page 142 and 
10 
you will see that that summons was issued on the 27 
October 2010. 
MR GAMA:   146?  144? 
ADV MYBURGH:   142. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   You will see that it was issued on the 27 
October 2010.   Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Now, as I understand, you were 
suspended at that time. 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  So you did not have anything to 
do with this, presumably.  You then, we know, reinstated in 
2011. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 220 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Now, if I could take you please to Mr 
Todd’s affidavit on GNS and to – there are two paragraphs 
where you are implicated and that is paragraph 39 and 47. 
MR GAMA:   Which affidavit now? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Paragraph 39 you find at page 497. 
MR GAMA:   497.  
ADV MYBURGH:   So you were in the 3.3 notice also 
referred to paragraphs 4 – perhaps we should start there, 
paragraph 4 of this affidavit.  I am sorry, that is at page 
486 and these are all just historical matters, paragraph 4 
10 
at 
486 
he 
attaches 
a 
copy 
of 
the 
initial 
approved 
appointment of GNS and that was signed by you on the 5 
December 2007.  I take it you would agree with that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And then in paragraph 5 he says: 
“Mr 
Gama’s 
approval 
of 
this 
appointment 
on 
confinement was one of the matters that led to the 
disciplinary proceedings.” 
We know that that is history.  And then at paragraph 6 he 
attaches certain transcripts and then he summarises them 
20 
at 7, that is history.  In paragraph 8 he talks about the fact 
that two people were dismissed at the Kassel inquiry, that 
is history.  And paragraph 9 he makes the point that what 
then followed were civil proceedings and I have taken you 
to those instituted on 27 October 2010. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 221 of 242 
 
 
So what I really want to do is then to focus just on 
the other two paragraphs mentioned in the 3.3 notice, that 
is paragraphs 39 and 47 and they relate to the time when 
you came back into the organisation.  So it is a bit of a 
longwinded introduction, but do you follow what I saying?  
39 is at page 497, bundle 3. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, thank you, Mr Gama.  So at 
paragraph 39, 497, this is a time now you are backing the 
organisation on 14 January 2013, Mr Siza Mthethwa 
10 
general manager  Rail Network for Transnet Freight Rail 
addressed a memorandum to Ms – I am not sure how you 
pronounce that, Chairperson, you will give me an elocution 
lesson, I am sure.  Ms Mbandala. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you looking at Ms Mbandla? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mbandla. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, second line. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, the second line, Mbandla. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Mbandla, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So on 14 January Mthethwa addresses a 
20 
memorandum to Mbandla and copies you as the Chief 
Executive.  A copy of that memorandum is attaches marked 
W.  Alright?  Can you we just have a look at that?  You find 
that at 678, the memorandum and on the face of it the 
memorandum is from Mr Mthethwa it is to Ms Mbandla and 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 222 of 242 
 
it is copied to you, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Then Mr Todd says at paragraph 39: 
“I point out that Mr Mthethwa had been the final 
approver of the second extension of the scope of 
services provided by GNS referred to earlier.” 
Do you accept that, that that be so? 
MR GAMA:   That is in annexure what?  Annexure O?  
Where is that annexure? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Give me a second?  Let me come back 
10 
to that, I will ask my junior to look for it.  But do you have 
any particular difficulty with that statement? 
MR GAMA:   No, I do not. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And this was for the appointment of train 
crew monitors and rapid response and then what Mr Todd 
seeks to do in (a), (b) and (c) is to summarise what the 
memorandum says.  Do you see that?  He says (a) the 
purpose of the memorandum, (b) he deals with in the 
memorandum 
and 
then 
(c) 
I 
point 
out 
that 
the 
memorandum.  Do you see that? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So the only reason that you are given a 
3.3 notice here in relation to this paragraph is really simply 
because you were copied on this memorandum and you 
accept you were, is that right? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 223 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So let us then go to the only other 
paragraph that you were referred to and that is paragraph 
47.  Now here things might have got mixed up.  47: 
“In a memorandum dated 8 October 2013 signed by 
Mr Gama…” 
Says on 22 October 2010, I think that should be ’13, we 
will come to the memo. 
“Mr Gama sought approval from Mr Molefe for TFR 
to present its response to the Transnet Group Risk 
10 
Committee to questions raised by the committee in 
respect of GNS/Abalozi.  Copy of the memorandum 
is attached marked CC.” 
Now that you find at page 705. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And you accept that that is the 
memorandum at 705 and that it is dated the 8 October and 
that you signed it and it is just incidentally, it is dated the 
8 October 2013, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Which shows that paragraph 47 needs to 
be amended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  I previously wrote 2013 next to 
or above 2010. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 224 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
But 
there 
should 
be 
a 
proper 
…[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   We will attend to that like yesterday.  
Alright, so this is a memorandum dated the 8 October, as 
Mr Todd said and it was signed by you, as he says, on the 
22 October and he says that you sought approval from Mr 
Molefe for TFR to present its responses to Transnet Risk 
Committee.  Now if you have a look at page 705: 
“The purpose of the submission is to request 
approval from the GCE…” 
10 
That being Mr Molefe, for TFR to present its responses to 
the Transnet Group Risk Committee. Would you agree that 
the first sentence then of Mr Todd’s paragraph 47 but for 
the 2013 instead of 2010 is in fact accurate? 
MR GAMA:   But can you read the entire sentence, Mr 
Myburgh, it would be interesting to read, [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
ADV MYBURGH:   I thought I had read the entire sentence. 
MR GAMA:   No read on. 
ADV MYBURGH:    
20 
“To present its response to the Transnet Risk 
Committee to questions raised by the committee in 
respect of GNS/Abalozi.” 
Are you saying it is misquoted? 
MR GAMA:   No, it is important.  No, you only went up to 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 225 of 242 
 
Risk Committee to questions raised. 
ADV MYBURGH:   No, fair enough. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I just want you to read the entire 
sentence. 
ADV MYBURGH:   But it still accords with the purpose of 
your memorandum. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   It is an accurate quotation. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So you do not have any difficulty with 
10 
that? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And then what Mr Todd does, is he 
seeks then to – he attaches the memorandum and he says: 
“The background to this request, as explained in the 
memorandum is this: 
(b)  The memorandum states this. 
(c)  The memorandum went on to explain this. 
(d) In the memorandum Mr Gama recorded that  
responses to these questions had been provided. 
20 
(e) Again he refers to the memorandum and (f) he says: 
“Consequently Mr Gama requested…” 
And he repeats the request.  Do you have any difficulty 
with Mr Todd’s summary, that is all he seeks to do, of this 
memorandum? 
 
I 
mean, 
it 
either 
accords 
with 
the 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 226 of 242 
 
memorandum or it does not. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I got a number of difficulties. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, so in what respect is his 
summary wrong? 
MR GAMA:   So can we start with – you said that Mr 
Mthethwa writes a memo on the 8 October or it is dated the 
8 October. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Right? 
MR GAMA:   And he signs it on the 8 October.  
ADV MYBURGH:   Right? 
10 
MR GAMA:   I then recommend the memo on the 22 
October. 
ADV MYBURGH:   That seems correct, yes. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   I think it has been read into the record. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   So Mr Mthethwa compiles the report. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Right. 
MR GAMA:   And it is what is called an accompanying 
20 
memo. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Fair enough. 
MR GAMA:   Mr Mthethwa cannot write to the GCE. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So, in other words, he wrote it, not you, 
if that is what you are saying? 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 227 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, fair enough. 
MR GAMA:   So Mr Mthethwa writes the memo and he says 
I am writing the memo. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Right. 
MR GAMA:   And he says it is because the Group Risk 
Committee has asked me – has raised certain questions in 
a meeting so I am now writing this – I now have this 
presentation that I wish to make. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
10 
MR GAMA:   To the Group Risk Committee as a result of 
their questions and it is Mr Mthethwa all the way, he writes 
this thing. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So, in other words, what you are saying 
is that Mr Todd attributes you to being the author of the 
memorandum but it is actually Mr Mthethwa and that has a 
series of knock-on errors, is that right? 
MR GAMA:   Yes and there he has a series of things where 
he says Mr Gama then …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Instead of Mr Mthethwa? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Ja, everywhere where he put Mr Gama it 
should be Mr Mthethwa. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Well, …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   He knows who the author is.  If he says Mr 
Gama recorded that the responses to the questions have 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 228 of 242 
 
been provided to the Group Executive Ms Mbandla on 3 
October.  I did not, on 3 October I was copied a memo 
between Mr Mthethwa and Ms Mbandla and Mr Mthethwa 
could not write to the Group Executive directly without 
…[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes but …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   …letting his Chief Executive be aware that 
…[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   But, Mr Gama, it is a simple error, I 
mean …[intervenes] 
10 
MR GAMA:   It is not a simple error. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we talking about – I am sorry, are 
we talking about the memo at page 705 to 706? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH: 
 
 
And 
Mr 
Gama 
is 
pointing 
out, 
Chairperson, that if you look at 706 it is compiled by - in 
other words, it is written by Mr Mthethwa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   It is then recommended by Mr Gama. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   It seems that the controversy is that 
when Mr Todd summarises the memorandum, he is saying 
this is Mr Gama who said (a), (b) and (c). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 229 of 242 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Whereas he should have said that it is 
Mr Mthethwa who had said (a), (b) and (c). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I think this is one of the issues I was 
raising there with counsel for Mr Gama to say I was not 
sure what the issue was.  So basically your complaint 
about what Mr Todd said about this memo is that he 
represents it as if you were the author. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are saying although your 
signature does appear on the memo, as far as you are 
10 
concerned, 
the 
author 
is 
the 
complier, 
namely 
Mr 
Mthethwa. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So that is the point you seek to 
make. 
MR GAMA:   Yes but the inference is – that are then made 
as a result of that and it goes onto the record that he 
makes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   Where the inferences that Mr Gama is now 
20 
trying to influence something about Abalozi when in fact I 
am not even in the playground, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But let us get this clear.  While on page 
706 there is nothing that expressly says written by, so the 
author is so and so, I mean expressly, there is nothing that 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 230 of 242 
 
…[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   It says compiled by. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It says compiled by and then it is 
compiled by Siza Mthethwa. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   General Manager Rail Network.  And 
then below that it says recommended by Siyabonga Gama, 
TFR Chief Executive and you sign.  Although you have that 
on page 706, on page 705 the memo represents to Mr Brian 
Molefe and whoever sees that page, sees the page 1 of 
10 
that memo, as the memo coming from you going to Mr 
Molefe. 
MR GAMA:   Yes because …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what appears. 
MR GAMA:   Yes because all of the memos that would go 
Group Chief Executive, they have to come from his direct 
report because otherwise you will get everybody in the 
organisation writing to the Group Chief Executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I accept that in terms of protocol 
whatever arrangements, I accept that. 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the question that arises from my 
mind is anyone who never sees the second page of the 
memo, that is what page 70 seeks here, who just sees the 
first page, the face of the memo, would be correct to say 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 231 of 242 
 
this is a memo from Mr Gama to Mr Molefe, I think we 
would be agreed on that, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, if they only saw that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If they only saw that page ja, but if they 
saw both pages they would see that the memo was 
compiled by Mr Mthethwa and that you were recommending 
whatever Mr Mthethwa had said in the memo. 
MR GAMA:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were recommending it to Mr 
Molefe. 
10 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Now, so – so would we – would you 
agree that the one page, the first page, gives one the 
impression that it is your memo? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But our point is when both pages 
are looked at one should say – one should not say that the 
memo comes from you.   
MR GAMA:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the memo comes from you even if 
20 
you look at the second page, you simply say, I think your 
point you want to simply say the ideas in the memo did not 
originate from you. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But once they were placed before you, 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 232 of 242 
 
you had no problem embracing them? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that fair? 
MR GAMA:   That is fair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, okay. 
MR GAMA:   And Chair just to add to that, at paragraph 47 
Mr Todd is alive to the fact that the memo is prepared and 
compiled by Mr Mthethwa and signed by him on the 8 t h of 
October, where he also says, and we agreed that is a typo, 
and then he says it is signed by Mr Gama on the 22 n d of 
10 
October, so he knows both of these things.  So he is alive 
to it, so he has not just read the covering pages, he also 
read the second page. 
COURT:  Yes, but I just want to say – well I haven’t looked 
more closely to what is – to what is on this page and the 
other pages, but my impression is that to the extent that it 
may be said that if he said it was a memo from you to Mr 
Molefe it would seem to me to that if that sought was a 
mistake it should be understandable in the context of what 
we have just pointed out.  Would you take issue with that? 
20 
MR GAMA:   If you say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you might want to say ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   It would be understandable if Mr Todd was not 
seeking to make inference. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 233 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   He makes inferences in circumstances where 
he is very clear, and he says it himself, on paragraph 47 
where he starts, to say Mr Mthethwa addressed this and in 
any event there is nothing in the memo itself that talks to 
anything, it is just a covering memo.  The memo says 
background, we have been asked by the Board Risk 
Committee to talk about GNS, we requested in January 
2013 to talk about costs, subsequent to that the Risk 
Committee 
wants 
to 
ascertain 
certain 
issues, 
KPI’s, 
etcetera, etcetera, and then after he has finished that 
10 
background he then says the discussion I am trying to 
bring this matter to finality, because security resides within 
my area, and I would like to go and explain to the 
committee the background to the problem so that we can 
solve the issue related to specialised security services and 
then it closes, and then it says recommended but you see 
...[indistinct – audio distorted] the request that we address 
the Risk Committee, so he sends it to me, I recommend it, 
then it is up to the GCE to then make sure that it gets onto 
the Risk Committee pack. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   At their request, but here this is being said by 
Mr Todd in circumstances where his only reason for saying 
it in the manner in which he says it, it is because he wants 
to say that I was now trying to influence the Abalosi 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 234 of 242 
 
settlement and it was not my space, I was not there, I was 
not in that field.  This is a matter which was being dealt 
with by the Group Legal and Group Risk people.  All I was 
doing here was to recommend the memo so that the work 
that they wanted to do can be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR GAMA:   Of course ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course it is true that when you 
recommend something that originates from somebody else 
you – other than to say it did not originate from you, 
10 
otherwise if there is something bad about the content, the 
suggestions or the points you can also be criticised for 
that, because you embraced the contents but that is apart 
from saying look I didn’t originate these ideas that came 
from somebody else. 
MR GAMA:   This one Chair is not one of those memo’s 
which have the content in it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   This is one of those memo’s that says I have 
representation to make, it is attached and all I need from 
20 
you is to be aware that I am going to be making a 
presentation, and it is not one of those where you then say 
-  ja, it is just a cover memo and it is all it is, it is all of 
two pages long. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 235 of 242 
 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And perhaps just going forward, and 
we know you were not involved in the risk committee’s 
decision to withdraw the litigation against Abalosi did you 
come to learn in time of the terms of the settlement with 
Abalosi the R20million payment? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have no insight? 
MR GAMA:   No I have no insight. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Into that? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama could I then take you to 
your opening address. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Your opening address. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you have it with you?  The 
written document? 
MR GAMA:   Yes it is in my bag, let me ... 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   This bundle can be taken away? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think so DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So I want to just deal with the 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 236 of 242 
 
complaints that you make against the Transnet Legal – 
Transnet 
Stream 
Legal 
Team, 
let 
me 
say 
that 
any 
complaints that are raised by someone in your position are 
obviously taken very seriously.  I want to just deal with 
three things that fall within my watch, and I want to start 
with paragraph 2.3.   You are right that you were not 
provided with a Rule 3.3 Notice or the Affidavit of Mr 
Mkhwanazi and Mr Mhlangu[?] at the time, and the reason 
why you were not is because you are not an implicated 
party in your reinstatement.   Mr Mkhwanazi’s affidavit 
10 
deals with why did the Board decide to reinstate you and 
that is the focus of our investigation.  The same applies to 
Mr 
Mhlangu, 
you 
have 
in 
time 
then 
received 
those 
affidavits, but that is why you did not receive them at the 
time.   In fact you received Mr Todd’s affidavit, the initial 
affidavit dealing with your reinstatement but you received it 
because he referred to GNS twice, so when you were given 
Mr Todd’s affidavit it was not given because you were an 
implicated party in your reinstatement, so I hope that that 
clarifies that issue. 
20 
 
Then at 2.6 and 3.1 ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Sorry before you move off there, Mr Todd was 
at this Commission approximately the 10 t h to 16 t h of 
October, presenting evidence.   I never received anything 
about Mr Todd, I was just told that there is somebody on 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 237 of 242 
 
television talking about you. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Well 
I 
can 
only 
deal 
now 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   I only received it on the 28 t h of October when 
I wrote to the Commission and I said I have now seen that 
Mr Todd has been talking about me, can I please have – I 
received it two weeks now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well let me – I will investigate that 
and I will come back to you when we resume, but I am 
dealing now with paragraph 23, here you don’t deal with Mr 
10 
Todd.  At paragraph 2.6 and 3.1 you say you did not get 
the Fundudzi Report and 3.2 you say there is seven 
documents that were discovered late, but you would accept 
that ultimately the parties have reached agreement that 
your evidence is deferred in that regard, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   Absolutely Mr Myburgh, I think I did say, and I 
also said to Chair that of late there has been a huge 
improvement and we are able to cooperate and to receive 
documents and where we have not received them we have 
been able to defer and I think as a result of that we will be 
20 
filing a supplementary affidavit by the 19 t h of March, that is 
the agreement that we reached with your consent. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I also just want to make mention of 
the Fundudzi Report, that was a report that was introduced 
very early on in the Commission and 3[3]’s were not issued 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 238 of 242 
 
in relation to it and it is really in that context that it has not 
been given to you before and was produced in the run-up 
to this hearing.  So that then remains for me to deal with 
your diary and this is something that perhaps requires 
more work and maybe even ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Myburgh, I cannot 
remember everything clearly about the Fundudzi Report 
and other reports such as M & S Reports which have been 
received by the Commission. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it is possible that at that stage the 
thinking might have been that the Fundudzi Report or the 
investigators who were conducting the investigation that 
resulted in the Fundudzi Report would have – were thought 
to have afforded affected parties the opportunity to deal 
with matters that ended up in the reports so it is possible 
that 
the 
thinking 
might 
have 
been 
well 
those 
who 
conducted that investigation would have afforded those 
people affected by the Fundudzi Report the opportunity to 
comment on the matters that the report dealt with and the 
20 
people would have known about those findings, so there 
might have been that, unlike a situation where allegations 
are made for the first time.   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the final thing I wanted to 
deal with Mr Gama ...[intervenes]  
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 239 of 242 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Oldwadge did you want to 
say something? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   I do indeed Mr Chair, and I will be very 
brief. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   I am not going to accept that 
explanation and what is being put to my client, simply for 
this reason, this report was dated 2018, it has come to our 
attention that some of the implicated parties in this report, 
you find it on the very first page of this report, and our 
10 
client seems to be one of the implicated parties.  A number 
of these other implicated parties were interviewed in 
relation to this investigation and during this investigation 
so it must have been within the contemplation of this legal 
team for some time.   Our client’s complaint as per  his 
opening statement is simply this, you held back on this 
report, you knew I was an implicated party, I was never 
interviewed in this process, yet – and this is the context 
yet 
again 
– 
I 
am 
expected 
to 
deal 
in 
detail 
with 
interrogatories posed to me in relation to the locomotives 
20 
issue when in truth you knew all along that this was a 
document that I ought to consider for that very purpose.    
 
It 
is 
in 
that 
context 
that 
Mr 
Gama 
says 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no. 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 240 of 242 
 
ADV OLDWAGE:   ...this is not accepted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that – as I said I cannot remember 
clearly whether the thinking that I mentioned might have 
been the thinking what would be necessary would be for 
somebody to go back and check what happened, because if 
for example other people were afforded then it would 
require a different explanation but I think what is also good 
is 
that 
in 
the 
end 
when 
that 
was 
pointed 
out 
an 
arrangement has been made which will allow Mr Gama an 
opportunity to deal with the matter properly. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just to point out something, Mr 
Gama was in fact interviewed by Fundudzi but Chairperson 
I make no excuses for this, this is something that should 
have been done earlier, we accept that.  When it was 
brought our attention we came to the agreement that we 
did, we have identified a much more limited tranche of 
pages that we would like Mr Gama to deal with and we 
don’t even expect him to put up an affidavit, we asked him 
if he chooses – we invited him to deal with them and he 
can deal with them to the extent that he is implicated and if 
20 
he chooses to do so.  We are not asking him for a 10.6 
affidavit, we are simply asking him that prepare yourself 
we would like to deal with that in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then finally in relation to this 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 241 of 242 
 
diary Mr Gama I tried to broker a discussion between your 
legal 
team 
and 
my 
investigators 
so 
that 
some 
understanding is shared on what we have given you here 
electronically and we have not.   Are you comfortable that 
this issue can be resolved or is it something that we need 
to deal with further on? 
MR GAMA:   No, no I suspect that it is an issue that can be 
resolved, we will get the IT teams to look at it again and I 
think there is some understanding that it may perhaps be 
resolved and that would assist us.  So we just need to 
10 
make sure that is it in fact resolved and I think if it is then 
we are fine, but I think there are attempts by both sides. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So the long and the short of this and 
if necessary we can put up an affidavit and explain 
everything, but we have made over a lot of electronic data, 
in fact there was so much that Mr Benjamin saved it on a 
flash disc and hand delivered it to Brian Khan Attorneys.  
We accept that we hadn’t been able to provide Mr Gama 
with the Microsoft Outlook pages that we are all used to, 
but we have given him the underlying data and we I think 
20 
are in a position to be able to use that so that we can help 
him recreate the diary, and that is something that I think 
both parties are committed to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson I mentioned at the 
11 MARCH 2021 – DAY 359 
 
Page 242 of 242 
 
outset that we intend to ring fence all issues in relation to 
the locomotives and the transaction advisors.  There is 
only one thing other than that, that I intend as things stand 
to deal with next time when we reconvene and that relates 
to the transaction involving Nkonki, but apart from that I 
have no further questions today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no, that is fine. I think we will 
adjourn for the day because I think we have a common 
understanding that whatever re-examination maybe desired 
can be dealt with when Mr Gama has given all this 
10 
evidence, so I thank everybody for all their cooperation, all 
your cooperation for us to work till this time. 
 
We will adjourn, thank you Mr Gama, we will 
adjourn and then a new date will be determined for you to 
come back. 
MR GAMA:   Thank you very much Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 12 MARCH 2021    
 
20 
