 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
03 DECMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 317 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 376 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
03 DECEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 3 of 376 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 03 DECEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Chaskalson, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are we ready? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  We are Chair.  Today’s witness is 
Mr Paul Holden before we swear him in can I just check 
that you have the documents that are necessary for today’s 
hearing? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got Flow of Funds Bundle 5 
10 
Exhibit VV511 and which his name. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That is correct Chair and then 
there should be a – a file of duplicate spread sheets in A3 
format as opposed to A4 format.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And that is not a – a bundle in its 
own right it is merely larger copies of the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  For convenience. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Of the documents that are 
already in the bundle. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  For convenience.  We – we have 
also arranged for a – a screen to be up today.  So on 
certain of the spread sheets which have thousands of 
entries with very small numbers Mr Holden will be able to 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 4 of 376 
 
zoom us in to show them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Will that be enlarged larger than 
that or it will stay like that? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  When we want to examine in 
particular. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It can – it can be magnified much 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Much more than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Okay thank you.  
10 
You – will it be before the – the oath is administered or 
after that – for the benefit of the public you will just say 
what his evidence will cover? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sure.  Mr Holden will be with us 
for two days and some evenings hopefully.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  He – he is going to testify about 
money flows.  Today and possibly spilling into tomorrow he 
will be testifying about the public funds that went into the 
Estina Dairy Enterprise and what happened to them. 
20 
 
Starting tomorrow he is going to be dealing with the 
offshore kickbacks that were paid into the Gupta Enterprise 
in respect of Transnet contracts for cranes and locomotives 
and he is going to be tracing that money and – and to an 
extent what happened to it.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 5 of 376 
 
 
It is – we are in the lucky position in relation to 
Estina that because part of what happened to it happened 
on shore we can access banking records and what 
happened offshore was documented in fairly detailed 
accounting records that are kept on Gupta leaks.   
 
So we can account for most of the funds and where 
they went in relation to Estina. 
 
Offshore we do not have powers to gather bank 
statements from other countries and so we are much more 
limited and so our picture is not as clear as it is in respect 
10 
of Estina. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you.  Please administer 
the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR HOLDEN: It is Paul Edward Holden. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed affirmation? 
MR HOLDEN:  I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
20 
else but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and 
say, I truly affirm? 
MR HOLDEN:  I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr Holden; you 
may be seated.  Thank you. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 6 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Good morning Mr Holden.  I 
would like you to begin by confirming the correctness of 
the statement that you have furnished to the commission 
and possibly before I do that I need you to make one minor 
correction to your report.  And can I ask you to turn to 
page 112 of the bundle? 
CHAIRPERSON:  And just for the record the bundle we are 
using is Flow of Funds Bundle 5? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Unless I mention another number. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That will be the bundle I am 
referring to today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  And what page did you say we 
must look at? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  112 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  112. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And there at – towards the top of 
the page against a paragraph B a figure of 3.1 million US 
20 
Dollars paid to Oakbay Investment Limited is reflected.  I 
understand that you need to correct that figures.  Can you 
give the Chairperson the correct – the correct number 
there? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  Chair the correct figure there is 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 7 of 376 
 
3.35 million US Dollars.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Chaskalson where about is 
that? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Paragraph B towards the – the 
little indenture paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Which says 3.1 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so that should be 3.3? 
MR HOLDEN:  3.35 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  3.35 okay.  So it would 3.35 and then the 
10 
zeros?  Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And that is dollar denominated 
not rand denominated Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Mr Holden we will be doing some 
fairly microscopic examination of transactions of hundreds 
of transactions later on and every now and then there are 
typographical errors which we may need to correct as and 
when we come to them.  But subject to that sort of error do 
you confirm the correctness of that statement to which I 
20 
first referred you to at page 5 of the bundle? 
MR HOLDEN:  I do Chair yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Of course particularly this not being 
an affidavit Mr Chaskalson a corrected page can easily be 
obtained. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 8 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And to replace this one. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then Mr Holden attached to your 
– your statement is a – is a brief Curriculum Vitae I do not 
want you to have to read it all out but can you very briefly 
describe to the Chair who you are; what you do for a living 
and what your experience is? 
MR HOLDEN:  Chair – thank you Chair.  My name is Paul 
10 
Holden I am currently working as Director of Investigations 
at Shadow World Investigations based in London.  I have 
been investigating complex grand corruption for the better 
part of twelve years.  I have written five separate books on 
a combination of corruption related issues and South 
African political economy.  I have been working at Shadow 
World Investigations for the previous two years but prior to 
that I worked at a company by the name of Corruption 
Watch UK Limited which is the predecessor company to 
Shadow World Investigations and I worked there for the 
20 
better part of about eight years.  I have led relatively 
complex training for journalists and activists and law 
enforcement.  I have trained over I think it is about a 
thousand journalists around the world in open source 
investigative methods and security training as well.  And I  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 9 of 376 
 
have also taken part in a number of complex financial 
training exercises as well. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Mr Holden.  And if you 
go to page 12 of the bundle you will see a report that you 
have prepared for today’s evidence.  Can you briefly 
describe 
to 
the 
Chair 
how 
this 
report 
came 
to 
be 
generated? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  So initially the report was 
submitted to this commission as a submission.  It was one 
of – we have made as Shadow World Investigations a total 
10 
of three individual submissions under our name and one 
joint submission with our colleagues Open Secrets.  We 
have made two separate submissions on the Estina matter.  
 
The first submission provided evidence from the 
Gupta Leaks indicating the extent to which the – what we 
call the Gupta Enterprise so the broader Gupta family and 
set 
of 
companies. 
 
What 
role 
they 
played 
in 
the 
establishment and the running of the Estina Project. 
 
And the second submission is the result of a – an 
analysis 
of 
what 
was 
then 
Open 
Source 
banking 
20 
information designed to try and trace the disposition of 
funds that was paid to Estina by the Free State government 
and how it eventually was paid to the benefit of the Gupta 
Enterprise. 
 
Subsequent to that submission the commission … 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 10 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Before you get to that you 
describe – you describe the sources as Open Source 
banking records can you explain to the Chairperson what 
those sources were? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  Chair the sources were for the 
local bank accounts were drawn from attachments that 
were appended to the asset forfeiture unit application for 
the seizure of funds.  There were two separate asset 
forfeiture applications to which they attached a range of 
bank statements and of – there were also a series of 
10 
affidavits – sort of explanatory affidavits explaining how 
the Estina accounting mechanisms were operating. 
 
In addition to that there are quite a substantial 
number of internal accounting ledgers that appear within 
the Gupta Leaks themselves and we will get to that in more 
detail but those are effectively an internal accounting of 
what was really happening on the Estina Project. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That was your submission.  The 
report has been amplified and enriched through your 
interaction with the commission.  Can you explain to the 
20 
Chair how that – how that took place? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  Chair there were certain gaps 
within our knowledge due to the fact that certain bank 
statements were not available to us as they were not 
appended to the asset forfeiture application and also 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 11 of 376 
 
certain records of offshore and onshore flows were not 
available to us because those were held at the time by the 
Reserve Bank. 
 
The commission very – very graciously pointed out 
those gaps and filled those gaps with the available 
documentation they have and we have reproduced that – 
we have updated the original submission including the new 
banking documentation and what that reveals into this new 
report which will be the most sort of up to date and 
complete version of events based on underlying banking 
10 
documentation. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Mr Holden.  We now 
going to move to your report and your report is going to 
detail the banking flows from the Estina Project through 
the Gupta Enterprise.   
 
Before we begin getting into that detail I think we 
should take some time just to describe both the individuals 
who are going to be involved and the companies. 
 
And in that respect can I ask you to go to page 20 
of your – of the bundle where there is a list of the 
20 
individuals who will feature prominently in the emails and 
the banking transactions that we will later discuss.  And 
can you take the Chairperson through that list.  You do not 
need to read it all out but just identifying each one of these 
individuals, what role they are going to play and yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 12 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  Chair the first entry is for Ashu 
Chawla I am sure he has been mentioned already in the 
commission’s evidence. 
 
He was the Chief Operating Officer of Sahara 
Systems but was effectively running the vast majority of 
the logistics of what we call the Gupta Enterprise. 
 
In this respect he was very important as a facilitator 
and a director of how the offshore funds were to be 
dissipated and he was giving direct instructions to the 
individual who was controlling those bank accounts. 
10 
 
And that person enters as a second dramatis 
personae Sanjay Grover.  He is an Indian National.  He had 
been working with the Gupta Enterprise in a separate 
capacity for a number of years prior to the Estina Project 
around about 2012 based on the Gupta Leaks we can 
ascertain that he effectively became the Gupta Enterprise’s 
accountant in Dubai.   
 
That included setting bespoke offshore vehicles and 
running their bank accounts on instruction of Ashu Chawla 
and also providing a regular update of the movement of 
20 
funds in those accounts to Ashu Chawla and others. 
 
He was – I should mention the sole director of a 
number of Gupta offshore enterprises and a South Africa 
entity by the name of Vargafield which was the recipient of 
considerable funds through the Estina Project. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 13 of 376 
 
 
The third entry is Achla Gupta and she is the sister 
of the three Gupta brothers.  We mention her because 
there is at one point in the internal ledgers an indication 
that money may have gone to her so I just highlight her 
role within the family there. 
 
The fourth entry is Rajesh Gupta also known as 
Tony Gupta.  Obviously he was central to the entire Gupta 
Enterprise and a director of a number of companies within 
it.  The importance here is that in our first submission we 
identified that he was quite closely involved in meeting 
10 
with various Free State officials to discuss the Estina 
Project but also most importantly he was being kept 
abreast of and informed of the disposition of Estina’s funds 
offshore.  And that was achieved by Sanja Grover ’s 
accounting to Ashu Chawla which was then subsequently 
provided to Tony Gupta. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry Mr Holden before you 
continue you have been referring to your first submission.  
Do you have FOF Bundle 6 in front of you or available? 
MR HOLDEN:  I am afraid I do not Chair. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can you turn to – sorry I have 
lost my reference – I believe it is that flag document where 
the blue tag is can you just – and give me a reference 
there? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  That is FOF-06-004.-06-004. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 14 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And is that document – that 
submission 
by 
Shadow 
World 
International 
what 
you 
referring to when you talk about your first submission? 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Just 
hang 
on 
– 
one 
second 
Mr 
Chaskalson.  So shall we record that that is a document 
that is in Flow of Funds Bundle 6? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is in Flow of Funds Bundle 6 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and it is at page 4? 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Black numbers.  Okay and – ja okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if you can briefly explain to 
the Chair the distinction between that submission and – or 
the topic addressed by that submission and the topic 
addressed by today’s report? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  So the first submission is a 
focus rather on the circumstantial evidence of the role of 
the Gupta Enterprise in the Estina Project drawn almost 
exclusively from the Gupta Leaks materials.  And there for 
20 
example we tried to outline this is the pragmatic and 
practical ways in which the Gupta Enterprise was creating 
the infrastructure to which the Estina Project happened 
and effectively directing the Estina Enterprise remotely.  
And that is a distinction from the – the report we 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 15 of 376 
 
discussing today which focuses exclusively on money 
flows. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you.  I took you out of 
your sequence of describing the relevant individuals so if I 
can take you back to Bundle 5 and you had addressed Tony 
Gupta, Rajesh Gupta – if you can go over the page to page 
21 there is an entry Shivani Gupta.  Can you tell the 
Chairperson who she is? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly Chair Shivani Gupta was the wife 
of Ajay Gupta or is he wife of Ajay Gupta and I include her 
10 
on the dramatis personae as she is also noted as a 
recipient of funds in the internal ledgers that have 
ultimately derived from the Estina Project. 
 
And the second entry on that page is a person by 
the name Lin Yu Chu also goes by the name of Alex and we 
include his name – I am afraid I do not know a great deal 
about him beyond that there is correspondence between 
him and certain of the Gupta Enterprise employees but I 
include him there as there is a payment of $50 000.00 that 
ultimately derives from the Estina Project that was sent to 
20 
him. 
 
The third entry is Ashok Narayan who I am sure the 
commission has heard a great deal about already.  In 
relation to the Estina Project we show in our first 
omissions which I have just described the very intimate 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 16 of 376 
 
role that he played in running or establishing in running the 
Estina Project on the ground.  In relation to this specific 
report the thing that is useful to bear in mind is that he 
appears to be the on ground administrative person or point 
person for the running of their account by the name of 
Vargafield the company Vargafield which received just 
under R60 million from the Estina Project. 
 
The… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can you mention also his role in 
relation to Linkway Trading? 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  So he served as a director of 
Linkway Trading and Linkway Trading was one of the 
entities that received a very large sum of money derived 
from the Estina Project and that was quite famously 
invoiced against the costs of the Sun City wedding. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then Evan Tuck? 
MR HOLDEN:  Yes Evan Tuck was – he is a senior Sahara 
Computers employee.  He is involved in a number of sort of 
logistical discussions and the reason why we include him in 
this dramatis personae is that he was involved in trying to 
20 
troubleshoot the importation of equipment from India and 
that equipment was imported using funds drawn from the 
Estina Project. 
 
The second to last entry is Suresh Tutega he is a 
former employee of the Gupta company JIC.  For the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 17 of 376 
 
majority of the period of time under consideration here he 
operated in India and acted as a – as an additional 
accountant 
and 
manager 
of 
Gupta 
Enterprise 
Funds 
Offshore. 
 
And then the last entry here is Kamil Vashram who 
we will be dealing with quite extensively in the money 
flows.  He was the sole director of Estina Pty Limited up 
until if I am not mistaken 2016 in which – when he was 
replaced.  
 
The Gupta Leaks record show that he was engaging 
10 
with the – with Sahara Computers from at least 2008 
onwards.  From 2011 onwards he starts to invoice and is 
paid – invoice a monthly amount against – against the 
Gupta Enterprises including against Linkway Trading of 
which Narayan was the director.  And the first invoice is 
from March 2011 onwards as we discussed. 
 
He provided the – he acted essentially as a front 
man for the Estina Project.  He was always based in 
Johannesburg.  He also acted as the front man for a 
number of other companies through which the capture of 
20 
certain funds from the Free State occurred including 
Sunbay Trading. I am not sure if the commission has heard 
evidence in relation to Sunbay Trading and the laptop 
issues but – so that can be just another point. 
 
 
Very importantly he also opened up a vast series of 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 18 of 376 
 
personal bank accounts at the bank of Boroda and 
Standard Bank through which much of the laundering of the 
Estina funds takes place in South Africa. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Very briefly to touch on the 
Sunbay Trading Computer issue because we will see later 
that some funds go there.  Literally no more than a minute 
can you tell the Chair what the Sunbay Trading Computer 
project was? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  The Sunbay Trading Project 
was very briefly a project in which the Free State 
10 
Government ordered a number of laptops to be given to 
needy learners. The order was placed via Sunbay Trading.  
It appears from the Gupta Leaks that the point man 
between the Free State government and Sunbay Trading at 
that point was actually Ashok Nayaran who was receiving 
confirmations of payment.  
 
We have been able to establish and we do set in 
our first submission that Sunbay Trading was effectively 
merely 
providing 
computer 
sourced 
from 
Sahara 
and 
computers sourced from Sahara at significantly reduced 
20 
cost for what they charged to the Free State Government. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry.  Can you just clarify that?  
They – who was benefiting here Sahara or the Free State 
Government?  What – where was the reduced cost? 
MR HOLDEN:  So the reduced cost was if I was to explain 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 19 of 376 
 
this better Sunbay Trading purchased laptops from Sahara 
Computers and then effectively doubled that cost when 
they sold it to – or doubled the price I should rather say 
when they on-sold to the Free State Government.  So the 
prejudiced party here is the Free State Government which 
if they had directly contracted with Sahara would have paid 
half the price and the beneficiary here is Sunbay Trading 
although we do know from the Gupta Leaks that the 
majority of the profits they would earn on this particular 
transaction were ultimately transferred back to Sahara 
10 
Computers. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you.  That deals with the 
individuals we now turn to the companies who are going to 
be involved and can I ask you to go to page 28 of the 
bundle?  And can you – at page 28 you deal with the four 
most significant offshore companies that we are going to 
encounter and can you take the Chair through those – 
through those companies who are they? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  So the first company is 
Accurate Investments which is entry 3.1.  The registration 
20 
number is provided there.  It is registered to a PO Box 
address in the UAE and we – the only known shareholder is 
Sanjay Grover who as I pointed out earlier was effectively 
the Gupta Enterprise accountant.    
 
I then also provide a list of banking facilities for 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 20 of 376 
 
Accurate Investments.  I should mention that paragraph 16 
I am surprised that it appears it was actually removed – 
that should be corrected. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Paragraph 60? 
MR HOLDEN:  It is a page FOF05-029 I think there might 
be a version issue here but that paragraph was – is 
deleted – paragraph 16. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So paragraph 16 must be 
removed from the report? 
MR HOLDEN:  Correct. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Chair can I ask you to strike a 
line through paragraph 16?  Then I have asked you to deal 
with the offshore companies but I see of course in your 
report you are dealing with – you are dealing with 
companies domestic and offshore alphabetically.  Let us 
stay with the report so that the Chair does not have to 
jump around. 
 
So Chair we are talking about local and offshore 
companies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That are going to be involved 
here.  Before we leave Accurate when you come to talk 
about Transnet money flows we will be focussing on some 
offshore deposits that went into the Accurate account. 
 
Can I ask you now briefly to describe to the Chair 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 21 of 376 
 
what you see in the transaction records of Accurate that 
gives you an insight into the nature of the company? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  Chair Accurate Investments is I 
would describe as effectively merely a money laundering 
vehicle that exists within this collection of four separate 
companies. 
 
It receives payments – the majority of payments 
into and out of this account almost universally are derived 
from other Gupta Enterprise companies offshore. 
 
It is only used in 2013 to receive payments from 
10 
one tranche related contractor and then to immediately 
dissipate out those funds to other Gupta Enterprise 
companies offshore.  It is also used in this particular 
instance to – as a vehicle through which funds from the 
Estina Project are eventually co-mingled into a single – 
singular account from the Gupta Enterprise to be paid into 
South Africa.  It is really – it is mostly just a place for the – 
through which funds are being flowed as part of a laundry 
process. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Do you see any recurrent 
20 
expenses in the accounts of Accurate Investments? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely none. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can you then tell the Chair about 
Aerohaven Trading? 
MR HOLDEN:  Yes Aerohaven… 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 22 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That entity would not have had many 
employees. 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  There are absolutely no 
employee costs or infrastructure costs associated with 
Accurate Investments.  As we discuss we will discuss in 
relation to Transnet the company has no online profile and 
has no physical infrastructure either. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Mr Holden.  Can we – 
can we move to Aerohaven? 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  Aerohaven is a company 
registered in South Africa.  The registration number is 
provided there as 2008/014743/07.  The known shareholder 
is Ronica Ragavan who had 100% shareholding.  I am sure 
Ronica Ragavan has emerged during testimony before.  
 
Aerohaven 
held 
shares 
in 
a 
vast 
array 
of 
companies.  Should I go through each single one? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No I think they are set out under 
paragraph 18. 
MR HOLDEN:  Okay. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Unless there is anything that you 
want to emphasise particularly there? 
MR HOLDEN:  The only thing I would emphasise here is 
the extent to which Aerohaven is integrated into the Gupta 
Enterprises local entities and the sort of – it is a very sort 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 23 of 376 
 
of central cog within the local laundry.  We address 
Aerohaven 
because 
it 
is 
an 
important 
part 
of 
the 
laundering of Estina funds as we will address later. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then we come to Estina itself.  
You can be very brief there because we – we have heard 
lots of evidence around Estina.  What – what may be useful 
for today’s purposes is to go to paragraph 21 where you 
describe the banking records of Estina that you have – that 
you have analysed? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  Chair at paragraph 21 I have 
10 
included a table of all the known bank accounts operated 
by Estina.  The primary account I will be focussing on 
today is the first entry which is the current account that 
was operated by Standard Bank with the account number 
310864860.  That account is used until it is replaced by an 
account held with FNB in 2015 to receive and dissipate 
Estina funds and that was paid into and received into the 
business account 6250573906.  Turning to the Bank of 
Baroda there are two unit trust accounts – well money on 
call account with FNB and a unit trust account with 
20 
Standard which are used as parking places for funds for a 
very temporary period during the laundering of funds and 
thereafter there is a vast array of Bank of Baroda accounts 
they include the main – the primary Bank of Baroda current 
account which I refer to throughout is 02/255, account 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 24 of 376 
 
number is 9202000000255.  And then below, that there are 
14 fixed deposit accounts that are opened and held at 
various times at the Bank of Baroda.  And then three loan 
accounts.   
 
Chair, it might be worthwhile at this point to – just to 
indicate.  I am not sure if this has come up in any testimony 
before but the reason why I refer to the account is 02/255, is 
because the Bank of Baroda internal account allocation 
system indicated that the current – the type of account by 
the sixth number in the account number.   
10 
 
So in this case, 92020.  The 02 indicated the current 
account whereas the one below that, 9202203.  The 03 
refers to a fixed deposit account and 06 is a loan account.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you Mr Holden.  Can you 
then go to Fidelity Enterprises?  And we are now offshore 
again.   
MR HOLDEN:   So the Fidelity Enterprises is registered 
offshore, also known to be that the sole shareholder was 
Sanjay Grovo and the only known director is Sanjay Grovo, 
although, obviously, he was taking instructions from Ashu 
20 
Chawla and others.   
 
We have identified the six different Fidelity offshore 
accounts that we are aware of with Standard Chartered 
Bank, the Bank of Baroda and Mashreq Bank. 
 
In both of those cases, they were operating in US Dollar 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 25 of 376 
 
and 
Dirham, 
the 
nominated 
accounts. 
 
And 
we 
see 
throughout the laundry that there is quite often a laundry that 
has gone through different denomination accounts, be it 
Dirham or US Dollars.   
 
Of the offshore companies, Fidelity is the only one that 
is then subsequently integrated into the onshore laundry and 
it holds shareholder in a number of different local Gupta 
companies that included a 10% shareholder in Mabengela 
Investments alongside Tony Gupta, Duduzane Zuma trading 
Mufasa(?) Investments, Ashu Chawla of which the directors 
10 
were Duduzane Zuma and Tony Gupta.   
 
A 
20% 
shareholding 
in 
Mabengela 
Resources 
and 
Energy.  Two hundred ordinary shares out of 1301 shared in 
Tegeta Resources and Exploration and a 25% shareholding 
in Tegeta Resources (Pty) Ltd.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I understand it also has shares in 
Oakbay? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So I may have misread your 
paragraph. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   No, I am just double-checking.  I do not think 
that is correct.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, thank you.  I will stop making 
suggestions.  [laughs]  Then we come to Gateway, another 
UAE based company.  Can you tell the Chair about it? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 26 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  So Gateway like Fidelity and 
Accurate(?) before it, is registered in UAE.  It is registered 
to Sanjay Grovo who is the main director and the main 
shareholder.   
 
It operated a number of different bank accounts with 
three different banks that we know of, Standard Chartered, 
Bank 
of 
Baroda 
and 
Mashreq 
Bank 
again 
in 
Dollar 
denominated and Dirham.   
 
If held shared in one Gupta enterprise company but 
based abroad in India by the name of Alpha Computers.  
10 
Sorry, it is registered in Singapore.  Apologies. 
 
And it purchased the shares in Alpha Computers from 
CSC Technologies which is based in India and is one of the 
Gupta’s Enterprises main vehicles.   
 
They are in – Gateway Limited as we will show in 
greater detail later, was the primary means by which the 
offshore laundry first received funds from Estina Project and 
from where the Estina funds were eventually dissipated.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you talk about the 
relationship between Gateway and Vargafield? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  Vargafield, as we will describe in 
a bit more detail later, was the recipient of just under 
R 60 million from Estina Project.   
 
The sole director of Vargafield was Sanjay Grovo, 
although that we do know that Ashu Kenarian was operating 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 27 of 376 
 
an account, an email account on behalf of Vargafield.   
 
The 
internal 
accounting 
records 
for 
the 
offshore 
enterprise indicates two entries, entitled Vargafield/Gateway  
shares R 120,00 and Vargafield/Gateway  shares R 130,00, 
which I have come to believe indicates that Gateway held 
shares in Vargafield or bought shares in Vargafield.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I ask you to turn to page 341 
of that bundle, Bundle 5? 
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number Mr Chaskalson? 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   341 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   341. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And we will get to this document 
in a bit more detail later but can you briefly first tell the 
Chair what is the document that we are looking at? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, this is – Chair, this is probably the 
most important single document in relation to the offshore 
flow of funds.  This document is an internal accounting 
ledger of all the movements of funds into and out of before 
primary offshore companies. 
20 
 
What we are looking at here is the fund, the first heat(?) 
within that spreadsheet which provides and overall summary 
of the movement of funds into and out of those accounts 
between March 2013 and the end of February 2014. 
 
And I assume that you want to refer to the bottom entry? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 28 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, before we get to the bottom 
entry.  Can you tell the Chair how we came to be in 
possession of this document? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  The document is attached to an 
internal mail correspondence within the Gupta leaks.  The 
document was attached to an email that was sent by Ashu 
Chawla to Tony Gupta, sharing this particular spreadsheet. 
 
For some reason it had the subject line:  Forward Visit 
Observations.  From the trail of emails, we can see that Ashu 
Chawla received that email and that spreadsheet from other 
10 
employees within the Gupta enterprise and Sanjay Grovo(?) 
in particular. [Speaker is not clear.] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  And we will take the 
Chair to those specific references later but for present 
purposes, can you go to the references 3 and 4 from the 
bottom of page 341? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  Chair, as you can see, they are 
the entries Vargafield/Gateway  shares R 120,00.  And then 
below that, Vargafield/Gateway  shares R 130,00. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Holden.  I am at page 341 but 
20 
I remember that I heard you earlier on mention a date, I 
think March, but I cannot see a date here.  I think you and 
Mr Chaskalson have mentioned something that I cannot see 
either.  The page is 341. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, we will come to the emails 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 29 of 376 
 
to which this was attached which is where the dates comes 
from. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   A little later.  [laughs]   
MR HOLDEN:   [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  When you mentioned the date, I 
was trying to see where exactly. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, there is no date on the 
spreadsheet itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But the docket – the page that – what we 
are looking at it is the page that has as a first item Ho Chi 
Minh, Jen Trading LLC at the top.  Is that right? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Okay.  Yes, you may 
continue. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But if one goes to the third last 
entry or the third last yellow entry on the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, where we have got rand and Global?   
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   At ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Highlighted yellow. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, no, no, no.  The bottom 
highlighted yellow section.  The last part, yellow highlighted 
section.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 30 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you just direct the Chair 
to the entries that are relevant to Vargafield and Gateway? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  So the fourth last and the third 
last entries say – the first one says Vargafield/Gateway 
Shares, R 120,00.  What is useful to note there is that if you 
scroll to the right the column indicates 13.98...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Holden, you will have to be 
patient, certainly with me.  [laughs]  Because...  Okay.  Now 
when you say R 130,00.  I was looking.  So that is ZAR.  
10 
That is the South African Rand. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but the way it is written [laughs] with a 
capital Z and a small letter AR, one was not sure – I was not 
sure.  Okay.  So I now I see where you are.  Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   Okay.  So just for the record.  It is 
Vargafield/Gateway shares, 120 ZAR. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR HOLDEN:   And then if you follow the columns to the 
right, you will see an entry 13.98 in brackets. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I can see that. 
MR HOLDEN:   And that is a Dollar figure.  It is a Dollar 
equivalent figure for R 120,00.  And the importance there is 
that because the entry is in brackets, we know the money 
was paid out. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 31 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  No, no.  I am sorry Mr Holden.  
No, I think I was looking at the wrong line.  I was looking...  
You are on the fourth line on the highlighted – on the last 
highlighted shade. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  So the fourth line 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I was on the third.  But the name is 
the same but the amounts are different. 
MR HOLDEN:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are looking at the one, four, one, 
10 
twenty.   
MR HOLDEN:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then when you go straight, then you 
go to 13.98. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
MR HOLDEN:   And Chair, the important thing there is that 
because it is in brackets, that is the indication that money is 
paid out of the offshore laundry.  So we know that money 
was paid out of these accounts to buy the shares. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  
MR HOLDEN:   And that applies for both entries. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the price of the shares? 
MR HOLDEN:   So the price of shares are R 120,00, 120 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 32 of 376 
 
ZAR.  And  130 ZAR.  The 120 ZAR is equivalent to 13.98 
Dollars.  A 130 ZAR is equivalent to 15.03 Dollars.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you Mr Holden.  Can I now 
take you back to the company sequence?   
CHAIRPERSON:   So the 120 ZAR is 120 as is, not like 
120 000.  It is just 120. 
MR HOLDEN:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And now at – going back to page 
35.  The next company you address is Global.   
10 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes.  So Chair, this is Global Corporation 
LLC.  Again, operated in Dubai.  The know director is Sanjay 
Grovo.  I indicate there known director as Shivani Gupta and 
I should clarify that how I understand that to be the case. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Please do. 
MR HOLDEN:   So we have – it is very difficult to get share 
registers from Dubai and the UAE, unfortunately.  But there 
is correspondence in the Gupta leaks throve in which there 
is an accounting issue that has to be dealt with in India.   
 
And in that correspondence, it emerges, they state that 
20 
Shivani Gupta had shares within Gateway.  I think, partially, 
to explain why she had received funds there from.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you make a note at some 
stage?  I think having mentioned that we need to produce the 
relevant correspondence. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 33 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And maybe tomorrow we can 
...[intervenes]  
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...an additional exhibit.  Global.  
You were going to move to it. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  So we see there that Global 
Corporation – we know Chair operated accounts of four 
different banks registered in Dubai.  It is Standard Chartered 
Bank, The Bank of Baroda, Mashreq Bank and The National 
10 
Bank of Abu-Dhabi.  Again, they were operating in US Dollar 
and Dirham flavoured(?) accounts.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you had in fact dealt with 
Global.  Linkway. 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, Linkway Trading is an account 
registered 
in 
South 
Africa 
with 
registration 
number 
2007/009012/07.  The known directors are KWE Tisbat(?) 
Kaiser and Ronica Govender..  And the known shareholders 
...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry.  Can I just stop you at 
20 
Veronica Govendor.  Do you know who – how do we know – 
by what name is Veronica Govendor more commonly known? 
MR HOLDEN:   Ronica Ragavan.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry? 
MR HOLDEN:   Ronica Ragavan, Chair. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 34 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, the one who has hundred percent 
shareholder in one of the entities we have dealt with. 
MR HOLDEN:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  H’m.   
MR HOLDEN:   We know that Linkway Trading holds shares 
in Islington Site Investments.  Holds 53% of the shares 
there.  Sorry, I am getting a little bit mixed up there.  The 
shareholders 
of 
Linkway 
Trading 
are 
Islington 
Site 
Investments which owns 53% of the shares.   
 
Ronica Govender which owns 25% of the shareholding 
10 
and 
Brugath(?) 
Investments 
which 
owns 
22% 
of 
the 
shareholding.   
 
I am aware of two different accounts operated by 
Linkway Trading which I referred to in my evidence.  One 
was an account operated with a state Bank of India.  And the 
second account was held with Nedbank.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Your next entry is Oakbay.  I think 
we all know who Oakbay is.  So you entertained the DCJ, the 
Chairperson there.  And then we come to Vargafield on page 
38 who you have talked about already.  Is there anything that 
20 
you want to add in respect of Vargafield? 
MR HOLDEN:   At this point, no.  It might be useful just to 
record its registration number on the record.  So it is 
registered with CIPC.  It was registered in 2012 which was 
the year in which the Estina Project was initiated.  And the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 35 of 376 
 
registration 
number is 
2012/101734/07 
and the known 
director, as I mentioned before was Sanjay Grovo.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then I would like us, before we 
get into the details, just to give an overview of what you 
found in your investigation.  And for that, can I ask you to 
turn to page 109? 
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And maybe it would be simpler to 
start at the end where you talk about aggregate numbers and 
then get to the individual tranches.  So can I ask you to go to 
10 
page 111? 
MR HOLDEN:   Sorry.  I...   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And at page – at the top of page 
111, you summarise what the aggregate amounts paid into 
Estina by the South African state or by the Free State 
Government were and what happened to that money.  Can 
you take the Chairperson through that big picture overview 
that starts at the top of page 11? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  If I may, could I actually – there 
is a slight distinction between the figures, between pages 
20 
109 to pages 111?  It might be useful to draw out, if we may? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sure.  Certainly. 
MR HOLDEN:   At page 109, paragraph 286.  I recorded a 
total amount that the Free State Government paid into Estina 
(Pty) Ltd which was R 280 202 652,00 in eight separate 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 36 of 376 
 
tranches 
between 
the 
9t h 
of 
July 
2012 
and 
the 
5t h of May 2016.  And then returning to page 111, we see the 
figure is slightly different.  It is R 7 million more.   
 
And that is R 287 220 534,88 and the additional amount 
that is included there is an amount drawn – is caused by a 
trial(?) of interest against the amounts deposited by the Free 
State Government against the Estina accounts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay now...  Thank you Mr Holden.  I was 
looking for the 287.  I have now seen it.  Yes, at 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So there is approximately seven 
million worth of interest that is added to the 280 million that 
comes direct from the Free State Government.  Is that 
correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Yes.   
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
What 
happened 
to 
that 
287 million? 
MR HOLDEN:   Of this, R 169 532 396,82 was transferred to 
Gateway Limited offshore.  R 83 703 664,32 was transferred 
20 
to Gateway from Estina’s Standard Bank account, which I 
have already mentioned.  And R 85 828 732,50 is transferred 
to Gateway from Estina’s FNB current account.   
 
Of this, the two largest recipients of funds, once 
Gateway has disbursed it, three point three, three zero...   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 37 of 376 
 
 
Sorry, let me rather rephrase that.  I left – put out a zero 
there.  3 330 700 Dollars is transferred to the benefit of 
Linkway Trading and the amount is ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, can I just pause there.  You 
are talking Dollars, not Rands. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  Dollars. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.   
MR HOLDEN:   An amount which we have corrected on the 
page, I believe, is 3.35 million Dollars to Oakbay.  Following 
that, R 59 505 875,00 is transferred to Vargafield of which 
10 
R 52 726 348,00 was paid from Estina’s Standard Bank 
account and R 6 779 256,95 was transferred from Estina’s 
FNB account.  A further R 34 563 580,12 was transferred to 
the South African Revenue Services to settle Estina’s VAT 
obligations.  Therefore, ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Continue. 
MR HOLDEN:   Therefore, we can see that of the total 
amount paid in by the Free State Government, a total of 
R 263 601 851,94 was paid out accumulatively to Gateway 
Limited to Vargafield and it is like a services for connected 
20 
to Estina.   
 
So of those funds that are deposited by the Free State 
Government, we can trace a mere R 21 746 697,18 that was 
transferred to accounts or recipients other than the South 
African Revenue Services, Gateway Limited and Vargafield.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 38 of 376 
 
 
These appear to be a mixture of payments for the cost of 
running the dairy enterprise but also include paying salaries 
to individuals, two individuals who ran Estina on the ground 
but who were ultimately connected to the Gupta enterprise.  
And one person of particular notice there was Tranjay(?) 
Mabusat(?).   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you Mr Holden.  Can we 
now back to your tables on page 109 and see how those big 
numbers break down if we look at it tranche by tranche? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  Chair, just as an indication why 
10 
we start at Tranche 0 rather than Tranche 1.  The reason 
why, is because the initial money laundering analyses that 
we 
started 
doing 
was 
based 
on 
the 
asset 
forfeiture 
application. 
 
And in the first forfeiture application for a reason that I 
do not fully understand, the Asset Forfeiture Unit neglected 
to include in its analyses the first payment that was made 
out.   
 
So I called that Tranche 0 instead so that the tranches 
now match in numbering with asset forfeiture application.   
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  So what was Tranche 
0 and where did it end? 
MR HOLDEN:   So Tranche 0 was R 30 million that was paid 
on the 9t h of July 2012 to Estina.  And the endpoints that we 
are aware of is 1.347 million Dollars that is paid to Linkway 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 39 of 376 
 
Trading.   
 
R 1 million that is paid to Estina’s ABSA current account 
which we will return to at a later stage.  Oakbay Investments 
which this – this needs to be updated I am afraid, which is 
the reason for the error later, is 250 000 Dollars.  Star 
Engineering received 72 231.14 Dollars. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you tell the Chair who is Star 
Engineering now? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  Star Engineering is an Indian 
based company.  They provided certain dairy equipment’s to 
10 
Estina that was important from India.   
 
The – as we show in our first submission, it appears that 
the decision by Estina to purchase equipment from Star 
Engineering – it appears to be based on the fact that they 
were known to the Gupta family in India.   
 
I also do note that in previous evidence, maybe about 
five(?) years ago in the first evidence on Estina, a couple of 
the individuals who witnessed the importation of that 
equipment, claimed that it was sub-standard and that it was 
quite rusted and poorly treated.   
20 
 
Below that is Ling Lu Yu who I have mentioned 
previously, who received 50 000 Dollars.  And then there is 
an entry in the internal ledgers for Shivani and Ashley Gupta 
combined which is 737 220 Dirham which roughly equals to 
200 000 Dollars.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 40 of 376 
 
 
And then there is an amount of 735 825 Dirham that is 
paid out to what we believe are suspected Hawala transfers.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And when you talk about Hawala 
transfers, can you explain to the Chair what you are referring 
to? 
MR HOLDEN:   Hawala is a very common money exchange 
system that is used throughout South East Asia in particular.  
You, effectively, have two partners in different parts of the 
world who run a ledger internally and they will receive 
deposits from one individual who then wants to transfer 
10 
money abroad to a certain other individual.   
 
They will not actually physically transfer funds but will 
be marked off against the ledge of the second person.  So it 
is a way of transferring money between traders of funds for 
their clients without actually money through any sort of 
actual transfer of cash or electronic transfer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be easier or would it be difficult, 
maybe because of different dates when the transfers 
happened to have a column that translates the US Dollars 
into what it is in terms of Rands?  Would that be easy?  Just 
20 
because one is used to the Rands.  When you look at 
R 30 million you want to see how it was – who got how much 
of that R 30 million.  And when you use US Dollars, it is not 
always easy.   
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 41 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would that be easy for – to create such a 
column? 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   We are happy to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  No, I would appreciate that.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, it may not be something 
that we can do overnight because there are so many of these 
transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, no, no.  That is fine. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But we will arrange that it – at a 
certain stage it is formally ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  It does not need to be 
done today. 
MR HOLDEN:   I should also maybe just to make things 
slightly easier, when we deal with Trance 0 a little bit later, 
the largest Dollar amount there or the Dollar amounts there 
are paid into South Africa and we do have a corresponding 
amount in the bank statements.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Which we will revert to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  Thanks. 
MR HOLDEN:   So for Tranche 1, we have R 34,95 million on 
the 18t h of April 2013.  The largest recipient of funds there is 
Vargafield which receives R 14.27 million.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 42 of 376 
 
 
Gateway Limited which is paid R 4.57 million, of which a 
hundred thousand, we can ultimately trace being paid to 
Oakbay Investments.  A hundred and fifty-seven thousand 
...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry.  You say a hundred 
thousand.  That is 100 000 Dollars? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is 100 000 Dollars.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR 
HOLDEN: 
 
 
R 157 320,00 
to 
Linkway 
Trading.  
R 1.6 million to sorted recipients which we have not really 
10 
been able to identify but it appear to be related to the 
running of the dairy farm.  R 1.2 million paid to attorneys, 
Frieda Pretorius and Bosman.   
 
R 250 000,00 that is paid to Sunday Trading which I 
mentioned before was controlled by Kanal(?) Wasram(?).  
And an amount of R 2 359 899.00 that is paid to AFGRI 
Equipment which is a contractor for the provision of certain 
equipment for use on the Estina Dairy Farm.   
 
In the second tranche is thirty million that is paid on the 
26t h of April 2013.  Of that, R 3 million(sic) or the vast 
20 
majority of it is paid to Oakbay Investments. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Mr Holden I think you said 
Rands there.   
MR HOLDEN:   I probably did.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 43 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Three million Dollars is paid to Oakbay 
Investments.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR HOLDEN:   An amount of 65 270.39 Dollars is ultimately 
transferred to a company by the name of Idea For Life 
General Trading.  Sadly despite it appearing in the Gupta 
leaks, I cannot shed a heat amount of light of the nature of 
that company.  That is also true of the entity below.  That is 
Third Eye Enterprises which is paid 125 000 Dirham.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And how does the Dirham, Dollar 
10 
and the Rand relate at that stage? 
MR HOLDEN:   The Dirham was roughly 3.7 at that time.  So 
we are looking at, probably, about 30 000 Dollars. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Dirham being the UAE currency? 
MR HOLDEN:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   Below that, gives an amount of 73 222 
Dirham.  That is paid to Llewellyn Global in Australia.  We 
know from the Gupta Leaks that this amount is – that 
Llewellyn Global was providing certain travel services to the 
20 
Gupta family.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you have a recollection, just roughly, 
what the – how the Dirham compares with the Rand?  I 
mean, one has an idea about the US Dollar.   
MR HOLDEN:   I am afraid Chair.  I do not want to commit to 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 44 of 376 
 
a figure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   I would hate(?) [laughs] myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  [laughs]   
MR HOLDEN:   I know very well that the Dollar/Dirham 
because of the calculations I was making. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:   I need to check that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, that is fine.  That is fine.  Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   Bellow that is 95 000 Dollars.  It is paid to 
10 
Global Corporation which dissipated in other things.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And you just refresh – just come 
back to who Global are? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  Global Corporation is one of the 
four offshore entities that is controlled by Sanjay Grovo 
which is used to, amongst other things, dissipating transfers 
Estina funds.   
 
And then there is an unidentified offshore recipient.  I 
am afraid there is not entry in the ledger against this amount 
for 108 932,40 Dollars.  The third tranche is an amount of 
20 
R19 050 000 3 r d of May 2013 and that is ultimately paid to 
Linkway Trading and the value that Linkway Trading 
receives is 1 986 000 dollars, it is actually, I think it is R2 
million that is transferred but there is a …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, 2 million dollars. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 45 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   2 million dollars, that is correct.  And 
Kamal Vasram is paid R100 000 of that amount, so virtually 
the entirety of that charge is paid out to Linkway Trading.   
 
The fourth tranche is R29.95 million on the 20 
December 2013 paid by the Free State government to 
Estina.  Of this R18.237 million is paid to Vargafield and 
R5.825 million is paid to a company by the name of UTI 
South Africa based on the Gupta Leaks records we know 
that UTI South Africa was the freight company and the 
conveyancing company that was used by the Gupta family 
10 
to import the dairy equipment from Star Engineers. 
 
The fifth tranche is R30 million on the 25 July 2014.  
Of this, R15.79 million is paid to Estina’s FNB account and 
ultimately  [indistinct] 01.19 other funds to be paid on to 
Gateway Ltd.   
R14.2 million is paid to Vargafield and R3.2 million 
of which a R100 000 is from the Free State government is 
paid to Aerohaven, that is R3.2 million of which R100 000 
is from the Free State government and the R3.1 million I 
am afraid I have not been able to determine the source but 
20 
is -  I have not deemed it relevant considering it did not 
come from Estina, to try establish that. 
 
Transfix is R60 million on the 8 May 2015.  That is 
paid – quite a large number of those payments are made 
out to South African Revenue Service.  The first payment is 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 46 of 376 
 
R28 590 349.74, that is paid to South African Revenue 
Services with that long reference number 4650257167 
VC2015062 and the Commission has kindly confirmed that 
that number is Estina’s VAT account at the South African 
Revenue Services. 
 
And then there are two amounts that are paid to 
SARS e-Filing, one amount of R183 000 and R2.78.  
Another 
one 
of 
R19 711.23. 
 
Vargafield 
is 
paid 
R3 116 479.10 and Gateway Limited is paid R45 091 652 
and that is a combination of funds emanating from this 
10 
tranche and the 15.79 million that was transferred from 
Estina’s account at Standard Bank from the previous 
tranche. 
 
And 
then 
the 
seventh 
and 
final 
tranche 
is 
R46 252 652 which is paid on the 5 June 2016 by the Free 
State government to Estina.  Of that R5 384 412.26 is paid 
to the South African Revenue Service again with Estina’s 
VAT reference and the vast majority is paid out to Gateway 
Ltd which is paid R40 737 452.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Mr Holden.  And 
20 
once again, to give an overall picture, can I ask you to go 
to paragraph 293 on page 112? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  The importance here, the 
reason I include this, it might be worthwhile to explain why 
I have included this paragraph, if I may. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 47 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, yes, it certainly is.  Can 
you tell the Chair what defence was put forward by the 
respondents in the asset forfeiture application, in Estina 
asset forfeiture application.  In other words, the people 
whose assets were sought to be frozen. 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  Chair, the respondents in that 
application indicated that if you looked at the Estina bank 
records you could see a huge amount of money coming into 
the Estina that did not derive from the Free State 
government, it derived from other sources and their 
10 
argument was that you cannot argue that the entirety of 
these funds belonged to Free State government and 
therefore cannot be seized assets flowing from the Free 
State government.  
It is also what they argued as proof of the 
investment that Estina was drawing into the project.  I am 
not sure if you recall from earlier evidence but one of the 
stipulations of the underlying contract between Estina and 
the Free State government was that the Free State 
government would provide a certain amount of funding and  
20 
Estina would provide the remainder, I think it was R220 
million.  We can now establish that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which is never provided. 
MR HOLDEN:   It was … 
CHAIRPERSON:   On which Estina never provided. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 48 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  It was drawn entirely from the 
Free State government funds and what was happening was 
a very complex system of money laundering in which Free 
State government funds were paid out of Estina and to a 
very complicated loop, that we will describe, eventually 
returned back into the Estina account which made it look 
like Estina was receiving deposits from other sources but 
was effectively deposits derived from the Free State 
government funds.  So of that amount, of the total amounts 
that are paid into the Estina account over this period, there 
10 
is 800 and …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So if I can just stop you there.  
So including original amounts deposited from the Free 
State government and amounts which circle around from 
those Free State government funds and then eventually 
come back into Estina, what is the total aggregate amount 
of deposits into Estina? 
MR HOLDEN:   The total aggregate amount of deposits is 
R880 345 265.83 and that is including accrued interest. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And how much of this did not 
20 
come from the Free State government? 
MR HOLDEN:   Ultimately we trace R35 087 788.77 which 
indicates that a mere 3.98% of all the deposits received or 
interest 
accrued 
did 
not 
derive 
from 
Free 
State 
governments. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 49 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So more than 96% of all of that 
money deposited into Estina can ultimately be traced back 
to the Free State government? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  And, Chair, if I may, it may 
even be a smaller figure.  In examining some of the bank 
statements there were two entries, two large payments into 
the Estina account.  I think they total around about R9 
million against a statement reference that I did not 
understand, so I just indicated that this is the statement 
reference.   
10 
I have been informed by the Commission that those 
may have been payments made by the South African 
Revenue Service and I understand the Commission is now 
investigating whether those are rebates that were paid by 
the South African Revenue Service to Estina. 
If that is the case then clearly the amount of funds 
that actually derives from sources outside of the Free 
State government funds falls even further. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I thought that the evidence that I had 
under Estina suggested that the amount was much lower 
20 
than this 96% of this 880 million.  So what you are saying 
is out of this 880 million only about 3 comma something 
percent did not come from the Free State government. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The rest came from the Free State 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 50 of 376 
 
government. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And under the Estina project, not that 
there was some money coming or something else. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  That is quite a large amount.  
I am under the impression that all along the amounts that 
had been mentioned were 200 and something. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Indeed, Chair.  Maybe if you can 
explain to the Chair how we get from 280 million plus 7 
10 
million interest to 880 million deposits. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, Chair.  So the 287 million figure 
is the figure that is paid in by the Free State government 
with accrued interest and the figure that we reach of 880 
million, that is the 287 million plus and additional amount 
that is effectively drawn from the 287 million but is 
laundered in such a complex way through a circular system 
that returns the funds ultimately back into Estina which 
thereby 
increases 
the 
aggregate 
deposits 
into 
the 
20 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, like investments or something. 
MR HOLDEN:   Well, we will see when we – Chair, when 
we look through the specific tranches, we have done 
visualisations. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 51 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:   But effectively it is referred to in money 
laundering terms as a round tripping where funds are paid 
out of an account to a second account potentially and 
number of different accounts before being paid back into 
the original account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   To create the impression that there is a 
separate fund flowing into the account but it actually 
derived from the original payment. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Okay, but basically it is - like 
they 
get 
287 
or 
whatever 
million 
from 
Free 
State 
government and they find a way  - ways in which they 
either grew it or whatever but ultimately it comes back and 
they say well, you know, it cannot be the money from – it 
cannot all be the money from the Provincial Government 
because the Provincial Government only paid 287 so you 
can see now it is 880 million but actually whatever it is, the 
increased amount actually – it is like proceeds of some 
kind of the same 287 million? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I maybe illustrate with a 
personal example. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 52 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If I receive R100 000 into my 
current account and I then transfer it from my current 
account to a savings account for a month and then back 
from the savings account into the current account there will 
be two deposits.  So my current account statement will 
reflect two deposits of R100 000.  The first one that came 
from the outside and the second one that came back from 
my savings account after I had put it there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Am I correct in suggesting that 
10 
the 880 million figure that you quote there corresponds to 
the two times R100 000 deposits on my current account 
and the 280 figure would be the original R100 000 deposit 
in my current account? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So it is not about growth interest 
and investment growth it is actually simply about moving 
the same funds to one place and bringing them back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  So, if I may, Chair, as you 
can see the increase, which is about R600 million which 
would indicate that the R280 million was paid in by the 
Free State government was washed three times in a circle 
to produce this amount. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 53 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, I see it may be a 
convenient time to take the tea break at this point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us take a tea break, we will 
resume at twenty five to.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us continue. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Holden, 
you have given us some overall pictures, we now need to 
10 
take the Chair to how we get to those overall pictures and 
that involves two separate exercises.  
One, first establishing what our sources were or 
what your sources where.  And, two, how you have taken 
the information from those sources to generate those 
overall pictures on a step-by-step basis. 
To start then with the sources, there are two broad 
– or they can be provided into two parts.  Can we start first 
with the South African sources and in that respect can I 
ask you to go to page 132 and I am going to take you 
20 
sequentially through all of the South African sources of 
bank records to which you have had regard.  Starting with 
page 132 and can you identify the document annexure E 
from page 132? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, Chair, this is the Standard Bank 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 54 of 376 
 
bank statements for Estina (Pty) Ltd for the account 
number – I am trying to find exactly where it is on here.  
310864860 and you can see at the top left, just underneath 
the Standard Bank logos where their account number is 
recorded. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  Then I am just going 
to take them sequentially through the bundle even though 
it is probably not the most logical – or conceptually.  But if 
you can go then to page 378. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just so that I understand, page 132 is 
the bank statement in regard to the specific account for 
Estina? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, as at a particular date I assume or 
before 18 January 2013 to 16 February 2013, is that right? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  If I may answer, the 
Commission was able to provide the actual PDF, the full 
printout of a statement from that date onwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   But before that we have records that were 
collected electronically.  I do not know whether my 
evidence leader would like to explain how that happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is acceptable to note anything 
in particular on the contents at this stage on the page, 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 55 of 376 
 
other than that is a statement for Estina. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But it is more than one 
statement for Estina. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is that so? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is monthly statements for 
Estina that run – I think they go all the way down to page 
298. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is a bundle of consecutive 
monthly Estina statements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It may – referring to what Mr 
Holden has just mentioned, if I might take the Chair 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe before you continue, Mr 
Chaskalson, it is a bundle of statements starting at page 
132 going up to what page?  I think maybe I should know 
that first. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is – I think the last one, Chair, 
is on page 298. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I think it is just important to 
understand that that is how far it goes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And it is linked, Chair, to the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 56 of 376 
 
document that you see on page 299. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  Okay, then that is fine, I 
understand, that is a bundle of statements. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   For Estina from Standard Bank. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then, Chair, if you go to 299 you 
will see there is a spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Now that is a spreadsheet that 
the Commission has produced in respect of electronic 
10 
transaction records that were furnished to the Commission 
by Standard Bank for Estina that are not reflected on the 
PDF bank statements because they come from an earlier 
period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We will attempt to locate the 
original PDFs if Standard still has those PDFs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The next bundle of statements is 
at page 378 – the next bundle of local bank statements, 
20 
page 378 and can you identify these for the Chair? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, these are – Chair, these are 
bank statements for Estina’s business account with First 
National Bank.  Well, the account number is 62505753906 
and they run from 29 November 2014 until effectively the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 57 of 376 
 
closure of the account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The last page is at 437, if you 
can take the Chair there or maybe to the preceding page 
which will tell you the date. 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, the final page of statements is at page 
436.  Actually, no sorry, it is 347, where the last entry is 
for the 18 April 2017.  The relevance here is that this is the 
period 
in 
which 
the 
Free 
State 
government 
makes 
payments into these accounts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then if you can go to page 438 
and identify the document there? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, Chair, this is Estina (Pty) Ltd’s 
Bank of Baroda account statement and the account number 
is 92020200000255 or, as I refer to it, 02/255 and this runs 
from the inception of the account until the closure of the 
account and the inception of the account is the 10 July 
2012 and the final page … 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   443. 
MR HOLDEN:   Is at 443.  And the final transactions there 
20 
is the 5 October 2018. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I ask you then to go one 
page over, page 445 and identify that document for the 
Chair? 
MR HOLDEN:   444, I would imagine. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 58 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, I beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   445 or 444? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   444, Mr Holden has corrected 
me quite appropriately. 
MR HOLDEN:   So this is a very brief bank statement from 
Estina’s 
fixed 
deposit 
account 
with 
the 
number 
92020300000189.  It is opened on the 31 July 2012 and it 
is effectively rolled over but the final transaction day is the 
7 August 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then to the next page? 
10 
MR HOLDEN:   This is the fixed deposit account for Estina 
(Pty) 
Ltd. 
 
Again, 
with 
the 
account 
number 
92020300000207 and the first date of the – the creation 
date of the fixed deposit account is the 15 October 2012 
and the closure date is the 4 September 2013.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And over the page to 446? 
MR HOLDEN:   466 is Estina’s Bank of Baroda fixed 
deposit account with account 92020300000212.  This fixed 
deposit was created on the 8 November 2012 and closed 
on the 26 November 2012. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Over the page again to 447. 
MR HOLDEN:   447 is another fixed deposit account for 
Estina (Pty) Ltd with account number 92020300000245 and 
the opening date of that fixed deposit account was the 19 
April 2013 and the closure date of that account is the 3 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 59 of 376 
 
October 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Page 448? 
MR HOLDEN:   This is another fixed deposit account held 
by Estina with the Bank of Baroda with the account number 
92020300000246 with an opening date of 22 April 2013 and 
a closing date of 3 October 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, what I should have done 
for record purposes is referred to the annexure numbers, 
we are now on annexure J5.  Each one of these – the 
original current account was annexure J. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And each one of these fixed 
deposit accounts is J1, J2, J3, J4.  We are now at J5.  If 
we go over the page to J6, on page 449. 
MR HOLDEN:   J6 is an Estina fixed deposit account with 
the Bank of Baroda with account number 92020300000249, 
with an opening date of the 25 April 2013 and a closure 
date of the 20 September 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Over the page again to page 
450, J7? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   This is another Bank of Baroda fixed 
deposit account for Estina (Pty) Ltd with the account 
number 92020300000282 with an opening date of the 6 
August 2013 and a closing date of the 4 September 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then J8 on 451? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 60 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   J8 is another Estina fixed deposit account 
with Bank of Baroda with account number 92020300000297 
with an opening date of the 30 September 2013 and a 
closing date of the 4 October 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, I have lost track now, we 
are on J...? 
MR HOLDEN:   J9. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We are going to J9 on page 452, 
thank you. 
MR HOLDEN:   J9 is another fixed deposit account held by 
10 
Estina with the Bank of Baroda with the account number 
92020300000300 with an opening date of 30 September 
2013 and a closure date of the 14 October 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then 453, J10? 
MR HOLDEN:   Is a further Estina (Pty) Ltd Bank of Baroda 
fixed 
deposit 
account 
with 
the 
account 
number 
92020300000314.  Opening date of the 19 December 2013 
and a closure date of 14 April 2014. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And J11 on page 454? 
MR HOLDEN:   J11 is an Estina fixed deposit account 
20 
again 
with 
Bank 
of 
Baroda 
with 
account 
number 
92020300000389 with an opening date of 27 November 
2014 and a closing date of the 12 June 2015. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And J12, 455?  
MR HOLDEN:   J12 is a further fixed deposit account held 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 61 of 376 
 
by Estina (Pty) Ltd with the Bank of Baroda with the 
account number 92020300000507 with an opening date of 
the 11 June 2015 and a closing date of the 5 August 2015. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And J13 on page 546? 
MR HOLDEN:   J13 is an Estina loan account loan which 
has been issued against a fixed deposit account with the 
account number 92020600000273.  The loan was opened 
on the 30 July 2012 and closed on the 7 September 2012. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then J14 on 547? 
MR HOLDEN:   J14 is an Estina (Pty) Ltd loan against 
10 
fixed deposit account also with the Bank of Baroda with the 
account 
number 
92020600000359, 
opened 
on 
the 
29 
September 2013 and closed on the 14 January 2014. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And finally J15 on 458? 
MR HOLDEN:   J15 is a further Estina (Pty) Ltd Bank of 
Baroda loan issued against a fixed deposit with the 
account number 92020600000367 with an opening date of 
10 June 2014 and a closing date of 12 August 2014. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  I am afraid this may 
be a little tedious, Chair, but we have to identify all of 
20 
these sources. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, but when it is necessary it is 
necessary.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I see that almost all of these fixed 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 62 of 376 
 
deposit accounts their life span is very limited, it is a few 
months. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Maybe – I mean, we will see that 
in context a little while later, maybe you can respond to the 
Chair by explaining how these fixed deposits of Estina 
operate within the movement of funds that you are later 
going to describe. 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  So there are two purposes of 
10 
the fixed deposit accounts.  The one is to hold funds paid 
by Free State government to Estina until they decide how 
they are being dissipated.   
 
And 
the 
second 
way, 
which 
is 
slightly 
more 
complicated and will be best described with a visualisation 
later.  As I mentioned towards the end there, there are 
loans that are issued against the fixed deposit amounts 
and those loans are then used to pay certain expenses or 
to conduct the circular laundry and eventually those loans 
are settled once the fixed deposit accounts are closed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you then take us to 
annexure K at page 459? 
MR HOLDEN:   Annexure K is an Estina (Pty) Ltd bank 
statement.  This is for – I am trying to find the account, it 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 63 of 376 
 
is a call account, a money on call account with the account 
number 62611308554 and the statement period is for the 
11 May 2016. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if you go to the letterhead in 
the top right hand corner can you say which bank is the 
bank is this call account? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, Chair, it is First National Bank. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, what bank? 
MR HOLDEN:   It is FNB, Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if you go down to page 462 
10 
that would be the last of the series of call account 
statements on annexure K.  Annexure K, page 4. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If you go over the page to 
annexure L at page 463? 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, this is a Stanlib account also held with 
the name of Estina (Pty) Ltd, it is effectively a money 
market investment account.  The account number is a little 
bit unclear on this printout, I am afraid. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Are you possibly able to magnify 
20 
it on your computer screen?  Anyway, I think we can come 
back to identify the …[intervenes] 
MR HOLDEN:   Specific number. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The specific account number.  I 
can possibly magnify it. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 64 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Ja, I do provide the account number in my 
annexures list as well, which might be the easiest. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think it looks to me like 
552028172 but maybe you can confirm for me or... 
MR HOLDEN:   Annexure K, is that correct? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Annexure L. 
MR HOLDEN:   Annexure L is the unit, is a Standard Unit 
Trust account, the account number is 532028173. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Good thing you went to your...  
And that runs through to page 472 whereafter we get to 
10 
annexure M on page 473.  Can you identify that for the 
Chair? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, this is a Bank of Baroda current 
account but held by Kamal Vasram, who was the director of 
Estina. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, that is at 473? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Indeed, Chair, annexure M at 
473. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you confirm that 
20 
annexure finishes on page 476? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is correct, let me double-
check that.   
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Conveniently says end of 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 65 of 376 
 
statement. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If we go over the page to 477, 
annexure M1, can you tell the Chair what this is? 
MR HOLDEN:   This is a fixed deposit account opened by 
Kamal Vasram.  The account number is 92020300000358, it 
is opened on the 21 August 2014 and closed on the 28 
November 2014. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And annexure M2? 
MR HOLDEN:   Annexure M2 which is the following page. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   On 478. 
MR HOLDEN:   Is a loan against a fixed deposit account 
opened by Kamal Vasram and the account number is 
92020600000295 and is opened on the 18 April 2013 and 
closed on the 14 October 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Page 479, annexure M3? 
MR HOLDEN:   This is a loan against the fixed deposit 
account opened by Kamal Vasram.  The account number is 
92020600000297 with an opening date of the 22 April 2013 
and a closing date of the 14 October 2013. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Annexure M4? 
MR HOLDEN:   Annexure M4. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   On page 480. 
MR HOLDEN:   Annexure M4 is another loan against a 
fixed deposit account issued to Kamal Vasram with Bank of 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 66 of 376 
 
Baroda with the account number 92020600000302, the 
opening date is the 15 May 2013 and the closing date is 
the 20 September 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then page 481, Annexure 
M5? 
MR HOLDEN:   M5 is another loan against the fixed 
deposit account opening in the name of Kamal Vasram with 
the account number 92020600000306 with an opening date 
of the 10 June 2013 and a closing date of the 20 
September 2013. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   482 – I am just wondering if 
there is a way in which we might speed this up, Chair.  
Might I suggest that we prepare a schedule, which we will 
have 
prepared 
overnight 
which 
will 
give 
a 
detailed 
description of accountholder, bank, opening and closing 
date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Annexure 
number, 
page 
numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then Mr Holden can just 
confirm that rather than taking an hour and a half of the 
Commission’s time to read it all out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine, that will speed it up. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then what – but what I 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 67 of 376 
 
would like us to identify today is just briefly the entities 
whose statements had been looked at. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, oaky. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So at page 484, can you tell 
which entity’s statement we are looking at there?  I think 
you may have to go down to page 485. 
MR 
HOLDEN: 
 
 
That 
is 
correct. 
 
This 
is 
Oakbay 
Investments ABSA bank account.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And that is Annexure N.  
Annexure O starts on page 500.  
10 
MR HOLDEN:   Chair, this is the Aerohaven Trading bank 
account again with ABSA. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And from page 520?   
MR HOLDEN:   This is a …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   520? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   520, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   This is Estina bank statement from 27 t h of - 
- Estina (Pty) Ltd with – I am trying to establish that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ABSA. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   With ABSA, that is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And Q from 522? 
MR HOLDEN:   This is the bank statements for Kamal 
Vasram with Standard Bank for his current account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And 559, annexure R. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 68 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   This is Linkway Trading, State Bank of 
India account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   592, annexure S?  I have gone 
offshore, forget about that.  The last set of South African 
account records that we have are Reserve Bank records 
across border transactions involving the Dubai companies 
and there can I take you to page 631, annexure and are 
you able to identify which entity we are looking at with 
annexure U? 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, this is – and I am checking overleaf.   
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So this is the – these are 
records of an offshore entity. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, I am trying to… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If you look at – if you go to page 
632 you will see the entity. 
MR HOLDEN:   Correct.  This is the forex report for 
Gateway Limited. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then annexure V at page 
636 and again for that you need to go to 637 to see the 
entity’s name. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   These are the Reserve Bank records for 
searches against the name Fidelity Enterprises. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And at page 645 and again you 
have got to go over the page to see the non-resident name.  
So 645 is annexure W.  If you go over the page to 646. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 69 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Chair this is the Reserve Bank search 
results for Accurate Investments. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then, Chair, I see that I 
have actually left out some of the South African records as 
well.  If you go to X on page 656 – sorry, 646.  No, 650.  
Sorry, my reference is wrong, 650. 
MR HOLDEN:   This is an Aerohaven Trading (Pty) Ltd 
bank account, fixed deposit account with Bank of Baroda. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And 651 we have some bank 
records. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, 651 is an instruction that is 
issued to grant a loan of R3 million against a fixed term 
deposit held by Aerohaven with the Bank of Baroda. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And whose name is it that is 
giving that instruction? 
MR HOLDEN:   It is Kamal Vasram. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you know if Kamal 
Vasram had any position within Aerohaven? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely none. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   654? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   654 is an annexure to an affidavit that was 
filed by Ronica Ragavan in relation to the assets forfeiture 
application and this provides a description of a loan that 
was granted to Kamal Vasram and thereby paid to Estina.  
This is by Oakbay and as we will establish later this was 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 70 of 376 
 
effectively a fictitious loan designed to increase the flow of 
revenues into the account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And 663, annexure AA? 
MR HOLDEN:   This is a Bank of Baroda account for West 
Dawn Investments. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   665, BB? 
MR HOLDEN:   This is a fixed deposit account with the 
Bank of Baroda for West Dawn Investments. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And 666 CC.   
MR HOLDEN:   That might start earlier. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   666 CC – sorry.... 
MR HOLDEN:   That is right.  666 CC is the Commission’s 
records of the cash flow analysis of the Standard Bank 
account of West Dawn Investments. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the last is DD at page 670. 
MR HOLDEN:   This is a Baroda current account for 
Oakbay Investments. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And that, I think, concludes our 
domestic records, the records that we have from banks 
under subpoena or from the Reserve Bank or including 
20 
Reserve Bank in relation to cross border transactions but 
then your analysis depends on a great deal of offshore 
records and I would like to take the Chair quite slowly 
through the nature of these offshore records and how you 
came to – or how the world came to see them and what 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 71 of 376 
 
they comprise and what they tell us and maybe to go back 
to page 41 of the bundle which is part of your report and at 
paragraph 42 you say what you are going to be describing, 
a selections of emails and correspondence that show the 
control exercise by Ashu Chawla and the Gupta brothers 
over the offshore network as well as the evidence that the 
assets of the four entities were used ultimately to benefit 
the Gupta enterprise. 
 
The first set of those emails and correspondence is 
in the bundle that is your annexure UAE1.  UAE1 starts at 
10 
page 717.  Can you take the Chair to the email on page 
717 and explain what you see there? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, this is an email that is sent 
from – Chair, this is an email sent from Ashu Chawla from 
his Sahara address, it’s Ashu@sahara.co.za.  It is sent on 
the 12 February 2014 and it is sent to Sanjay Grover.  The 
text of the email read …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, can I just ask you to 
confirm, all of these emails, I understand, are on Gupta 
Leaks.   
20 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if there is any – sorry, I am 
not going to ask you each time but if there is a document 
that is not on Gupta Leaks that we are relying on this 
section please flag that. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 72 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, I will do.  The text of – the text of the 
email says: 
“buyer please update this sheet every day in this 
format, thanks Ashu.” 
And attached a document called Format ACC.xlsx which is 
an 
Excel 
spreadsheet 
and 
that 
is 
attached 
– 
the 
attachment is then provided overleaf. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And so at 718 what do you – or 
first can you describe what you see on 718, 718.1, 718.2, 
718.3, 718.4, 718.5 and explain to the Chair how that 
10 
relates – how the spreadsheet is constructed?   
MR HOLDEN:   So what we have is a spreadsheet that 
includes all of the four offshore enterprises and their 
various banking facilities, so for example you have the 
bank facilities for Global Standard Chartered Bank, their 
account for example, the page 718 lists all the various 
bank accounts that are reflected in the spreadsheet and 
then the spreadsheet starts overleaf and is the much more 
dense and slightly unreadable version provides a running 
telly of transactions through each of those accounts and 
20 
what emerges from the clip I hope I am not jumping forward 
here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no not at all. 
MR HOLDEN:   Is that effectively what Ashu Chawla’s was 
instructing Sanjay Grover to do was on a regular basis to 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 73 of 376 
 
input transactions that were occurring at his direction 
interview spreadsheets that they had a running total of 
transactions and their balances.  The Gupta league show 
that on a relatively regular basis every couple of days a 
new version of this would be sent by Sanjay Grover to 
Ashu Chawla’s with the new set of transactions included. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you take the Chair to 
718.1 and just explain to the Chair what 718.1 is? 
MR HOLDEN:   So what we have at 718.1 is effectively 
eight different accounts all held by Global Corporation 
10 
LLC.   
The description or the nature of the account it is 
described in bold above the individual, each individual 
table and so for example the top left version it says global 
SCBAED which stands for Global Standard Chartered Bank 
Account Denominated Dirham and if you look below that it 
will be Global Standard Chartered Banks, Global Standard 
Chartered Bank Accent Denominated in dollars and you can 
see there are dates reflecting the opening balances at 
those dates and that is repeated across the different tables 
20 
for the different banks at which account are  held.   
So 
the 
second 
column 
over 
is 
Global’s 
bank 
accounts both in Dollars and Dirham with the National Bank 
of Abu Dhabi.  The third column is Global’s account held 
with Mashreq Bank Dirham in US Dollars and the fourth 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 74 of 376 
 
column is Global’s bank of Baroda account also held in Us 
Dollars and Dirham and just to clarify Chair these are our 
accounts held in Dubai in relation to the offshore entities. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then 718.2? 
MR HOLDEN:   7 point, we have here Chair effectively the 
same arrangement, here we have three different banks that 
were being used by Fidelity, Standard Chartered Bank, the 
Bank of Baroda and Mashreq and again providing a 
tabulation of the Us dollar and Dirham account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And 718.3? 
10 
MR HOLDEN:   Is effectively the same process applied to 
Gateway Limited again the banks reflected here are 
Standard Chartered Bank, the Bank of Baroda, the Mashreq 
Bank both in Dirham and dollars. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   718.4? 
MR HOLDEN:   Is the same procedure applied to Accurate 
Investments here the difference is though there is only two 
banks, it is the Bank of Baroda with Us dollar and Dirham 
amounts and the Mashreq Bank, Us dollar and Dirham 
amount.  
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And 718.5? 
MR HOLDEN:   7 point this is a catch in hand tabulation 
which is updated throughout which is, as you will see when 
we go through some of the visualisation at times as a 
means of breaking an electronic record of fund flows cash 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 75 of 376 
 
is taken out in hand or received from different people and 
it is recorded in this particular spreadsheet. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And, this spreadsheet will 
become more important when we deal with Transnet.  We 
not going to deal with it too much today but will you briefly 
describe to the Chair what actually happens on a sort of 
weekly basis thereafter well not exactly weekly basis but 
on a regular basis thereafter? 
MR HOLDEN:   On a regular basis thereafter Sanjay 
Grover inserts the transactions that have occurred since 
10 
the last spreadsheet was shared with Ashu Chawla and 
then sends that updated spreadsheet to Ashu Chawla 
which allows us overtime as we will show with the Transnet 
discussion to track all movements into and out of these 
accounts between February 2014 when this accounting 
system was started and the end of 2014 when our Gupta 
Leaks’s records goes silent. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  So that is the first 
set of sources that you are using for the offshore sources, 
then you refer to go back to page 42.  You describe at 
20 
paragraph 47 you talk about a separate set of documents 
relating to Gupta Enterprise well sorry, I can understand 
that 
these 
documents 
relate 
specifically 
to 
accurate 
investments and what we now going to do is look at each 
one of these four offshore companies and documents 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 76 of 376 
 
specifically relating to each one of those companies 
evidencing control from within the Gupta Enterprise and 
the first set relates Accurate Investments at UAE 2.  Can I 
ask you to go to UAE 2 at page 719 and briefly take the 
Chair through what you have in the UAE 2 bundle? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  Chair we have an email that is 
sent from Ashu Chawla from his Sahara address on the 13 t h 
of October 2012 it is sent to Asha Kanarihum and the 
subject is forward Accurate Investments Limited and it 
provides 
details 
of 
Accurate 
Investments 
registration 
10 
number and address and phone number plus also the 
address for Sanjay Grover presumably Ashu Chawla sent 
this to Asha Kanarihum for him to be able to compile 
documents that made reference to Accurate Investments 
and refer to the correct details. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then down the page at 721? 
MR HOLDEN:   721,we have an email that is sent from 
Sanjay 
Grover ’s 
Hotmail 
account 
at 
sanjay.grover@hotmail.com. It is sent on the 27 t h February 
2014 and it was sent to Ashu Chawla and to a separate 
20 
account that was operated by Sanjay Grover and the 
subject is Linkway and the text of the message is 
effectively it is a confirmation of payment that is provided 
by Mashreq Bank that shows that Accurate Investments has 
made a payment to Linkway Trading.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 77 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then over the page we get to 
UA3 the deals with Fidelity and can you briefly tell the 
Chair what the UA3 had deals with? 
MR HOLDEN:   UA3 refers to a correspondence in which, 
wait let me start from the top actually Chair.  This is an 
email that was sent for Ashu Chawla to Sanjay Grover on 
the 25 t h of July 2014 with the subject forward aircraft 
purchase agreement and it has an attachment who is that 
said aircraft purchase agreement.   
The 
substance 
he Ashu 
Chawla 
direct 
Sanjay 
10 
Grover to please. Sanjay Grover apologies to please sign 
these attached documents and send them back to Ashu 
Chawla and the documents are a purchased agreement 
between 
Fidelity 
Enterprises 
and 
Green 
Link 
Capital 
Corporation to purchase as far as I can recall it the 
helicopter. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And maybe if you could go all 
the way down to 726 were it comes a bit clearer, the foot of 
the page. 
MR HOLDEN:   Here we have the attachment to that email, 
20 
and this is – you could see at 731 Sanjay Grover has 
actually signed it and return it to Ashu Chawla.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh sorry I am talking at page 
726. 
MR HOLDEN:   Oh apologies.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 78 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Foot of 726 and then go down to 
727. 
MR HOLDEN:   Apologies, so we have here an email from 
Ashu 
Chawla 
his 
Gmail 
account 
which 
is 
asherc111@gmail.com,he effectively sending it to himself 
that is Ashu Chawla Sahara address he is – it is sent on 
the 19 t h of June 2014.  The subject is Ford LOI signed by 
seller.  LOI is letter of intent and it includes a pdf file 
which is reproduced over leaf, the substance of this is 
to...[intervene] 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   May we go down to the bottom of 
that page where there is the forwarded email from the, 
Rouhitma Massa email 1:32pm.  
MR HOLDEN:   What we see here is an email from Rhahid 
Matar at Heritage Aviation and Heritage Aviation has been 
known from the Gupta Leaks and media reporting was the 
entity that the Gupta Enterprise created or was trying to 
establish in India to move into a rental market for 
helicopters.  It is sent on the night, at the 18 t h of June 
2014.  It is sent to a number of different people including 
20 
Ashu Chawla and Steve Girlinger who is a, Steve Girlinger 
is a, well better to describe him as a sales agent on behalf 
of this particular transaction. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the text to the email? 
MR HOLDEN:   The text of the email says: 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 79 of 376 
 
“Dear Mr Steve.” 
So this is addressed to Steve Girlinger. 
“Please find attached a fresh letter of intent the 
name of new company.  Please get it signed from 
seller, please also get the revised transfer advice 
from the Escrow agent the money will be transferred 
tomorrow morning, until then please get the revised, 
signed by the seller and resend to us.” 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then finally over the page 
on UAE3 page 727 we see who the new sellers is. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:   So this is the signed agreement which is 
the seller is Green Link Capital Corporation.  It is signed 
on the 6 t h of June 2014 and it is signed by overleaf on 
page 731 by Sanjay Grover who list himself as a director of 
Fidelity Enterprises on the 18 t h of June 2014. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  Can we then turn to 
the Gateway bundle which deals with, sorry the bundle 
dealing with Gateway the third of the four companies at 
page 750 UAE 4? 
MR HOLDEN:   750? 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   750, and briefly tell the Chair 
what you have attached as UAE 4.  
MR HOLDEN:   At UAE 4 page 1 we have an email that is 
sent 
from 
Ashu 
Chawla’s 
Sahara’s 
address 
ashrasahara.co.za sent on the 2 n d of July 2012.  It is sent 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 80 of 376 
 
to Sanjay Grover and the subject is regarding US dollar 
Gateway 
bank 
detail 
with 
Iban 
and 
Ashu 
Chawla 
responding on this email he says: 
“Thanks.” 
He is responding to an earlier email that is sent on the 
same day by Sanjay Grover to Ashu Chawla in which Ashu 
Chawla is been given the bank details for Gateway Limited 
Standard Chartered Bank accounts that are foreign, so a 
transfer can be made to accounts. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you and if you go lower 
10 
down on 751, UAE 4 it is the email from Grover to Ashu on 
September 17 t h 2012 at 2:41pm. 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly Chair, this an email from Sanjay 
Grover ’s Hotmail account to Ashu Chawla and Sanjay’s 
Grover separate email account with the subject Gateway 
Limited.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it 751 Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR HOLDEN:   It is the second email. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh yes, no alright I think I was looking 
at the one at the top, okay alright, yes, thank you. 
MR HOLDEN:   And this says Sanjay Grover is indicating to 
Ashu Chawla.  It says: 
“Please note the details for agreement as below.” 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 81 of 376 
 
With the office address and it gives their office address 
and registration number for Gateway Limited and Sanjay 
Grover ’s P.O. box address to receive documents. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then finally the Global 
Corporation bundle which is UAE 5 starting from 777.  
Maybe start on 778 which indicates sort off measure of how 
the system work. The email from Narajan to Ashu, Friday 
November 4, 20:11 the second email in the string. 
MR HOLDEN:   So, Chair at UAE 5 page 2, the second 
email…[intervene] 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, it is page 778 of the bundle. 
MR HOLDEN:   Sorry page 778, I was just reading the red 
number.  It is an email sent from Ashrif Marianter to Ashu 
Chawla with the subject line agreement with Global sent on 
the 4 t h of November 2011 and he says: 
“Ashubay 
enclosed 
please 
find 
the 
completed 
agreement, please forward to Sanjay G.” 
Which I assume is Sanjay Grover. 
“For his signature.  Please ask him to put his email 
ID and his full name on page 17, Annexure A.  Once 
20 
you receive the mail back from him please forward 
to me as well best regards Ashrik.” 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can we then go back to the main 
body of your statement, where you describe what that 
subcontracting agreement was at page 49 paragraph 85. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 82 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, should I read it or.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no if you can just explain to 
the Chair what that subcontracting agreement was and 
maybe what we need to do overnight is to bring the 
subcontracting a copy of the subcontracting agreement as 
well. 
MR HOLDEN:   So Chair the subcontracting agreement was 
a subcontracting agreement that was to be entered into 
between Global Corporation LLC and Newlani Unalani 
Management Services with a CIPC registration number 
10 
2008/020998/07 
the 
agreement 
envisaged 
that 
Global 
Corporation would for a fee of R10million provide certain 
services to Newlani Management Services and Unalani 
Management Services at that time was anticipated to be 
the service provider for the project in the Free State known 
as the City of Tomorrow. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then it gets to the second 
set of banking records offshore that we see and these are 
what you call the UAE ledgers.  Can I ask you to page 53 
and will you describe to the Chair or will you explain to the 
20 
Chair what these UAE ledgers are? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  Chair we discovered in the 
Gupta Leaks relatively frequent updates of what was 
happening in the offshore accounts which were being sent 
by sent by Sanjay Grover to Ashu Chawla’s and of 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 83 of 376 
 
particular importance here, was a document that was 
appended to an email to Sherech Totajo who I describe 
earlier and employee of the Gupta Enterprise abroad in 
India and it is sent to Tony Gupta’s, Rajesh Gupta’s Sahara 
email address Tony@sahara.co.za.  It is sent…[intervene]     
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I just stop you there if you 
go to page 370 can you identify that as to which you are 
referring and it is Ledge 31A at page 370.  
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct so Ledge 1A at page 370 is 
the email Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me get there please, thank you, yes.  
MR HOLDEN:   And in the email Sherech to Jojo from his 
Gmail account FKtajojo@gmail.com sends and email to 
Tony Gupta on the 30 t h of April 2013 with the subject 
forward visit observations and he attaches a document by 
the name of bank summary 2014 which is an excel 
spreadsheet and he says: 
“Respected Sir, 
Please find below the email sent to Ashu G for 2014 
with regards to Resto Tajay.” 
20 
And the substance of the correspondence that falls there 
under is correspondence between Ashu Chawla and Toteje 
in which they are consolidating and correcting certain 
errors in a ledger and once those errors have been 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 84 of 376 
 
corrected they are being sent on to Tony Gupta for his 
information.       
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you then go up to page 
340 and identify the document that you see there? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, Chair this was the document 
that I attached as Ledge 1.1 to the report.  This is the first 
page of the excel spreadsheet that was attached which we 
refer to as the UAE Ledgers.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you briefly describe to 
the Chair how the spreadsheet operates, how the ledger 
10 
works? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely should I do it on the screen or 
should I carry on with the hardcopy? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair we in your hands I do not 
know if the copies in front of you are sufficiently clear.  
CHAIRPERSON:   At page 340? 
MR HOLDEN:   At 340 and then 341. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, 340, 341 are quite clear.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And 342 and all the way down 
to…[intervene] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   341, 342…[intervene] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We have had major difficulties 
Ledge 1.2 which starts at page 345.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, 341, 342,343 are fine 344 is fine, 
345 is not so bad.    
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 85 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay 345 is as bad as it gets so 
we can continue.  So if you can then take the Chair 
through this ledger that was attached to that email to Tony 
Gupta and explain how it operates.   
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, so what we have on page 342 
which is overleaf we have a recordable of different cash in 
hand transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay did you say 342? 
MR HOLDEN:   Correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think go back to 340 which is 
10 
Ledge 1.1.  
MR HOLDEN:   So at 340 and 341 what we have is a 
summary of all the transaction that have occurred against 
particular names.  So if I was going to give one example on 
page 340 you will see an entry for Estina Pty Ltd an 
against that amount is a Us dollar amount of 8million 348 
thousand 700dollars and that is to be read to mean that 
Destine Pty Ltd has over the period of this ledge paid in 
that amount into this collected Gupta Enterprise offshore 
banking system. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
And 
maybe 
by 
way 
of 
comparison if we can look at the entries a little higher up 
in respect of Browns Sandton City.  I do not know if you 
know what Browns Sandton City is.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 86 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, Browns Sandton City is a jeweller and 
what we have, we have two entries for Browns Sandton 
City – I should point out that Sandton City is misspelt I 
have it here as Suntan City.  What you see to the right of 
those entries is 230thousand 991.34 Dirham and because 
that is enclosed in brackets we know that that is a payment 
out of these accounts.  So that effectively means that 
Browns Sandton City has been paid that number of Dirham 
from these consolidated offshore ledger accounts.  We will 
probably get to this at a later stage but the next to Browns 
10 
Sandton City at the top it says 600thousand by checking 
the reserve back records we were able to confirm that the 
Dirham amount of 230 thousand was roughly equivalent to 
600 thousand rand.      
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So that is ledger 1.1 which runs 
over the page to 341 and we have already mentioned the 
Bargofield shares that we saw there being paid out on this 
ledger. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can we then go to the 342 and 
20 
can you explain what 342 is? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly 342 is a recordal of expenses in 
cash that are being transmitted of the Gupta Enterprise 
accounts to a variety of different entities.  Maybe I am 
jumping ahead here but one of the entities for example on 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 87 of 376 
 
the 24 t h of September 2013 in the second box gives Nadi X 
an amount and that is how we ascertained that that was 
most likely Hawala transaction because there is quite a 
famous 
Hawala 
exchange 
network 
called 
the 
Nadi 
Exchange.     
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Before you said these are 
payments in cash.  Can you just look at the first box at the 
top of the page?  
MR HOLDEN:   Yes sorry those are receipts that have been 
recurred in cash and the box below are payments out.   
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And are there any entries that 
you would want to flag now in relation to receipts? 
MR HOLDEN:   There are, oh there are one particular one 
which is of interest is the first three entries are for JJ T or 
alternatively JJT direct in bank.  JJT was short for JJ 
trading, JJ Trading is an entity that ultimately is controlled 
by an Indian group of companies by the names of World 
windows Network but most importantly was the entity that 
signed various agreements with China South Rail, China 
North Rail and others to receive a percentage of a 
20 
locomotive contracts from Transnet.        
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And this…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry that third one the directing 
bank is not part of the name that still just stays JT 
directing ban is on its, just explain something?  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 88 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   I think so yes I think that is a sort of a 
short hand account of what then actually happened with 
the cash.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If we go down to the next part of 
the ledger which starts at page 344. Are you able to cast 
any light on this I must confess I have never been able to?  
MR HOLDEN:   I have always understood it to mean that 
the – this is a range of different expenses or amounts paid 
out – I think we may be missing a top line here because 
10 
this is actually separated into two columns.  One says 
received and once says sent.  So on the left hand side 
which I am sure we will be able to organise a better printed 
version.  But on the left it is amounts received and a 
description of where they come from and on the right side 
is amounts paid out.          
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then ledger 1.2 that starts 
on 345, first is that ledger a different spreadsheet or part 
of the same spreadsheet attached to that email to Tony 
Gupta? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   It is the same spreadsheet.  I think I maybe 
got a little bit confused to be honest.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   In what way? 
MR HOLDEN:   So bank summary – the ledger we now is 
the email that was attached, that we described previously.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 89 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The Tony Gupta email.  
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely this is the ledger we have just 
looked at now is actually an earlier email.    
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well that we need to correct.  
MR HOLDEN:   Yes.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So I think we need to clarify that 
after the lunch break.  
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But the – so ledger 1.2 is the 
ledger attached to the email to Tony Gupta?  
10 
MR HOLDEN:   That’s is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay so that once can you 
describe it?  
MR HOLDEN:   So if I may just describe the sequence of 
these two ledgers and why attached ledger 1.1 is mainly 
for completeness sake but it was an earlier version of the 
accounting ledgers that were used and as you can see 
there they are quite difficult to read and understand and 
then they were replaced by  new set of ledgers which are 
substantially easier to read and more fulsome in terms of 
20 
what there include and what we have across this ledger is 
if you look on page 345 on the left hand side, I know it is 
very small, you will have the columns names company and 
if you read down that column you will see it is different 
entries for Global Fidelity, Gateway and Accurate as well.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 90 of 376 
 
To the right of that you have a date column which indicates 
the date of the transaction and then it gives you a 
particulars description over there which will then describe 
the nature of the transaction and the direction of the 
money flows.  So I might choose an example which would 
be easier to follow or what I should say is next to the 
particulars we have eight columns, we have a rate figure 
which is the rate of Dirham, Dollar exchanges at a 
particular time and then we have a cash entry figure but 
actually this is irrelevant to this particular sheet because 
10 
this ledger is actually a separate cash sheet as well and 
then you have the very top heading there is AED which is 
Dirham and then it provides all the various bank accounts.  
So Standard Chartered Bank is the first one, Bank of 
Baroda, National Bank of Abu Dhabi and then Mashreq 
Bank and then a total on the – is used by them to where an 
amount is in Dirham they translate it into dollars.  And then 
to the right of that is a heading USD and again it gives 
Standard Charter Bank, Bank of Baroda and National Bank of 
Abu Dhabi and Mashreq bank accounts so these all of the 
20 
account in US Dollars with the different banks.  And then 
there is a Euro figure to the right which is just for Standard 
Charter Bank and then total running tally to the right hand 
side which provides a total of the transaction if it is in – if it 
is more than one implicated in that particular transaction. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 91 of 376 
 
 
The way in which this operates and maybe I should 
give a good example.  So if we look at the second entry from 
the top we have – on the left hand side the company is 
indicated as Global.  The date is given as 20/03/2013 so the 
20 March 2013 and the particulars is FEL and we now know 
from looking at this document that FEL stood for Fidelity 
Enterprises.  And if you scan over to the right you can see 
that there is an amount of $60 000 from the Standard 
Charter Bank account in brackets which means that $60 000 
was transferred from Global Corporations US denominated 
10 
account at Standard Chartered Bank to Fidelity and because 
this is a double entry ledger you will see on the entry below 
is Fidelity and Fidelity records the same date it records 
particulars Global Corporation so we know that they had 
received funds from Global Corporation and if you scan over 
to the right you see under the US Dollar figure the exact 
amount as a positive integer of 60 000.  So we [00::01:50] 
together we can see that $60 000 has been transferred from 
Global Corporation, Standard Chartered Bank account in US 
Dollars to Fidelity’s Standard Chartered Bank in US Dollars. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Holden you lost me on 
Fidelity.  Can you start on the one relating to Fidelity just 
indicate which line I was trying to locate it here? 
MR HOLDEN:  Okay should I start from the beginning Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 92 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:  Okay.  So – at the top left you see the entry 
Company. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  This may be a useful time to use 
the screen because you can then highlight the columns that 
you…his may be a useful time to use the screen because 
you can then highlight the columns that you… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:  What we have – apologies Chair.  We have 
now on screen I will be zooming in very shortly.  Just to give 
you a sense of how the spread sheet works.  On the – I will 
10 
zoom in here so you can see it a bit better.  But on the – you 
have different sheets describing different transactions. Over 
here is the summary sheet which we have already discussed.  
Here is a cash sheet we discussed as transactions.  And 
then we have a consolidated sheet which has everything but 
the cash transactions and then for some reason that is 
replicated in the all spread sheet over here – so the sheet – 
and I will focus on that.   
 
So what we have for example so as I mentioned 
before you have the Dirham amount up here – the Dirham 
20 
column and you have a USD column up here and the Euro 
column and beneath that are these... 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry Mr Holden you have been 
working with this stuff every day for two years – opposed to 
us who have come a bit more recently.  You can go a little bit 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 93 of 376 
 
slower.   
MR HOLDEN:  Apologies. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And maybe open – yes open up the 
columns. 
MR HOLDEN:  Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So that the date becomes visible 
again once we zoom. 
MR HOLDEN:  So what we are looking at here is – I am 
afraid it is a little bit small on the screen but the sheet name 
is All which is a recordal of all the transactions on – in this 
10 
ledger beginning from the 1 March – as you can see here is 
the date – for all of the four companies within the ledger.   
 
So to give you … 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And can I just make a suggestion?  
Can you scroll – zoom out a little bit and show the division 
between the Dirham side and the Dollar side. 
MR HOLDEN:  Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  To start. 
MR HOLDEN:  So what we have here is the Dirham side – 
the AED side over here.  And underneath that you have the 
20 
banks and I will just zoom in if that is okay so we can see 
the individual banks. 
 
So here we have AED and then SCB stands for 
Standard Chartered Bank, BOB stands for Bank of Barodo, 
NBAD stands for the National Bank of Abu Dhabi and MB 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 94 of 376 
 
stands for Mashreq Bank.   
 
So what we can see from these columns these 
columns record so if we had to look at this column for 
example here that I am highlighting column F what is shows 
is all transactions taking place in Dirham denominated 
accounts at Standard Chartered Bank and then we can 
determine which company is running that account by having 
a look across to the left. So if we have – let me give you a 
different example which would be a bit easier to see. 
 
So we have here on the left hand side we have the 
10 
company Global.  So Global is involved in this transaction. 
And it gives that is this here Global is highlighted here.  On 
the 19 March 2013 there is an account – there is a 
transaction involving Sahara.  So we know looking at these 
three columns that there are some funds flow between 
Global and Sahara.  We then scroll to the right to establish 
what the nature of that funds flow was and what we can see 
here we finally hit an entry here and I should point out there 
is never more than one entry per line. 
 
And what we have we can see here is this is under 
20 
the 
US 
Dollar 
column 
which 
you 
can 
see 
up 
here.  
Underneath that you can see Standard Chartered Bank and it 
is an amount of 140 029.87.  So that means that Sahara paid 
$140 029.87 to Global on the 19 March and this is effectively 
how the spread sheet runs throughout. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 95 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Now you are dealing there with a 
transaction between one of the four companies in Dubai 
namely Global and a company – and a company other than 
those four.  So in respect of those transactions you will just 
see one entry reflected on the spread sheet. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can you now go to a transaction 
between two of those companies because it will appear 
twice. 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Once in mirror images of itself. 
MR HOLDEN:  So what we have I am highlighting here Chair 
is at row 16 we have the company Global. So that is – and 
then the date is 20 March 2013 and on the right here we 
have FEL which is short for Fidelity and we can see if we 
scroll across … 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry before you leave FEL can 
you just give Fidelity’s full names because those are the 
initials of Fidelity? 
MR HOLDEN:  Yes it is Fidelity Enterprise Limited so that is 
20 
what FEL stands for. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:  And then if we go across to the right here we 
see an amount under the US Dollar column for Standard 
Chartered Bank of [60 000] just over there Chair if you can 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 96 of 376 
 
it.  And what we know that to mean is that Global paid to 
Fidelity $60 000 from Global Standard Chartered Bank 
account that is denominated in US Dollars and then we will 
see a matching transaction involving Fidelity which occurs 
on the following line.  So on the same date it records Fidelity 
on the left hand side the 20 March 2013 Global Corporation 
LLC because Global is the party that has paid Fidelity in the 
line of both and if you scroll to the right here you see 
$60 000 as a positive integer which means this is recording 
the receipt of $60 000 into Fidelity’s Standard Chartered 
10 
Bank US Dollar account and as you can see here which I 
might just zoom in so it is a little bit easier to see – these 
two cells here they correspond – they match up so it is a 
double entry ledger.  So you can see the top one is the 
payment out and the payment in between the two accounts. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Mr Holden.  Can I – can 
I ask – I mean we will go into some detail in relation to 
individual transactions later when we are looking at the 
precise flows from Estina funds.  Can I ask you is there 
anything else in relation to this ledger that you would want to 
20 
draw to the attention of the Chair on a general basis? 
MR HOLDEN:  There is quite a number of different things.  
The one thing I should mention is – and you will see it on – if 
we were to turn to the fund page summary sheet which is at 
4 – at 340 of the bundle Chair.  It makes for very interesting 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 97 of 376 
 
reading the entities that are paying into and out of these four 
companies the Gupta Enterprise companies and for our 
purposes I would like to highlight a couple just to flag them 
for your own interest. 
 
The first obviously is the Estina Limited amount 
which gets paid $8.248 million and I think you have every 
right to ask why Estin Limited is paying this amount of 
money to an offshore company.   
Below that is an entity by the name Flamingo 
International which is – which pays in $100 000 an Flamingo 
10 
International is a duty free entity.   
We also have Unova Manager in Gauteng which I 
understand from my evidence leader he may be leading 
separate evidence on a certain point. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That may well be do you know who 
controls Unova Management? 
MR HOLDEN:  I am actually not sure off the top of my head 
okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And I will not put words in your 
mouth. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:  Okay.  Below that is JJ Trading which we can 
see is a quite large amount of money coming in $1.372 
million being paid into this account and then the final one if I 
may is to indicate – actually there are three more if I may? 
 
There is entry called… 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 98 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry, sorry can you go back to JJ 
Trading because there are in fact two separate amounts 
there? 
MR HOLDEN:  Yes there seems to be a mistake in the ledger 
entry.  The – the sum total on the left has to be wrong 
because what we can see is – it gives a sum equivalent of 
AD on the far right hand side which is 5 million Dirham which 
is 1.372 million multiplied by the Dirham foreign exchange 
rate. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Is that clear?  It is not the sum of 
10 
the Dirham’s and the dollars exchanged?  Maybe we can 
come back to this.   
MR HOLDEN:  Actually you are right there.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So the – the total columns that say 
AED and USD. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct.  Apologies  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Relate to separate cumulative 
transactions. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct.  So we have 1.267 million 
Dirham plus $1.372 million coming into the account and that 
20 
is equivalent in total to 5.049.  Thank you for correcting me. 
 
Below that I would also like to highlight Lieber 
against which there is an amount of $1.117 006.00 so it is 
$1.117 million and as we will discuss in relation to the 
Transnet contracts Lieber received crane contracts from 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 99 of 376 
 
Transnet and was making payments through to a Gupta 
Enterprise Companies at the same time. 
 
And then two more entries if I may?  Below that is 
Linkway Trading which indicates $3.932 million and it is 
obviously showing that $3.932 million is being paid from 
these Gupta accounts into Linkway Trading in South Africa 
and then the final one I would like to mention is Oakbay 
Investments which is on the following page on 341 against 
which there is a figure recorded of $4 million in brackets 
which shows that from these Gupta Enterprises accounts 
10 
formally and it was paid to Oakbay Investments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So those companies you wanted to 
highlight are Estina, Flamingo, Unova, JJ Trading, Lieber, 
Linkway and Oakbay? 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Mr Holden.  I am just 
trying to see where we are in terms of our offshore sources.  
We are going to leave these ledgers now but Chair just to 
under – for future reference in relation to Ledger 1.2 which is 
20 
the total ledger – the All button or tab that Mr Holden 
showed us a short while ago. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which starts at page 345? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 100 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Because it runs for several pages 
the pages that follow do not have the column headings on 
them and it may be a useful exercise now or maybe we could 
do it at the break that we could actually just write in – you 
will see the column headings on page 345.  It is the same 
column headings all the way through to page 347. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And then we see them again on 
page 348 but not on page 349, 350, 351, 352, 353 and it may 
be – I think during the adjournment if that is alright we will – 
10 
annotate your copy? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  With those column headings 
because we are going to come to a lot of these individual 
entries later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think that will be helpful. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can I – these ledgers are 
documents that we find on the Gupta Leaks.  You have done 
a corroboration exercise in relation to these ledgers.  Can 
you explain to the Chair what you have done to check that 
20 
the 
entries 
on 
the 
ledgers 
correspond 
– 
can 
be 
independently verified? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  Chair we work from a number of 
different sources.  One of the sources is the Reserve Bank 
currency flow analysis which allows us to confirm the fund 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 101 of 376 
 
flows between the Gupta Enterprise companies and South 
African entities that are reflected in the ledger.  
 
We can also check against … 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry slow down there.   So there 
are cross-border records from the Reserve Bank in relation 
to individual – any individual entity that transfers money into 
South Africa from offshore or received money offshore from 
South Africa those records are kept at the Reserve Bank?  
And 
so 
you 
have 
used those records to 
corroborate 
transactions on these ledgers.  So where the ledger refers 
10 
for instance we saw a – an amount earlier where Global paid 
4 million – I think it was Global or we saw an aggregate 
amount of 4 million going into Oakbay from those Dubai 
companies.  Would you be able to trace a Reserve Bank 
cross-border transaction record that matches that? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  Well we will see and we will come 
to that when we look through the visualisations.  The 
Reserve Bank conducts its searches against the company 
names of Gateway Limited Global Corporation and we are 
able to trace from that the payments that are made into 
20 
Oakbay Investments.  It is a payment of $3.1 million and 
then a separate payment of $900 000.00 which are both 
reflected in the Dubai ledgers – the UAE ledgers apologies 
and are also reflected in the Reserve Bank transfer of funds. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 102 of 376 
 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
So 
that 
is 
one 
source 
of 
corroboration 
using 
the 
Reserve 
Bank 
cross-border 
transaction records.  Can you give us another source of 
corroboration? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So in the instances where 
transactions are taking place between South Africa and one 
of the offshore entities they would also be reflected in the 
counterparts of South African Bank Statements. 
 
So for example when Estina makes a transfer out to 
Gateway Limited which is matched by the Reserve Bank it 
10 
also reflects on Estina’s bank statement as well which gives 
us an additional corroboration of that transaction. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 And 
any 
other 
sources 
of 
corroboration? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  The commission provided me with 
access to a number of bank statements for certain of the 
entities abroad.  One of those bank statements was for 
Gateway Limited at Standard Chartered Bank which was 
attached as far as I understand to an internal compliance 
discussion about whether Standard Chartered Bank should 
20 
be maintaining their accounts or not. 
 
But that included a series… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry if I can just correct you 
there. That is a – those accounts were furnished to the 
commission by the NPA who has received them pursuant to a 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 103 of 376 
 
mutual legal assistance request.  And maybe if I can take 
you to those accounts.  I will have to find them.  If you go to 
598.  Those are the records that furnished to the commission 
from the NPA pursuant to – from the UAE authorities in 
relation to Gateway and the transaction records come at the 
end of that bundle.  So if you – if you go all the way down to 
621 one starts getting transaction records.  And the actual 
bank statements themselves are annexure T from page 624. 
MR HOLDEN:  So if we look if I may at page 624. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  One good example of something we were 
speaking about earlier is payment for example to Browns 
Sandton City made on the 3 December 2013 which is the last 
– the second to last entry on page 624 which then is 
corroborated against the same entry in the ledgers which 
reflected a R50 000.00 payments to Browns Sandton City. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can we – you have in fact if we go 
to page 57 I think it is prepared a table setting out the 
transactions which on a selection of transactions on those 
ledgers 
that 
you 
have 
been 
able 
to 
corroborate 
20 
independently.  And can you just briefly explain to the Chair 
how this table works? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  So Chair we have on the left 
hand side we have the date that is recorded in the ledgers 
and the amount that is recorded in the ledgers.  And then 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 104 of 376 
 
extrapolated from the ledgers we understand who the payee 
is and who the beneficiary is.  So I – those four first four 
columns are drawn from the ledgers and then the verification 
the corroboration is provided by the documents to the right 
there.  So for the first entry for example we are able to 
confirm that amount of money is paid by Sahara to Global 
Corporation by looking at the Reserve Bank data for Global 
Corporation. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if you look at the second line 
there is in fact an additional source of corroboratory material 
10 
that you have not mentioned yet. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct.  What the commission has 
also provided me with is HSBC Dubai bank statements for JJ 
Trading. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry if I might just clarify they are 
not bank statements they are HSBC’s transaction records.  
So they are not in the form of a statement they are in the 
form of a transaction record which HSBC has confirmed is an 
accurate set of transaction records. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct.  So against that were able to 
20 
confirm the payments from JJT Trading to Global Corporation 
and this is something that we have never been able to do 
before Chair which is very useful.  We have known that this 
transaction has taken place according to the ledgers but 
because none of – this transaction – the second transaction 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 105 of 376 
 
here involving JJ Trading and Global Corporation took place 
offshore we never had any means of corroborating that but 
by the commission securing those transaction records we are 
now able to corroborate the fluidity of that as well. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Chair obviously at the time that Mr 
Holden prepared this table like the previous table he did not 
have paginated references to the bundle but what I have – 
would suggest is that again we develop a – an enriched 
version of this table which will give two references.  One the 
reference to the ledger on the left hand side in terms of the 
10 
bundle reference and two the corresponding reference to the 
independent corroborating material on the right hand side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  We have reached one o’clock it 
has been a very dense morning Chair.  We should take the 
break. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is necessary it has got to be done 
and it is very important information so – so – alright let us 
take the lunch break we will resume at two o’clock.  We 
adjourn. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES    
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair.  We were 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 106 of 376 
 
dealing with the corroboration exercise that Mr Holden has 
done to confirm the authenticity...   
 
Well, the correctness of these letters with independent 
evidence.  I am not going to ask him to say more about that 
because we will produce a referenced, a cross-referenced 
annexure for you Chair on that. 
 
And of course, when we come to look at individual 
money flows from the Estina deposits in the process, we will 
see that they appear both on the – by ledge side and on the 
domestic side when they involve cross-border transactions.   
10 
 
What I want now to do before we...  But before we...  
Joh, if we call talk like laundering strategies as well.  As – 
before we leave the ledgers, I just want...  Mr Holden, can 
you go to Annexure A, page 113?   
CHAIRPERSON:   On the same bundle we were using before 
lunch? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is correct, Chair.  And this is 
a document where I think we may need the screen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Because 
this 
is 
probably 
20 
the...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you said it is 188, the page? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   114. 
CHAIRPERSON:   114. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Annexure A. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 107 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, 113.  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It runs over.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And Mr Holden ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson, I was going to say, if it – 
if it is possible.  I would prefer a screen that is closer.  I do 
not know if it is possible to have one there.  You know, we 
sometimes we have had it here but that is when there are no 
10 
witness there.  Closer, if it is possible.  Whether it is this 
side or that side, it does not matter.  Maybe from tomorrow if 
that is particularly possible but if it is not it is okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We will certainly explore this after 
the session. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So if it is possible, we will do it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Holden, can you explain to the 
Chair what Annexure A is? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  Chair, Annexure A is a document 
that I created.  The way I created it, was to take all these 
transactions that appear on the ledgers for the consolidated 
spreadsheet and to bring them into a new spreadsheet. 
 
And the reason I have done this is because, we then be 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 108 of 376 
 
able to show relatively clearly that the funds that were 
ultimately paid back to South Africa or outwards to other 
recipients, would derived exclusively from monies that were 
paid by Estina. 
 
And the way to achieve that, is to create a running 
balance on those accounts.  So what this spreadsheet does 
and I will draw the Chair’s attention to the screen and I will 
zoom in.  Do not worry.   
 
So what we have on the left-hand side is the company 
that identified, the date and the particulars just as was the 
10 
case in the previous ledgers. 
 
The primary difference is that we have words that says 
Standard Chartered Bank over here, for example.  Then on 
the formula next to it, which generates a running total 
balance in that account.   
 
And that allows us to determine whether the funds that 
are transferred out of that account at any one time, are 
funds or drawn exclusively from one particular transaction. 
 
So if I may and I have done that for every single of the 
bank accounts that are used here and the formula is 
20 
relatively simple.  You can see it up there.  It is just adding 
the two columns together.   
 
I will show you Chair one example.  Probably one of our 
most famous examples. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Holden.  Just so that I can 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 109 of 376 
 
understand whether this applies – will apply all the time.  
Where in this spreadsheet you have got the entity on the 
extreme left column, is that always going to be the company 
that received the money or that paid the money or it might 
change? 
MR HOLDEN:   No, no.  That is great.  It will either receive 
or pay money if the entry is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but is it one or the other or it could 
be one or the either, depending? 
MR HOLDEN:   It could be one or the either, depending on 
10 
whether the accounts reflects a positive or a negative ledger. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   So if it is in brackets, then it means that it is 
a payment out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   And if it is not a bracket, then it is a payment 
in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  It would ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I clarify...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...one of the important distinctions 
between this spreadsheet and the original ledger, which is, 
as I understand it, you have made two significant changes.  
You have taken the information on the original letter and you 
made two significant changes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 110 of 376 
 
 
The first is.  You have organised it, not just by – not by 
date as the original letter is, but by company by date.  So 
there is a discreet set of transactions by Gateway and then 
Accurate...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...and then Fidelity and Global. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And that enables you then to do 
your running balance because a running balance by company 
because you are looking at one company, not intermingled 
10 
four companies, you can then create a running balance for 
that company. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay now, what I was looking at is.  At 
some stage the money would have come from Estina to some 
entity and from that entity to another entity.  Blah-blah-blah.  
By the time you reach a particular – maybe the end – the 
money might have gone through various entities.   
 
So when I look at that, do I – how do I see that in this 
particular case, Gateway received the money or paid the 
20 
money to somebody else?   
 
Received it from Estina and then paid it to somebody 
else or what the position is.  Is there anything on the 
spreadsheet that should tell me that? 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, Chairman.  So to use this example.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 111 of 376 
 
What we can see here is, obviously, the company on the left 
that is involved in the transaction is Gateway on the 
5t h of September and the particulars are Estina. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We have lost it but we found you 
again on the screen. 
MR HOLDEN:   Okay.  And if you were to scroll to the right, 
you will see a transaction as recorded and you will be able 
to establish whether it is a payment in or a payment out by 
whether it is in bracket or not.  If it is not a bracket, that is a 
payment in. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  So if it is in brackets, it is 
payment out. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  It is a deduction from the 
balance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  But what it shows is, in relation to 
that company that appears on the extreme left. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what it will mean. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if I look at the company on the – or 
20 
entity on the extreme left and I see an amount in brackets, 
then I know that is an amount that was paid by that company 
paying it out. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if it is an amount that is not in 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 112 of 376 
 
brackets, then I know that it is an amount that was received 
by that entity. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  No...  And that principle will 
apply in most of the spreadsheets or not necessarily? 
MR HOLDEN:   It applies in relation to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   This one? 
MR HOLDEN:   ...these ledgers that we are dealing with in 
relation to Estina. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The ledgers.  Ja.  Okay alright.  Okay.  
10 
Maybe 
you 
might 
remember 
as 
we 
deal 
with 
the 
spreadsheets, just remember to explain to me what the 
position is in regard to that, just so that I know who is 
received or who paid out.   
MR HOLDEN:   Okay absolutely.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
MR HOLDEN:   If I was continue with this example.  So we 
can see here, for example, that – so Gateway is the company 
involved, 
Estina 
is 
a 
company 
that 
is 
recorded 
and 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Mr Holden.  Can I ask you 
to slow down.  If you go back because again I think you are 
much quicker than us on that.  So you have got Gateway at 
row 118, column A. 
MR HOLDEN:   Ja. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 113 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Which is the primary Dubai 
company involved in the transaction.  Its counter party is in 
column C which is Estina. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The date is column B, which is the 
5t h of September 2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, that is the kind of explanation I 
needed.  [laughs]   
MR HOLDEN:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And now if we go slowly across, 
we will eventually come to a number.  If it is going to be 
...[intervenes]  
MR HOLDEN:   All the way across, I am afraid. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   All the way across?  Okay.  So 
there is the first transaction.  The only transaction on that 
line.  That number because it has no brackets means that 
just under three million Dollars was paid into the Standard 
Chartered account of Gateway. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   By Estina.  And if we go to the 
right, that means it took the balance of Gateway from just 
over one thousand Dollars.  Sorry, just under 1 943 Dollars 
to 3 1918 Dollars. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 114 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   So now that we know that – to return to the 
example – that Gateway has this amount of money in its 
Standard Chartered bank account, we can then go to the 
following entries to determine what they did with that money. 
 
And I have highlighted one in yellow here because it is 
probably the most famous example.  But if we were to return 
to the spreadsheet, on the four days after the amount was 
paid in by Estina...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay slow down.  We are still in 
10 
the Gateway accounts. 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So that is the primary party. 
MR HOLDEN:   So the primary party is Gateway.  The date is 
the 9t h of September 2013.  That is four days subsequent to 
the date that Estina paid Gateway and the counter party is 
Accurate.  
 
And if we scroll again slowly to the right, we can see 
what actually – we can see that this is in brackets and 
1.4 million Dollars.  So we know that 1.4 million Dollars was 
20 
transferred from Gateway to Accurate.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   And it could have only come from Estina’s 
funds because it was only Estina’s funds that created this 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 115 of 376 
 
working balance from which this transfer could be made.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just repeat that point Mr Holden. 
MR HOLDEN:   So we know that prior to Estina paying in 
money into Standard Chartered bank account, there was only 
a 1 943 Dollars in that account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In Gateway’s account? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   Once Estina made its payment, that 
increased the balance to just over 3 million Dollars. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   Which then gave it the funds to make a 
transfer out to Accurate of 1.4 million Dollars.  Now if we go 
further up the spreadsheet which is a counter party which, 
remember, is Accurate.  What we see here is the same 
transaction but reflected in Accurate’s records.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So now the primary party that we 
are looking at is Accurate? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  So the primary party is 
Accurate.  The date is the 9t h of September.  The counter 
20 
party is Gateway Limited.  And if we scroll across again, we 
see the deposit of 1.4 million Dollars which increases the 
balances to 1.4 – just slightly over 1.4 million.  So prior to 
that transaction we know that the balance in this account, for 
Accurate’s account, was only 4 000 Dollars.  Subsequent to 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 116 of 376 
 
the 1.4 million being paid in, it is now 1.4 million and 4 000 
Dollars.   
 
The following or actually, the following entry rather than 
the following day.  If we return back here, the primary 
partner – the primary company is Accurate also on the same 
day on the 9t h and the counter party now is Linkway which is 
based in South Africa.   
 
And if we scroll over to the right here, we see 1 347 400 
Dollars in brackets, which means that we are able to confirm 
that this amount is paid to Linkway. 
10 
 
And it could have only derived from Estina’s funds 
because the balance was increased by the payment on the 
previous day.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So in fact, there are two sets 
because the balance that came the previous day, came from 
Gateway as we have seen only out of Estina’s funds and it 
increased the balance to 1.404 million which facilitated a 
payment 1.347 million to Linkway.  None of that money would 
have been there without the originally Estina payment that 
we saw at the start of the trial. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Now 
that 
payment 
of 
1.3474(?) million to Linkway in South Africa, what does that 
payment do? 
MR HOLDEN:   Well, there are two transfers in total that are 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 117 of 376 
 
made to Linkway.  Both of those transfers are eventually 
invoiced in the Gupta records [fe-la-quay] as costs that are 
incurred against the wedding in Sun City.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So what we are seeing here is 
1.3474 million Dollars of Free State public funds that goes to 
Estina that then go to Gateway that then go to Accurate that 
then paid for the Sun City wedding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Of course, do the funds – is 
Linkway the last entity to have the money before the money 
issued for the wedding or from Linkway, where does it go 
10 
before – who expends it for the wedding? 
MR HOLDEN:   So I think what should be clarified is that, I 
think there is a bit of misconception about the precise nature 
of this payment.  The important point to bear in mind here is 
that Linkway invoices Accurate for this amount and they 
invoice a total figure of almost exactly R 30 million.   
 
It does not necessarily mean that all of that money was 
spent on the Sun City wedding.  What it did do was to create 
a paper trail through which Linkway could present to its 
auditors who are KPMG saying, this is why we have this 
20 
money coming into account is because Linkway provided 
services on the wedding and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   Actually, if you look at the Linkway account, 
for example, you do not see suddenly a vast numbers of 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 118 of 376 
 
expenses related to the wedding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   Instead, it is disbursed to other Gupta 
enterprise companies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   And we – what we see throughout is that 
whenever the funds return back to South Africa, they are 
then whizzed around the various Gupta enterprise accounts 
in South Africa including(?) with other operating funds that 
they have. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I maybe on this point take 
you to page 118, which is Annexure B? 
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thanks.  And can you identify to 
the Chair what we see at Annexure B? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  This is the rather infamous invoice 
that is drawn up by Linkway Trading and their name is 
indicated at the top and their registration date and their VAT 
number indicated thereafter.   
20 
 
And under the heading Tax Invoice, it gives the name 
Accurate Investment Limited and gives the address of 
Accurate investments in the UAE.  So we know from this that 
Linkway is effectively billing Accurate Investments.  And then 
below that is a serious of charges for specific costs that 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 119 of 376 
 
were incurred by the Sun City Wedding. 
 
The thing, I think, particularly useful to bear in mind is 
that if you would turn to the following page which is 121, you 
will notice that the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Did you say 121? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was I on the right page?  I was on 118 
before...  I though Mr Chaskalson ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You were Chair.  It is not the 
following page, it is the end of the invoice. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Which is after all of these entries. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ja, okay I am at 121 now.   
MR HOLDEN:   And did you see, at the bottom of the invoice, 
it provides the total amount excluding VAT.  The total amount 
including VAT.  And then the total.  And then very neatly, all 
of these wedding expenses magically add up to R 30 million.  
And they very helpfully explain ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And they match...  I am sorry.  They 
match... 
 
I 
thought 
you 
said 
the 
expenses 
matched 
20 
something?  
MR HOLDEN:   So the expenses here are tabulated in order 
to create the impression that Linkway has spent exactly 
R 30 million that Accurate must pay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I wonder if you can take the Chair 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 120 of 376 
 
to where the R 30 million appears. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  On page 121, at the bottom 
right hand corner in the final row, you will see their columns 
there.  The first column is R 260 million.  That is a total 
excluding 
VAT. 
 
Then 
there 
is 
a 
second 
column 
of 
R 3.6 million.  That is the VAT that they charged.  And the 
final column is R 30 million.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes.  Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   I might also usefully point out, that if you go 
slightly higher, the last entry is on that page. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  That R 30 million, is it 
connected with the first R 30 million from Estina or not 
necessarily? 
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Not necessarily.  Okay.  Remember the 
first payment at Estina was R 30 million there.  So I thought 
maybe...  Ja, okay.  Ja, but it is Estina – it is provincial 
government money. 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   As you will see as we do the visualisation, as 
far as I recall, the first payment of one point...  The payment 
I have just described, related to the invoice drawn from the 
first payment that was made to Estina.  Then there is a 
second payment that brings it up to R 30 million and that is 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 121 of 376 
 
drawn from a separate tranche.  But is, all in the end, Free 
State Government money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The, we would eventually get to 
following the money on each payment but...  So one last 
topic that I would like us to address which is the systems of 
money laundering used in this case study.  And for that, can 
I ask you to turn to page 24 of the bundle wherein your 
report you described different techniques used in money 
laundering.   
10 
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you explain to the Chair what 
you are addressing and – in paragraphs 5 and 6 of your 
report? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  Chair, paragraph 5 speaks about 
the primary three principle steps that are involved in money 
laundering and this is defined by the Star(?) Recovery 
Initiative that is run by the World Bank.   
 
The first step is placement and that is literally just 
money being paid into an account from a criminal source.   
20 
 
The second step is layering in which that money is then 
usually then split up into smaller amounts and then put into 
all sorts of different banking and investment vehicles.   
 
And then the final step is integration where those 
resources are then recompiled into a new asset or a new 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 122 of 376 
 
bank – a new banking instrument which then allows it to be 
used in a normal formal economy.   
 
And the idea behind this process is to make the origins 
of the funds as difficult to discern as possible and to provide 
an electronic trial so that if one of these parties is 
approached by a bank or a regulator or a law enforcement 
and say:  Can you explain to me how you received these 
funds?  They can say:  Well, it derives from this loan.  For 
example.   
 
Rather than – there are so many intermediary steps, it 
10 
will be quite hard to find the original criminal amounts.  
Within that, there are sub-categories which I described at 
paragraph 6.   
 
And this in referencing specifically to layering.  And 
there are two primary means of layering that we will focus on 
today.  The first is called round-tripping which I think is 
relatively straightforward.  It sort of implies what it means.   
 
But the – here you have the original criminal amount that 
is paid out on a number of different occasions to various 
different 
accounts 
or 
instruments 
and 
then 
eventually 
20 
brought back into the original account.   
 
And that is done to both increase same sort of outside 
revenue but also to try and disguise the origin, the criminal 
origin of the funds.   
 
The second process is known as a loan-back which is 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 123 of 376 
 
used extensively by the Gupta enterprise in relation to the 
laundering of the Estina funds.   
 
Here, what you have, is a portion of the criminal 
proceeds or the criminal proceeds.  It will be placed into a 
fixed deposit account and against that fixed deposit account 
a loan will be issued.   
 
That loan is then spent in very many different ways.  It is 
used to reintegrate the funds into the assets of the people 
who ultimately own the criminal assets.  And then once that 
process is concludes, the loan is settled by the closing of the 
10 
fixed deposit account.  And that creates – this is done for 
two or three different reasons.   
 
Again, it makes it very difficult to discern the transfer of 
the way in which the funds have moved because unless you 
are aware that the loan has been granted against the fixed 
deposit, which is often not clear, you will not know that is the 
original source of the funds. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the face of it, it looks like the amount 
ended in a fixed deposit or something and from there, it paid 
– it was paid into the bank or it remains there for quite some 
20 
time. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So if they have a – if they obtained a 
loan and bought some properties, you will not – it will not be 
easy to link the purchase of those properties to these 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 124 of 376 
 
amounts that went into a fixed deposit or something. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   What that also does as well is because it 
creates a second money stream, if that is return back to the 
original accounts.  So, for example, if Estina takes out a 
fixed deposit account and then a loan against hat fixed 
deposit account who pays the loan amount back into the 
Estina current account, it looks like there is actually two 
flows of funds, where it is all derived from a single flow of 
10 
funds which is from Estina from the Free State Government. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, just to go back to the example we 
were talking about a minute ago.  I guess that the one 
important thing about them putting the money, for example, 
into a fixed deposit account, is that whoever is investigating 
to them, it looks like this money did not do a lot of travelling.  
[laughs]  So it looks fine.  It was deposited in a fixed deposit 
for whatever time whereas if it seems to be travelling, then 
that attracts attention.   
MR HOLDEN:   Exactly Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   And it becomes a more sophisticated 
mechanism when, for example, Estina fixed deposit is used 
to give a loan to Kamal Vasram for example.  And then it 
makes them – the funds do not even look like they are 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 125 of 376 
 
attached to Estina at all anymore. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Now there is a particular example 
of a loan back scheme that you have found which shows that 
Estina was being used to loan the funds for the Gupta’s even 
before the dairy project began.  So can I take you to page 63 
of your report? 
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And maybe to give context, go 
back to page 62 where you talk about the Hawala ledgers.  
10 
And although we are going to get into that.   
 
We are anticipating something that we really should be 
doing tomorrow but it relates to Estina and it is very 
important for Estina.   
 
So I am just going to ask you to give a very brief outline 
of what the Hawala ledgers are. 
 
Chair, I am going to ask for your indulgence here.  We 
will 
go 
into 
detail 
on 
the 
Hawala 
ledgers 
tomorrow...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...since they relate to - more to 
Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine.  That is fine.  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:   So Chair, what we were able to uncover from 
the Gupta leaks material, is that from roundabout 2010 to 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 126 of 376 
 
about 2014, the Gupta enterprise in South Africa goes into 
partnership, as it were, with a group of companies called the 
Worlds Window Group based in India.   
 
And those two parties are engaged in a pretty – a quite 
substantial amount of money laundering both in South 
African and abroad.   
 
And the World’s Window Network achieves this partially 
by creating – establishing entities in South Africa through 
which it transacts.   
 
In relation to this, we know the existence of this 
10 
particular relationship because at a certain point Ronica 
Ragavan sends an email to Ashu Chawla, attaching the 
spreadsheet which is a transaction register of all the 
payments to and from Gupta enterprise companies and World 
Windows Companies.   
 
So we can trace the disposition of funds between those 
two different criminal networks. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you tell the Chair how the 
– I mean, we will look physically at the Hawala ledger 
tomorrow but can you tell the Chair what the idea behind the 
20 
Hawala ledger is? 
MR HOLDEN:   The Hawala ledger is compiled from the point 
of view of the Worlds Window Group and you have – you will 
see on the Hawala ledger, there is a running total balance 
which is either negative or positive.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 127 of 376 
 
 
And every transaction is recorded as either a negative or 
a positive in very much the same way that the previous 
ledger operated.   
 
If you see a positive amount, it means that the World 
Window 
Group 
has 
made 
a 
payment 
into 
the 
Gupta 
Enterprise.  If you see a negative amount, it means the 
reverse.   
 
And the idea behind that is that the running balance is 
the amount of money that is owed by the World Window 
Group to the Gupta enterprise or vice versa.   
10 
 
So if it says minus 200 000 Dollars at a certain point 
within those transactions, we now then know that the Worlds 
Window Group is owed a certain amount by the Gupta 
enterprise.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you give an example for 
instance of how it would work? 
MR HOLDEN:   So a good example would be.  One of the 
loan backs that we have identified in relation to this 
particular network.  Here, if we look at page 64, there is a 
very simple visualisation of showing a – a very simplified 
20 
version of how the loan back operated.   
 
The important thing to bear in mind here is that 
Everest Global Metals which I indicate on my left-hand side, 
is a company that was owned by the Worlds Window Group.  
And then Westdawn at the top is obviously a company that 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 128 of 376 
 
is owned by the Gupta enterprise and the way in which this 
particular loan back worked is quite simple.  The Bank of 
Baroda at the bottom would give a R15 million overdraft or 
loan to Everest Global Metals.  Everest Global Metals paid 
that …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So let us take it step-by-step.  
So Bank of Baroda is lending 15 million to a Worlds 
Window entity. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct.  So 15 million overdraft 
facility is given to a Worlds Window entity.  As soon as that 
10 
has been approved and issued to the Worlds Window entity 
it transfers the full amount into a Gupta enterprise entity.  
So you can see that is the second arrow, is Everest pays 
West Dawn R15 million in March 2011 and all of these 
transfers will be effected in the Hawala ledger.  
 
Then West Dawn repays Everest Global Metals for 
the loan but they pay it on a monthly basis, that is the third 
arrow.  And then Everest Global Metals then transfers that 
amount on a monthly basis back to the Bank of Baroda in 
order to satisfy their loan requirements and what we have 
20 
here is a way of disguising a flow of funds, so even though 
the Bank of Baroda effectively is issuing a R15 million 
overdraft to West Dawn, if you look at the electronic 
records and you do not have access to the Hawala ledger it 
looks like they have given a R15 million loan to a Worlds 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 129 of 376 
 
Window entity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you take the Chair to – well, 
how does Estina get involved in this? 
MR HOLDEN:   So what we established from the Gupta 
Leaks is that on …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, I give some context there.  
Just to emphasise the – if we go back to your diagram at 
page 64, that the way the Gupta enterprise is paying back 
the Worlds Window enterprise in this loan back scheme is 
10 
that on a monthly basis it is paying the interest of 120 000.  
So that is the equalisation payment over time that the 
Gupta enterprise makes to the Worlds Window enterprise. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct and what we see – there is 
two parts of this explanation of how Estina gets involved.  
The first thing that we see is that it is quite apparent that 
the Bank of Baroda in South Africa is aware of the real 
nature of this transaction because every month the Bank of 
Baroda issues a letter stating this is the interest on the 
loan, this is the amount they need to be repay but they do 
20 
not actually send this to the Worlds Window Group, they 
send it to Ashu Chawla and then Ashu Chawla makes a 
payment to Everest Global, to West Dawn and then he 
instructs Everest Global to pay back Baroda.  So the Bank 
of Baroda at all times knew that this was a fiction. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 130 of 376 
 
 
So what we have every month is a generation of two 
instructions effectively.  One instruction from the Bank of 
Baroda to Everest Global Metals to the Worlds Window 
company that says this is the amount that is outstanding 
and then a second instruction which is sent from the 
Worlds Window Group back to the – sorry, from the Gupta 
enterprise to the Worlds Window Group saying please 
remember to make this payment to satisfy this loan. 
 
So we have in the Gupta Leaks a quite vast set of 
correspondence where Worlds Window Group and Gupta 
10 
enterprise 
employees 
are 
sharing 
these 
instructions 
between each other in order to settle up this loan back.  
For some reason on the 23/11 …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I ask you to take a step 
back?  What was the paper trail that was created between 
Worlds Window and the Guptas to justify the monthly 
payments from – the monthly loan repayments from the 
Gupta enterprise to the Worlds Window enterprise? 
MR HOLDEN:   So the only paper trail that I can identify in 
the Gupta Leaks is the original Bank of Baroda instruction 
20 
which is addressed to Everest but actually sent to Ashu 
Chawla. 
And then the second instruction is to make a 
payment from a particular Gupta enterprise company to a 
Worlds 
Window 
Group 
company 
and 
then 
finally 
an 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 131 of 376 
 
instruction for that Worlds Window Group company to pay 
over to the Bank of Baroda.  So there are three separate 
instructions there. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the instructions refer what, 
once we are dealing with Worlds Window and Guptas, are 
they issues – are they asking for loans to be repaid, are 
they falsifying invoices so the payments look like payment 
of invoices.  How is the paper trail covered? 
MR HOLDEN:   I see where the evidence leader is going 
here.  The only instruction that is accurate is the 
10 
instruction from the Bank of Baroda to Everest Global 
Metals, the Worlds Window Group company saying you 
have a loan outstanding, you may repay this.  But all the 
other instructions for payment are invoiced just generally 
against consultancy fees.  So there is no indication in 
instructions from Gupta enterprise employees to Everest, 
for example, that this is to do with a loan facility at all.  It 
is only the first instruction from Bank of Baroda, so you 
effectively have a series of fictitious consultancy fees that 
are invoiced in order to justify the payment of the funds. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And with that context can we get 
to where Estina fits in?. 
MR HOLDEN:   Thank you.  So for a reason, I cannot 
entirely establish, but on the 3 May 2011 …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I stop you there?  When 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 132 of 376 
 
was the first payment from the Free State government to 
Estina? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is in June 2012. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So this is more than a year 
before the first Free State payment which itself is quite 
some time before anything happens in the dairy project. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say on the 3 r d or on the 13 May? 
MR HOLDEN:   It is the 3 May 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh ja, okay.  We were at page 64, ja. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:   What we have is an email from a Worlds 
Window employee by the name of Satyajit Panday, he 
emails Ashu Chawla and he said to Ashu Chawla please 
get an invoice from Estina for the following and provides 
details of what Estina should be invoicing for and gives 
Estina’s details.  It says: 
“Project scoping and advisory fee, Project Insinga.” 
Which I think is made up and then it gives an amount which 
is the exactly amount that was outstanding on the Bank of 
Baroda loan.  So effectively Estina is being invoiced by a 
20 
Worlds Window company so that Estina can make a 
transfer to the Worlds Window company and then from 
there to settle the loan. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And this is taking place more 
than a year before the dairy project? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 133 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  And what we see – the 
Commission was able to confirm by proving bank details or 
banks 
statements 
for 
the 
– 
sorry, 
it 
is 
actually 
a 
transaction record at this point for Estina bank accounts, 
shows that this payment was actually made, R125 400 was 
made from Estina’s bank account to Everest Global Metals 
on the 13 May 2011 which I have taken to read – to mean 
that, amongst other things, Estina was effectively being 
used as a front for money laundering by the Gupta 
enterprise for a year prior to the initiation of the Free State 
10 
dairy project. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then is there – we have dealt 
with round tripping and loan backs.  There are two other 
devices that you speak to in your report.  The first is called 
smurfing and you deal with it from page – actually, I forget 
where you first deal with it.  Well, can you describe to the 
Chair was smurfing is? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is from what page? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think, Chair, it will be 25.  If we 
20 
go to 25 it should be there.  Let me just check if I have got 
the right reference here.  No, you talk about smurfing later. 
MR HOLDEN:   I do. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, I will get the reference but 
in the meantime can you explain to the Chair what smurfing 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 134 of 376 
 
is about? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  Chair, this refers to the fact that 
– I am not sure if you were aware of the television 
programme the Smurfs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I am not. 
MR HOLDEN:   Smurfs are very small blue men and 
smurfing refers to the fact that -  taking a large amount of 
money and then reducing into – and paying it out in a 
series of much smaller transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  H’m, okay. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   In fact I realise now that you do 
not explain what smurfing is, you just have, but you used 
the term.  You do use the term on page – at page 89.  So, 
Chair, maybe if you go to page 89 and just make a note of 
what smurfing means and while we are at page 89 it 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which paragraph at 89 dealing with 
smurfing? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The second line of the page, 
Chair, right at the top. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Maybe we should – maybe if we 
just go up the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What you are talking about is 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 135 of 376 
 
tranche – how the money moved in tranche two and maybe 
if you can pick it up from paragraph 202. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson, I do not see smurfing on 
line two on page 89.  I do not see the term, the word. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Unless I have the… 
MR HOLDEN:   It is 89. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The second line of page 89, 
Chair, are you on 89? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I have got - on page 89 I have got: 
2.  Estina’s Baroda account was made up of six R5 
10 
million payments, a typical example…” 
Oh, okay.  Ja, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And maybe if you can explain 
what you are referring to there by going back to the start of 
paragraph 202 on the previous page. 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely. What we see here is – this is in 
reference to the tranche two payment that was made the 
Free State government to Estina.  That payment was made 
on the 26 April 2013.  But 30 million is paid directly into 
Estina’s Standard Bank account but then three days later 
20 
on the 29 April 2013 this amount is then transferred to 
Estina bank, a Borado bank account but notably it is not as 
just one 30 million payment it is instead split up into six 
transfers of 5 million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if we go to the Standard 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 136 of 376 
 
Bank statement on page 147, can you – it is very neatly 
illustrated there. 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, so I am – Chair, are you...? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   147, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, I have got it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you take the Chair to what 
you are describing? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, so just to clarify, this is the 
Standard Bank account bank statement for the Estina 
Standard Bank account and what you can see as the third 
10 
entry, it says transfer from Free State Agriculture and then 
R30 million comes in on the 26 April. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, transfer from? 
MR HOLDEN:   It says transfer from, it is a code that is 
used to describe the Free State Department of Agriculture. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh that VAS101? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, SA Agriculture, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   And then to the right of that you see a 
credit in R30 million on the 26 April. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so it goes into Estina’s account. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct and then what you can see 
following is payments that are made out of the account into 
the Bank of Baroda, Estina’s Bank of Baroda account of R5 
million, multiple R5 million payments, you see five on this 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 137 of 376 
 
page and then one further one on the following page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so that is a good example of 
smurfing? 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you – what is the – why is 
smurfing potentially useful to launderers? 
MR HOLDEN:   There is a couple of reasons.  First of all, if 
it is being paid into accounts where it is comingling with a 
large amount of funds it can be difficult to trace that the 
original amount is - where it derives from, especially if 
10 
there is a lot of movement in that account.  It is often also 
used where there are statutory reporting requirements so if 
there is a point at which a suspicious transaction becomes 
– needs to be reported, you will often see with money 
launderer exercises they will split a large amount into very 
small amounts so it falls under that threshold. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the last device that you 
speak to in the course of your report is what you describe 
as cash withdrawal firebreaks.  Can you tell the Chair what 
you mean by that? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  Chair, we will come to an 
example of that very shortly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is in the report, hey?  What 
page in the report?  I find it easy if I can look on the report 
as well, as he speaks. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 138 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let me find that reference.  
Chair, maybe if I can take you – I cannot find – I cannot 
find my reference in the report but can I take you to the 
example? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And maybe we can make a note 
on the example. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So if you go to page 679. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I found it. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And, Chair, here we are moving 
into the diagrams of how the Estina money moved and if it 
may be more convenient for you, Chair, there are A3 
copies of each of these diagrams in that small file to your 
left. 
MR HOLDEN:   Okay, okay.  No, that is fine but at least 
679 seems to be clear. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Holden, can you describe the 
cash withdrawal firebreak here and explain to the Chair 
what purpose it is serving? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely.  So the cash firebreak that you 
can occurs at the bottom left hand corner of the diagram.  
There is just an entry in a yellow box called cash and prior 
to that you see Global Corporation’s Bank of Abu Dhabi, 
Dirham Vest Account and what the arrow then reflects 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 139 of 376 
 
going down is that 1.7 million Dirham has been withdrawn 
on the 24 September 2013 on that account in cash and 
then if you could see there is an arrow that goes diagonally 
up to the right to Global Corporations, Bank of Baroda, 
Dubai Dirham account.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So it is the same corporation? 
MR HOLDEN:   It is the same entity with just a different 
bank and the arrow reflects that 1.3 million dirham is paid 
in on the 24 September.  So the same day the amount is 
withdrawn, it is paid, it is deposited in the same company’s 
10 
account and a different bank. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And what purpose does that 
serve? 
MR HOLDEN:   The main purpose is that it would be almost 
impossible to discern the source of that 1.3 million dirham, 
it will be certainly be difficulty discern where – that it 
comes from the Global Corporation’s Bank of Abu Dhabi 
account 
unless 
you 
had 
something 
like 
the 
internal 
accounting ledgers.  All you will see is two different banks, 
a cash withdrawal and a cash deposit and if you do not 
20 
have both sets of accounts or some sort of internal 
mechanism, it would be almost impossible to identify the 
original source of those funds. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think at this point we should 
start following the money. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 140 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But just before we move away from page 
679.  So there the money would have come from Estina, 
from the Standard Bank account of Estina, is that right? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then it goes Gateway and that is 2,9 
US dollars, is that right? 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, the 2.9 million goes to Gateway. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Gateway.  And then Gateway then pays 
400 000 US dollars to Global Corporation and Global 
Corporation pays a little more – alright, well, they use the 
10 
UAE currency 449 to pay – make a payment to Global 
Corporation in Dubai or in Abu Dhabi.  And then does it 
then – the 1.7 is made cash. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then that cash emerges at Global 
Corporation, the Baroda Bank in Dubai, is that right? 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then from there it goes to – it goes 
as cash to the various people or the two – given there, 
Hawala and Vikas. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   For present purposes, Chair, 
what  - I mean, we will in fact analyse this entire 
movement, this part of tranche 0, we will analyse it from 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 141 of 376 
 
start to finish in a minute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But while we are looking at this 
page, what is significant. is if one starts with Gateway 
payment to Global on the 23 September the money is in 
Global Standard Chartered account on the 23 September.  
So then some of it, a large part of it is then moved to the 
same Global Corporation’s Bank of Abu Dhabi account.  It 
is then turned into cash.  It is then moved as cash to the 
Global Corporation’s Bank of Baroda, so it has passed 
10 
through three different banks and a cash conversion or in 
the hands of the same company which is going to make it 
increasingly difficult to retrace when money laundering 
investigators look at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The only reason we can see this 
is because of the Hawala ledger.  The internal ledgers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Which track this in great detail 
for internal use. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So otherwise, once they have 
turned it into cash it becomes difficult after that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Indeed, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To trace it. 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, Chair. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 142 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, Chair, what – if one goes 
back to page 671 and runs forward all the way to page 716, 
from 671 to 716. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just on second, from 671 to..? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   716, black 716, red 712.  Sorry, 
it starts at 671. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And from there until the 
diagrams run out on page 716. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What these diagrams reflect is 
the movement of all of the public funds that were put into 
the Estina Dairy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And what we will is we will take 
you, Chair, through each one of these diagrams to show 
the movement of the funds. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   To begin with, we will go 
20 
incredibly slowly cross-referring to every underlying bank 
record that is relevant but we are not going to do that for 
all seven, what we are going to do is we are going to 
reissue a set of these diagrams now that we have record 
references where on each one of these arrows you will see 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 143 of 376 
 
the FOF volume 5 reference for where the money goes out 
and the FOF volume 5 reference for where it come in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But Mr Holden can – let us start 
with tranche zero which you described in a big diagram at 
page 671 and let us go step-by-step through that tranche 
and maybe if you can explain to the Chair what your colour 
coding system is for these diagrams. 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, would it be easier for me to do 
this on screen or...? 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think certainly given that there 
may be people watching it would help to put it on the 
screen just because – otherwise it will make no sense 
whatsoever. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   Okay, Chair, so what we have here 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is as large as it can get, hey? 
MR HOLDEN:   I will be zooming in to specific things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   So as you have indicated here at the 
bottom left, this is about tracing tranche zero and tranche 
zero revolves around the payment of 30 million on the 9 
July 2012.  The colour coding words relatively simply.  As 
you can see here, the Free State government has indicated 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 144 of 376 
 
in green, green for go, as in this is – wherever you see a 
green box is money coming into the system, into the money 
laundering system, and then a red box describes where we 
could trace the money to, at the end point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, green represents money 
leaving a particular entity? 
MR HOLDEN:   It is money entering into Estina or into the 
money laundering network. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, into the money laundering 
network. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR HOLDEN:   So in this example here you can see the – I 
have indicated that is the Free State government and they 
are initiating the tranche by paying that amount of money 
over here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, they pay out. 
MR HOLDEN:   The Free State government pays out to 
Estina. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   And then all the red boxes, and there is 
quite few on this tranche, indicates the final point at which 
we can identify where related funds go to, where they 
eventually pay out.  So, for example, here there is R1 
million payment to Estina ABSA bank account. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 145 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the Estina colour coding, is that – 
does that denote a recipient of the money? 
MR HOLDEN:   No, so the yellow boxes are just an 
indication of an account, that is not an beginning point or 
an end point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, somewhere – it is one of the 
stations. 
MR HOLDEN:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   So if we were to scroll out here you could 
10 
see, for example, one of …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So green is like point of departure. 
MR HOLDEN:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And somewhere you will find the 
destination.  In between there are various bus stops. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And quite a few junctions as 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And junctions and detours. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR HOLDEN:   So to give another example, an end point 
here, if I scroll in, which we have already discussed earlier 
as an example, one of the …[intervenes] 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 146 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So red is an end point. 
MR HOLDEN:   The red is an end point, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR HOLDEN:   And as we can see this is – the end point 
here is Linkway Trading and this is in relation to the 
[indistinct] 27.12 invoice.  
 
In 
addition 
to 
that, 
there 
are 
parts 
of 
this 
transaction, there is five separate parts that we can 
identify where funds travel – it makes it much easier to 
understand if you separate it into particular steps and each 
10 
part has its own coloured line.  So for part 1 they are all 
black lines.  So you can see here at the top left these are 
all black lines, so that is part one and then all the pink 
lines are part 2, which is over here and so on and so forth.  
But those will not be too material as we go through the 
more detailed steps. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So let us – moving from this big 
overview of tranche zero, let us go to what you call part 1 
of tranche zero which you have separated out at page 672 
and you have – if one goes to – 672 is an overview of the 
20 
whole of part 1 and that in turn is broken up into series of 
more subsets of part one. 
MR HOLDEN:   Subsets. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Which end I think at page 677, 
so we have big picture, part one, subsets of part one and it 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 147 of 376 
 
may be useful at this stage to while we are at subset of 
part one – so sorry, while we are at the picture of the 
whole part on 672, just to compare it with the big picture 
so that you can see where part one is going to fit in on the 
big picture.  So if you can go back to page 671 and show 
us what we are going to be looking at in part one. 
MR HOLDEN:   It is this series of transactions here on the 
left which are all South African-based, these are all 
transactions that take place before the money moves 
offshore. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then if we go to part one itself, 
on 672, and we look at the whole of part one we can start 
with the first steps in part one on page 673 and can you 
contextualise what is going at Estina at this point? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, so as the Chair will see the first 
payment that is made in under Transzero is R30million that 
is paid in on the 9 t h of July 2012.   At this point Estina was 
not operational as a dairy farm at all, and in fact was still 
in the process of being formally approved sort of poste 
facto through the Free State bureaucracy at that point.  So 
20 
once the money is paid in it really has – there is nothing 
for Estina to spend the money on which is why, it then 
takes quite an elaborate diversion through a fixed deposit 
account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry the part one arrows, did you 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 148 of 376 
 
say those are – would be the arrows from the point of 
departure to the first station, first entity to which it is paid 
or does it go beyond that in terms of the treasury? 
MR HOLDEN:   It goes beyond that sir, so what we did, the 
black lines here reference only – it’s all transactions that 
happen within South Africa in relation to this tranche. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So other arrows that might be other 
colours relate to outside of South Africa? 
MR HOLDEN:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright I think Mr Chaskalson had 
10 
asked you if you could explain what was happening at 
Estina here, you said they were not operating a dairy farm 
at that stage, they didn’t know what to do with the money, 
and then what happened? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, let’s – So Chair just – at the 
risk of spoiling a good story, I’m going to, for the first 
couple of parts of tranche nought, I’m going to ask Mr 
Holden to show proof for every single step that he 
describes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that’s important. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   And then when we finally get exasperated, 
we can speed up a little bit but I think it’s important for the 
Commission to know and for the public to see that every 
single one of these arrows is based, either in an underlying 
bank account, transaction record or when we go offshore in 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 149 of 376 
 
those ledgers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no I think that’s important, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So let’s start with step one, 
which you see on page – and Chair, might I ask you to take 
out page 672 for the moment, just so that you can sit with 
it on one side while you are going to be watching the 
different steps in part one.  So, you have the picture of the 
whole of part one which you can look at while we’re looking 
at individual steps. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay I’ve done that. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then if we look at the first step 
in part one which is on page 673 which is the Free State 
Government transferring R30million into Estina Standard 
Bank account and can I ask you to go to page 279 – 299, 
sorry I misread my seven…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   299? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   299. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can you show the Chair 
there, where that R30million payment is reflected? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, so Chair, as we discussed a 
little bit earlier, we don’t have the PDF bank statements for 
Standard Bank prior to 2013, instead we’ve drawn the 
electronic records that the Commission provided, but you 
can see, I think it is the – it’s the entry that’s highlighted in 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 150 of 376 
 
yellow and you can see on the left-hand side that it’s 
Estina’s Standard Bank account and if you follow us to the 
right it gives you the description which is BASF01 – FS 
Agriculture on the 9 t h of July over there and then on the far 
right-hand side you can see the R30million payment into 
Estina’s account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see the words, Dormant enclosure 
request, there is there any significance about the account? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, maybe I can answer that.  
That is what Standard’s electronic records reflect, not 
10 
necessarily – well they will reflect them today but at the 
time 
that 
Standard 
provided 
us 
with 
the 
electronic 
transaction records, that reflected that the account as 
dormant because closure had been requested or – so that’s 
just a banking…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, I thought it might reflect that at 
the time the R30million was paid it was dormant, okay, 
alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then while we’re on this page, 
still looking at step – at – if we go back to page 673 but 
20 
don’t leave – keep a finger on these records, keep a finger 
on 299 but go back to the diagram at 673 and there we’ll 
see that step two, R1million is transferred to Estina’s Absa 
account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, you’re asking me to check out 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 151 of 376 
 
page 672, that’s not the page you want me to look at now? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We can do it on 672 as well, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, if you look at 672 and you 
look down, from Estina’s Standard Bank current account 
you’ll see an arrow that says R1million 27/07/2012.  Mr 
Holden can you describe what that is – what that arrow 
reflects? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, so that reflects that R1million 
10 
has 
been 
transferred 
from 
Estina’s 
Standard 
current 
account 310864860, it has been transferred on the 27 t h of 
July 2012 into Estina’s Absa account 4079496171. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then if you go back to page 
299 can you show us where that R1million is? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before that, Mr Chaskalson and 
because you’ve got that red colour coding there, that 
means that’s where that R1million ended. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was its destination – it ended it 
20 
didn’t move after that? 
MR HOLDEN:   What we have in relation to – this is 
somewhat of a mystery I think, within the bank statements, 
this is, I think one of the only times we have this sort of a 
mystery, we have the amount – it’s paid into Estina’s bank 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 152 of 376 
 
account at this point, at a later point R950 000 is paid out 
but despite our best efforts we haven’t been able to 
identify where it goes to. I have my own suspicion of where 
it might go to and where it might turn up again but we can’t 
– based on the records of the Commission have definitively 
confirmed where that went, so rather than guess and 
create a final point, I made the R1million payment the final 
point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that’s fine, yes Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, if we go back to 299 can you 
10 
show the Chair where that R1million is? 
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely, so directly below the entry we 
had just addressed, this is now highlighted in a slightly 
different shade of yellow, a mustard perhaps, you’ll see a 
payment made from Standard Bank on the left-hand side 
and if you follow that all the way across you’ll see minus 
R1million and the middle part is Estina, it should be 
Estina, clearly there was a transcription error while making 
the payment, Estina Pty Ltd. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   While we’re on this page, can 
20 
you identify the next transaction? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, so the next transaction occurs on 
the 31 s t of July 2012 and this is a transaction of R28million 
that’s paid out of the Estina Standard Bank account and 
we’ll show a little bit later, into the bank of Baroda and that 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 153 of 376 
 
goes into Estina’s Bank of Baroda account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, Chair, if you go back to 672 
and maybe, Mr Holden, we should go – we should just have 
672 up for now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, I’ve got it, I can see the 
R28million from the Estina Standard Bank current account 
into Estina Baroda current account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, I would ask – Chair if you 
can just reference that up arrow with Annexure E1, page 
10 
299 for future reference, the R28million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I can see R28million at 299. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if you reference the 
R1million down to Estina Absa, also with 299 and the 
R30million in with 299. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let’s look at the other side of 
these transactions.  So, if we go to Annexure P, page 520 
and Mr Holden can you identify to the Chair, what this 
statement is? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, Chair, this is Estina PTY Ltd’s 
Absa account with the account number 4079496171. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And where will we see the 
R1million that came from the Standard account, landing in 
this account? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 154 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:     It’s slightly blurry Chair, but the second 
entry under those transactions, it says 27/07/2012 and it 
says, net credit and if you scroll over to the right-hand side 
it says the credit amount if R1million which increases the 
balance in that account to R1million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, Chair, if we go back to 672, 
we can then – on the R1million line down to Estina Absa, 
also add the 520 reference.  So have a – one reference for 
it leaving Standard Bank and another reference for it 
arriving at Absa. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    
On a similar theme if we 
follow the R28million from Standard to Baroda, can we go 
to page 438? 
CHAIRPERSON:   438? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   438. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And Mr Holden can  you take the 
Chair to the relevant transactions there? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, so Chair, just to re-confirm this 
20 
is a – this is Estina  PTY Ltd’s Bank of Baroda current 
account ending 255 and as you can see on the – it’s the 
second entry on that bank statement it says 31/07/2012 so 
31 s t of July 2012, deposit dated 31/07/2012 and if you 
scroll over to the right you’ll see an amount of R28million 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 155 of 376 
 
deposited, thereby increasing the balance in the account to 
R28million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And Chair – so if you go back to 
your…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That balance brought forward, zero. 
MR HOLDEN:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does that mean there was no money? 
MR HOLDEN:   There was no money in that account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, until this amount came in? 
MR HOLDEN:   Exactly Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But it is a fixed deposit account 
so it would have been created – I take that back, sorry, Mr 
Holden has corrected me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, well I heard evidence about Estina 
that – I don’t know whether it was the first R30million or it 
was another payment where the – before the amount came 
in that R30million or whatever the amount was that came 
from the Provincial Government, the balance on the Estina 
account on that particular Estina account where it went in 
20 
was, I don’t know whether it was R16 or R1 600. 
MR HOLDEN:  That’s correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If we keep annotating that page 
672, so we now have a corresponding annotation on the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 156 of 376 
 
R28million up from Estina Standard to Estina Baroda, we 
see it arrive at Baroda at page 438. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   There is one other – there is one additional 
thing to note in relation to this bank statement which you 
noticed, is that, the first entry on the left-hand side is the 
10 t h of July 2012 and that is the creation of the account 
and what we can defer from that is…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay so it was a new account? 
MR HOLDEN:   It’s a new account that’s created the day 
10 
after 
the 
Free 
State 
Government 
pays 
into 
Estina’s 
Standard Bank account, there creates an account with 
Bank of Baroda. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, it looks like it was specially opened 
– the account was specially opened for this deposit that 
was coming? 
MR HOLDEN:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then, can we see what happens 
to the deposit.  Stay on page 438 and if you can – Mr 
20 
Holden can you explain to the Chair where that deposit 
goes? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, so as we can see on the diagram 
up here, and I also reference it to the bank statement, on 
the same day the amount is paid from Estina Standard 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 157 of 376 
 
Bank into Estina’s Bank of Baroda account, it is – that 
R28million is immediately placed into a Bank of Baroda 
fixed deposit account and if you look at the bank statement 
appearing at 438, you can see that withdrawal the day 
after the deposit – sorry on the same day of the deposit, 
it’s the entry that comes directly after the deposit, there’s 
a withdrawal of R28million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, it comes in on the 31 s t of July 2012, 
same day it is withdrawn from that account, ja, R28million, 
okay. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, Chair, that diagonal – Mr 
Holden can you just show the diagonal that we’ve just been 
watching, so that’s the movement, that arrow, we can have 
a reference also at page 438.  Then to see where it lands, 
let’s go to page 444 and can you tell the Chair what 444 
is? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, Chair, 444 was attached as J1 to 
my report it is Estina PTY Ltd’s fixed deposit account at 
the 
Bank 
of 
Baroda 
with 
the 
account 
number 
92020300000282 and if you were to look at the very short 
20 
statement it shows that the first entry, the 31 s t of July 
2012B/F shows that it was opened on that day, the fixed 
deposit and the date below that is the 31 s t of July 2012 and 
that reflects the R28million deposit into the fixed deposit 
account. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 158 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Still on that statement, what 
does it tell you about that R28million? 
MR HOLDEN:   So that R28million remains within that fixed 
deposit account for slightly over a year and on the 7 t h of 
August 2013 it is then rolled over into a new fixed deposit 
account and I assume that being the case, because this 
was originally established as a 12 month long fixed deposit 
account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, Chair, there – sorry Mr 
Holden, on your diagram can you show what you are now 
describing the withdrawal on 7 August 2013? 
MR HOLDEN:   So, it goes from – so this is – apologies 
this is 2013 not 2012 over here, I thought I’d corrected 
that.  It goes from the….[intervenes]. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry Mr Holden, can you just 
confirm that for the Chair, because it’s quite an important 
correction. 
MR HOLDEN:   Apologies Chair, when I did this diagram, I 
20 
wrote the 7 t h of August 2012 over here when I actually 
meant the 7 t h of August 2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, so one can correct it, page 
672. 
MR HOLDEN:   Correct sir. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 159 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
MR HOLDEN:   And you can see that on that date it is – it 
has moved…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I – ja no, I think you’re right, it’s very 
important to get it right ja, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can we just step back a minute 
now and just reflect on what we’ve seen.  The Free State 
Government transfers R30million of public funds to Estina 
on the 9 t h of July 2012, those funds – or R28million of 
those funds sit and do nothing for more than a year. So 
10 
R28million of public funds have been given to an entity 
that doesn’t touch them, just let’s them accumulate interest 
for over a year, then if we go…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this happens in the context, looking 
at other evidence I’ve heard when – at the time this 
R30million was being paid, first R30million it was a rush, 
rush thing within the Provincial Government as if there was 
a lot of urgency and I asked witnesses here, what was so 
urgent, I think it was on a Friday afternoon where various 
people were told to go and meet and try and – because this 
20 
amount had to be paid, ja, okay, alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, we’ve seen that the fixed 
deposit is withdrawn on the 7 t h of August 2013 to see 
where it goes, can we go to page 450 and can you tell the 
Chair what we see there? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 160 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, what we have here, Chair, was 
attached to my report as Annexure J7, it is Estina PTY 
Ltd’s Bank of Baroda fixed deposit account with the 
account number 92020300000282 and what we can see if 
we look at the second entry is the 7 t h of August 2013 is a 
payment in it says TD for 12 months which I assume was, 
termed deposit for 12 months and a deposit of R28million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So Chair, if one goes back to the 
diagram, Mr Holden can you show the branch of the 
diagram we’ve now seen on both sides, so that diagonal 
10 
going up towards the right, we see starting on page 444 
and landing at page 450. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was still just checking something here, 
Mr Chaskalson, I was asking myself, where is the other 
R1million because we had R30million we know where 
R1million went to but where is the other R1million because 
we are dealing with R28million now but I think, you might 
not have touched on it but I can see from page 672 where 
it went but I see it’s got 1.3 is that correct? 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Sorry 
Chair, 
1.3 
20 
now…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Going to 
Kamal Vasram personal 
account.  You see the Provincial Government paid Estina 
R30million and we talked about the R1million that went to 
Estina Absa account, so now we are busy with R28million 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 161 of 376 
 
so I’m asking about the question, where is the other 
R1million so then I see that R1.3million that went from – 
oh no, no it didn’t go from Estina Standard Bank account it 
came to Estina…[intervenes]. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It’s the opposite direction 
indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so where’s the other R1million? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, we’ll have to go back to 
the Standard accounts to see what happens. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, but we can do it…[intervenes]. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Holden, there actually would 
be able to help us Chair. 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, I do, what happens at this point, and I 
think it, effectively remains in the Standard Bank account 
and is then co-mingled with payments that are made – 
sorry tranche one which is then made by the Free State 
Government, it co-mingles with that amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   At that point when the second payment is 
made, Estina is starting to put together a dairy farm and it 
20 
goes on those costs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, we now, covered the 
diagonal up from FDR 03189 to 03282 on 7 August 2012 
before we leave page 450 can you talk to the Chair about 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 162 of 376 
 
the second – the next entry on that fixed deposit account? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certain, so Chair, what that reflects is that 
on the 4 t h of September 2013 this fixed deposit account is 
closed and the full R28million is withdrawn. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And to see where that R28million 
goes, can we go down to 439 again, or up to 439 and what 
are we looking at, at 439? 
MR HOLDEN:   So, Chair, at 439 we are looking, again, at 
Estina PTY Ltd’s Bank of Baroda current account and the 
entry is reflected on the 4 t h of September 2013, if you 
10 
found it there Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I – there are three 4 t h of September 
– yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   And what you see there is, the description 
is, 92020300000282 closure, so that refers to the closure 
of the fixed deposit account and then the inward transfer of 
R28million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And is transferred by EFT, is that so or 
not, I just see EFT there? 
MR HOLDEN:   So, below that is a transaction, that amount 
20 
is then immediately paid out to a different account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, if we go back to our diagram 
there, can you just show us where that R28million is 
moving, so it’s moving down from FDR 03/282 into the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 163 of 376 
 
Estina Baroda – the rectangle with the Estina Baroda 
current account.  So, Chair, on that branch we can – the 
branch coming down on the 4 t h of September 2013 we can 
put in the reference 450 for where the money comes from 
and 439 for where it goes to. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
From 
Estina 
Bank 
of 
Baroda 
on 
3/282…[intervenes]. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Indeed that’s 450. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And it goes down the arrow to 
10 
Estina Baroda current account, that’s 439. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   While we’re at the current 
account let’s look at two more transactions that we see on 
the 
current 
account. 
 
The 
first 
is 
the 
transaction 
immediately above that payment of R28million, can you tell 
the Chair what that transaction is? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, so that is a deposit of R2million 
and that R2million is derived from a separate fixed deposit 
account which was 92020300000207 and as we will show a 
20 
little bit further along, this money actually comes from the 
second Free State payment from tranche one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that’s the R2million that comes from 
Kamal Vasram’s account in Baroda into Estina Bank of 
Baroda 03,207? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 164 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   That’s correct, so what we see is R2million 
is paid by Kamal Vasram from his current account and on 
the 15 t h of October 2012 that is then used to create an 
Estina fixed deposit account 03/207 and it sits there for a 
period of time until the 4 t h of September 2013 when it is 
closed and co-mingled with the R28million on – that came 
from the earlier FDR.  If I may, the one thing I’d like to 
point out here is that I do annotate on this page here, I 
say, of which R1 050 000 is definitively from tranche one of 
that R2million payment and the R950 000 is from a – is an 
10 
unknown source, I’ve been unable to trace.  That said, this 
is where my suspicion arises in relation to the Estina Absa 
Bank account because it’s from the Estina Absa Bank 
account that an amount of R950 000 is paid out to a 
separate party and it seems quite a coincidence that we 
suddenly have this amount that I can’t account for showing 
up, not very long after within the money laundering 
network. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   For the purposes of our diagram 
we’ve just seen – can you just flag the payment that we’ve 
20 
just seen in the Estina current account, so it’s the diagonal 
coming from top right to bottom left from Estina Bank of 
Baroda FDR 3/207 into Estina Baroda current account, 
we’ve seen that land on 4 September 2013 in Estina 
current account.  Before we leave Estina current account, 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 165 of 376 
 
we’re going to go – we’ll later go back to see where that 
R2million came from but before we leave the current 
account, while we’ve got it up can you talk to the third 
transaction on 4 September 2013? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly, so what we see – actually going 
slightly earlier is that the closure of the two fixed deposit 
accounts increased the balance in that account from 
R281 234 once those two FDR’s has a balance of R30 
281 234.00 and on the same day those two fixed deposits 
are closed.  There was a transfer out of R30 million and we 
10 
know that that goes to Estina Standard Bank current 
account. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so the R2 million that is paid by Mr 
Vasram into the Estina Bank of Baroda account 03,207 and 
on the 15 October 2012 stays for about close to a year or so 
in that account before there is – before it is paid into the 
Estina Baroda current account, is that right? 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is just in time for it to – to make – 
to be added to the R28 million to make R30 million. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So the – and then that R30 million is 
then paid to the Estina Standard Bank current account. So in 
effect the R30 million that the Provincial Government had 
paid into the Estina Standard Bank current account and 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 166 of 376 
 
travelled for quite some time is now back. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Just for again for reference.  The 
movement of that R30 million down is – should be – the R30 
million down from Estina Baroda to Estina Standard Bank a 
reference at page 439 on the Estina side is where we will 
find that.  If we can pick up we are at Lans and Standard and 
go to page 174. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We should go to page 174? 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  174 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And Mr Holden can you show the 
Chair where that – where to find that R30 million landing 
from – from Baroda? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So what you see at the – on page 
174 the very last entry on that page says Interbank Credit 
Transfer Estina PTY Limited Bedford Gardens and a deposit 
of R30 million on the 4 September. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So – so then for the – for the 
diagram we can put 174 as the corresponding reference in 
Standard Bank for that R30 million payment?  While we are 
on the Standard accounts Mr Holden can you talk to that 
previous entry of 1.3 million? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 167 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  So what that is is a payment of 
R1.3 million from Kamal Vasram and it is paid into the 
account on the same day as the R30 million is paid and it is 
for R1.3 million.   I have indicated it Chair up here on the 
diagram. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  For the record purposes because 
at some stage we are going to have to read what you are 
saying. What you are indicating is the diagonal down from 
the yellow box and Kamal Vasram personal accounts down to 
the right to Estina Standard Bank current account. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct.  And what is important there 
is that this R1.3 million ultimately derives from tranche 1 of 
the Free State government money.  So what we have by the 
– the 4 September is money from tranches 0 and tranche 1 
have been reconstituted back into Estina Standard Bank 
account to facilitate a further payment. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The R300 million – ag the R300 000.00 1.3 
is that just to confuse or – because with R1 million that 
would have made 30 or is that not really that is just a 
20 
transfer that has got nothing to do with the R30 million? 
MR HOLDEN:  What – so to move ahead what the R1.3 
million eventually – effectively does is increase the balance? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:  Along with the R30 million sufficient so that 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 168 of 376 
 
Estina can then make an outward transfer of exactly $3 
million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR HOLDEN:  Which is slightly more than the 30 million 
from the original tranche. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR HOLDEN:  Which you will see on the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is to facilitate that transfer.  But when 
that transfer happens does it – is it the equivalent of R30 
million in US Dollars? 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  No so it actually – if we go over to the 
following page which is 175. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:  You can see there – you can see the date is 
the 4 September so the exact same day which has received 
the funds and they being comingled there.  There is a debit 
of R30.9 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:  And that goes to Gateway Limited. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
20 
MR HOLDEN:  Which then obviously leaves a certain amount 
of balance but the R30 million from tranche 0 would not have 
been quite enough to make the payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Now Mr Holden some of these 
explanations you give us might be simplified to enable some 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 169 of 376 
 
of us to understand.  You remember earlier on you explained 
to me that your green coding that colour is for the point of 
departure but now I see that Kamal Vasram’s is not green it 
is like it is a bus stop like the other bus stops.  So how come 
you did not? 
MR HOLDEN:  In relation to that it is because that money 
from Kamal Vasram is ultimately from tranche 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:  And I indicate the green – the green start 
point in tranche 1… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the green is for a legitimate point of 
departure or something? 
MR HOLDEN:  So the green is money coming into this money 
flow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:  And in relation to this particular payment I do 
not indicate it as green here.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because that is… 
MR HOLDEN:  Because it is actually derived from an earlier 
– from a different tranche payment. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR HOLDEN:  And that one is indicated as green as we – 
when we get to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And on the fact of he seems to be a 
participant in the whole network? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 170 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.  Thank you Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So Chair just for referencing 
purposes we have looked at quite a lot. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well with referencing I wanted to say to 
you maybe when we are done with this we will have to go 
through it because some of the referencing I did not do this 
but others I did so to make sure that what I have got is the 
same as what you have got. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes in fact Chair what – what will 
10 
probably be the best. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Is for us to – now that we have a 
record with pagination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ys. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Is to generate a full set of these 
diagrams with references on both ends. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no that would be – ja that would be … 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And then you do not need to.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Need to be too concerned at this 
stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:  Maybe – could I make a suggestion? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry Mr Holden has a suggestion. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 171 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:  What might also make things slightly easier is 
that I have compiled an additional annexure which is 
annexure H which appears at 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  303. 
MR HOLDEN:  303. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR HOLDEN:  And what annexure H is is every single 
transaction that I refer to in these diagrams I have placed 
into a table. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  And cross-referenced that transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:  Against the underlying bank document from 
where I draw the information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:  Side it was referenced against the annexures 
attached to my report rather than pagination in the file itself 
so that will be relatively quickly upgraded. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But if we – if we go back to page 
20 
672 we have now covered everything on page 600 – oh sorry 
before we leave that Reserve Bank – that Standard Bank to 
Gateway there are two other references that we should look 
at. First it is picked up by the Reserve Bank at pages 631 
and 632. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 172 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second Mr Chaskalson.  Mr 
Holden am I correct then to understand that the diagram at 
page 672 does not reflect the final destination of the R28 
million not R80 million.  We know the R1 million had reached 
its destination in the Estina ABSA account but otherwise the 
R28 million plus the R2 million that came from Mr Vasram 
has not reached its destination. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:  It is now going to be moved offshore 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:  Where it is further laundered and then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR HOLDEN:  Spat out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So if we – if we go to page 631 
this is the Reserve Bank spread sheet and we are looking for 
unfortunately the spread sheets sort of runs sideways along 
two pages but if we look at the entry – we are looking for a 
payment of R30.9 million which we will see at page 632.  So 
20 
if you can take the Chair to 632 and identify the Estina 
Gateway payment. 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So Chair that is the – the fourth 
transaction which reflects in a rand amount a R30.9 million 
which is then transferred in US Dollars and the US Dollar 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 173 of 376 
 
amount is exactly R3 million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  $3 million. 
MR HOLDEN:  Sorry $3 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  $3 million ja I was trying to look where is 
$30 million.  Okay.  Okay 
MR HOLDEN:  $3 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is – that – whose account is that – is 
that Gateways’ account? 
MR HOLDEN:  It is going into Gateway Limited’s account. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Gateway Limited. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  So you can see that is next to the left of the 
rand amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR HOLDEN:  That gives Gateway Limited as the account it 
is going into. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ja I can see that ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if you go back up to 631 we 
get the Reserve Bank state for this transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is if we go back to? 
MR HOLDEN:  531 because… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  This is a spread sheet that really 
should be on the same page but it is too long. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  To fit on a page.  So the – so we 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 174 of 376 
 
have been looking at the fourth row and if we go to the 
fourth row on page 631 we see the date is 4 September 
2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then we have – this is a case 
where we have offshore evidence as well.  So if we go to 
page 625 we see the Gateway accounts that were obtained 
from the UAE and Mr Holden can you take the Chair to the – 
this transaction on Gateways’ Standard Chartered Bank 
statement page 65. 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So just to confirm this is a – this 
was attached as annexure T to my original report page 31 of 
that annexure and it is the second yellow highlighted 
transaction.  And you can see on the left hand side it gives 
the date as the 5 September 2013. It is – the text is rather 
small but you can actually see that the reference that it has 
given is Estina Pty Limited at Shimbali Sands which is what 
the registered address for Estina was at that time.   
 
And then the third column over also highlighted is the 
amount of $2.999. 975.00 which is $25 dollars less than $3 
20 
million.  That $25 is most likely accounted for by bank 
charges. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  There is one South African leg that 
we need to exhaust before we go offshore.  We took as our 
starting point for the 2 million that came into the Baroda 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 175 of 376 
 
account or we just saw it land in the Baroda current account.  
We have not seen where it came from.  For that can I ask 
you to turn to page 445?  And Mr Holden can you describe 
what 445 is? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  This is a fixed deposit account 
held by Estina at the Bank of Baroda with the account 
number 92020300000287 and what we have here if you look 
at the transaction dates thereafter the first date is the 15 
October 2012 that is the date that this facility was created.  
On the 15 October 2012 you see the deposit coming in of R2 
10 
million and then the closure on the 4 September 2013 of R2 
million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So that then takes us to the arrow 
out of the Octagon on the right hand side of page 668.  It 
also takes us to the bottom of the arrow dropping vertically 
into that – sorry it is an hexagon dropping vertically into that 
hexagon and the last South African link that we need to look 
at is where that R2 million that we see arriving on 15 
October 2012 comes from and for that can we go to page 
473? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  473.  473. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  473 Chair indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And Mr Holden first can you 
identify where the R2million comes from and then can you 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 176 of 376 
 
talk to how it is made up? 
MR HOLDEN:    Certainly.  So this page is a page from 
Kamal Vasram’s Bank of Baroda current account with the 
bank account number 92020200000262 and on the left hand 
side if you scroll down to the date 15 October 2012 you can 
see an amount of R2 million withdrawn and the reference is 
given as FDR and so that is the R2 million that goes into the 
fixed deposit account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And how is this R2 million made 
up? 
10 
MR HOLDEN:  So the R2 million is made up as you can see 
prior to this transaction there are two deposits.  The first on 
the 12 October 2012 of R1 million – R1 050 000.00 and then 
a further deposit on the 15 October of R950 000.00.  Those 
two deposits together increased the balance in the account 
to R2 million – R2 000 493.17 cents which then facilitates 
the R2 million transfer out to the fixed deposit account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So can you explain to the Chair 
why you have not got that rectangle with Kamal Vasram at 
the top of page 672 why it is in yellow and not green? 
20 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  Because the transfer on the 12 
October 2012 of just over – of R1 million and R50 000.00 is 
ultimately drawn from tranche 1 the second payment the 
Free State government makes.  And the R950 000.00 is from 
the source that we are unable to identify but we suspect may 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 177 of 376 
 
have been the Estina ABSA account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So now we have covered the 
starting the – the whole of the starting South African leg of 
tranche 0 and $3 million has landed in the Gateway account.  
To pick up where it goes in the Gateway account can we turn 
now and Chair at this point we are off part 1 so if you can 
put that page back – page 672 you can put it back in the file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if we go to page 674 sorry 678 
we will see what happens to that R3 million when it lands in 
10 
Dubai or in the UAE. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Chaskalson.  Okay and 
then we go to what page? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  To 678 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I am there. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And Mr Holden can you first 
describe what you are depicting on page 678 and then we 
can go to the bank statements? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So the $3 million that is paid into 
Gateway Limited’s account is dissipated in a number of 
20 
different tranches.  It is four different steps I am able to 
trace and this is the first of those steps.  And what we see is 
on the 5 September 2013 the deposit is made into Gateway 
Limited and then on the 23 September 2013 we see a 
payment made of $72 231.14 on the 23 September 2013 and 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 178 of 376 
 
that goes to Star Engineers. And then on the same day 
50 000.00 is transferred to Lin Yu Chu. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And can you just remind the Chair 
who Star Engineers are and who Lin Yu Chu is? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So Star Engineers is the Indian 
company from which Estina purchases the dairy equipment 
and Lin Yu Chu I am afraid I have not been able to discern 
the exact relationship to the Gupta Enterprise but there is 
correspondence showing that there were some sort of 
business relationship between them. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then if we want to confirm these 
transactions it gives us an opportunity to test the ledger 
against the Gateway – the official Gateway Standard account 
– Standard Chartered account.  So can we go to the 
Gateway Standard Chartered account first at page 625?  And 
can you identify the two payments that you have been 
describing here?  The payment of 50 000.00 to Lin Yu Chu 
and 72 231.14 to Star Engineers? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So what we have on the left hand 
side of you see the dates running chronologically under the 
20 
23 September which is two entries after the second yellow 
highlighted entry we have a payment – a first payment 
reflected of 50 000.00 and then a second payment of 
72 231.14.  What is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  We are at 625 is it not? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 179 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   625 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay I was looking for that amount of 
72 now I can see it ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And I think Mr Holden it is a rare 
occasion I can correct you.  You have given the date of the 
50 000.00 payment as 23 September but when I was 
preparing this morning I had reason to believe that it was not 
that 50 000.00 it was the one above that is dated 18 
September and so let us pend it for now but – until we go to 
the ledger on page 375.  And can you describe to the Chair 
10 
what we see on page 375? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So this is a transaction ledger that 
we have described previously and if you were to look at 
the… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry just to clarify is this one of 
the tabs that was on that spread sheet that was emailed from 
I think Suresh Tuteja to Tony Gupta? 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct.  And what we see in the 
second column is if we scroll down to the 18 September 
which I can the evidence leader has very kindly corrected me 
20 
you see 50 000.00 going to Lin Yu Chu.  It is about a third of 
the way down that page and against the date the 18 
September 2013.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And where do we see the Start 
Engineering payment? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 180 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:  So that occurs three transactions later on the 
23 September 2013 and it gives the amount 72 231.14 paid 
from – if you scroll over to the far – the final column it 
indicates it was made from Gateway Standard Chartered 
Bank US Dollar accounts which the statement confirms. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So what we have seen here is an 
instance of confirmation of the correctness of these ledgers 
on the email. Because we saw the underlying bank statement 
for Standard Chartered in respect of Gateway matching 
transactions that we see on the ledgers. Can we then turn to 
10 
page 679?  And you have a heading Tracing Tranche 0 part 
3.  Can you explain to the Chair what you are doing here? 
MR HOLDEN:  Absolutely.  So just to recap part 1 was 
tracing the internal South African laundry.  Part 2 was the 
transactions we have just dealt with and part 3 is another 
chain of transactions through which the $3 million is 
dissipated through offshore transactions. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if we go over the page you will 
see – you have broken it up into steps again. 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So we have… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That 679? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No 680 now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  680 okay.  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So at 680 we have already seen – 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 181 of 376 
 
it starts with the Estina payment – the Estina Standard Bank 
payment to the Gateway payment that we have already seen.  
Your first new step comes out of Gateway Limited Standard 
Chartered US Dollar account and can I ask you first to go to 
the official Standard Chartered account on page 625?  The 
statement on page 625.  And can you see where we find a 
payment of 400 000.00 on 23 September 2013? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  So it appears directly after the 
72 241.14 that was paid to Star Engineers. There is an entry 
for 400 000.00 also on the 23 September. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And let us again cross-check that 
against the ledgers and go to page 346?  And you have this 
400 000.00 moving from Standard Chartered – the Gateway 
Standard Chartered Dollar account to the Global Standard 
Chartered Dollar account.  Can you show me where we see 
that on the ledgers? 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly.  It is a bit small. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Maybe at this point if you could put 
the ledger up on the screen. 
MR HOLDEN:  Certainly. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So that you can direct us.   
MR HOLDEN:  As we can see here on the screen I am going 
to zoom in very quickly.  We have two transactions listed 
here.  The first main party is Global Corporation the 23 
September 2013 the counter party is Gateway Limited and if 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 182 of 376 
 
we scroll over to the right here we see that 400 000.00 has 
been deposited into Global’s US Dollar Standard Chartered 
Bank accounts and then the transaction that appears below 
that is the counter party transaction and on the left hand 
side we can see Gateway as the main party again the 23 
September.  The counter party is Global Corporation and if 
you scroll again across we have R400 000.00 that is 
transferred – it is a $400 000.00 that is transferred out.  So 
these two transactions reference each other. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So this is another instance where 
10 
we started with the ledgers and saw a transaction on the 
ledgers which subsequently was confirmed as correct when 
the NPA received the underlying Gateway statements from 
Standard Chartered? 
MR HOLDEN:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Your next transaction on page 680 
is the 400 000.00 that has moved from Standard Chartered 
Gateway to Standard Global is transferred across to Global’s 
Bank of Abu-Dhabi a Dirham account and to see that, it is...  
Sorry.  Can you just describe that arrow down from Global 
20 
Corporation Standard Chartered Dubai US Dollar account to 
Global Corporation Bank of Abu-Dhabi Dirham account? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  So what we see there is a transfer 
of 449 346 Dollars which is equal to 1.64 million Dirham and 
that is transferred on the 24t h of September 2013.  So a day 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 183 of 376 
 
after that account has just received the payment from 
Gateway Limited. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And can I ask you to go to page 
350 to identify that transaction on the ledgers? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page is that Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   350, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR HOLDEN:   So on the screen, as you can see, her at 
rows 257 and 258, the first party at row 257 is Global, the 
24t h of September.  It says...  I think I should be looking 
10 
here.  I apologise.  I am looking at the wrong transaction 
here.  It is up here.   
 
And see here at...  Sorry, row 249.  You see the party, 
the 
main 
party 
is 
Global. 
 
The 
date 
is 
the 
23rd of September 2013.   
 
The counter party is Global Corporation LLC which 
obviously is the second as the first party.  And what see here 
is an amount deposited into Global Corporations National 
Bank of Abu-Dhabi Dirham account of 1.65 million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And 1.65 million would correspond 
20 
to roughly to 455 000 Dollars. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then that 1.650 Dirham which 
is deposited into...  Well, sorry.  The other – you have an 
entry of 449 346, 15 Dollars, that has left the Dollar account.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 184 of 376 
 
Can you flag that on the ledgers? 
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think you have overshot it. 
MR HOLDEN:   Is it? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If you go back to 1650 and you go 
up four rows, you should find it.   
MR HOLDEN:   Ja, it is 3449.  Is that correct? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is correct, yes. 
MR HOLDEN:   Yes, yes, yes.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR HOLDEN:   Let me get organised here.  At row 244, we 
see 
the 
company, 
the 
main 
party 
is 
Global. 
 
The 
23rd of September 2013 
for 
a 
reason 
I 
do 
not 
fully 
understand.  They have the left counter party blank.   
 
But we do know that that is Global Corporation as well.  
And we see the capital withdrawal of 449 246 Dollars from 
Global US Dollars to Standard Chartered bank account.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  So we know have 
1 650 000 Dirham’s in the Bank of Abu-Dhabi account.  And 
you say as step two, 1.7 million is withdrawn in cash.  Can 
20 
you go to page 350 and show me where we see this 
1.7 million withdrawn in cash? 
MR HOLDEN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is your date on your diagram is 
24 September. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 185 of 376 
 
MR HOLDEN:   That is right.  Over here.  We have at row 
256, we see the first party is Global.  The date is the 
24t h of September 2013.  Then we have a description of cash 
withdrawal and then cash is reflected – there is a cash here.  
It is reflected as 1.7 million in cash.   
 
And if you see the counter party transaction here, it is 
actually on the same line because it is cash withdrawal.  You 
can see the 1.7 million Dirham being taken out of the 
National Bank of Abu-Dhabi account in Dirham.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  Then we move to 
10 
page 681 where we know as our starting point, 1.7 million in 
cash and we are going to see where that cash goes.  At the 
bottom left-hand page of...   
 
Well, it depends which way you are looking at it.  If you 
are reading the script from left to right as opposed to turning 
your head, trying to read it A4.   
 
If you have the page landscape not portrait, can you 
show us what happened to that 1.7 million cash? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  So on step 3 of this transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, sorry.  Or 1.7 budget at the bottom 
20 
there.  Is that the one at the bottom? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is the 1.7 million cash in that 
bottom... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright. 
MR HOLDEN:   Step 3, 1.3 million Dirham of that 1.7 million 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 186 of 376 
 
Dirham is then transferred to Global Corporation, Bank of 
Baroda, 
Dubai 
Dirham 
account 
on 
the 
24t h of September 2013. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, you said transferred? 
MR HOLDEN:   Oh, sorry.  Deposited not transferred. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So this is would be an example of 
the cash...[intervenes]  
MR HOLDEN:   Exactly. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So where in the banking system 
the cash of 1.7 million and now the banking system cannot 
10 
see where we are taking that cash but we put 1.3 million 
straight back into the banking system and now there has 
been a break.   
MR HOLDEN:   Absolutely. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And where do you see...  If I take 
you to page 350, which we were on a minute ago, can you 
show us where that 1.5 million ...[intervenes]  
MR HOLDEN:   1.3 million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, sorry.  1.3 million is 
...[intervenes]  
20 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  So at row 257 which is directly 
after the cash withdrawal row, you will see on the left-hand 
side the main party is Global, 24t h of September 2013 and 
here reflects cash deposit.   
 
And we see in the cash, the cash heading, 1.3 million is 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 187 of 376 
 
minus from the – is subtracted from the cash amount.  In 
fact, cash in hand.  And then 1.3 million Dirham is reflected 
as being paid into Global’s Bank of Baroda Dirham based 
account.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is 1.3 of the 1.7 million.  Can 
you go back to page 681 and tell us what happens to most of 
the balance of that original 1.7 million? 
MR HOLDEN:   So what we see is that amount being – the 
remainder amount of the 1.7 million is paid to the right on 
the diagram, 367 245 Dirham on the 24t h of September 2013, 
10 
is described as cash given to Nadi(?) which we understand 
the Nadi exchange for Hawala transaction.   
 
I should clarify Chair.  At the bottom of this red enter 
point here, I give a figure of 2 million Dirham.  That is – 
actually, what happens is that at a later stage within this 
transaction, more money is paid into – more cash is 
transferred into the Hawala system.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   To find that 367 245 going into the 
Nadi Hawala system.  Can I take you to page 342? 
MR HOLDEN:   It might be - more about to show, it going out 
20 
and then where it shows up on the cash later.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry?  You told me what you want 
to show. 
MR HOLDEN:   I think you are correct in the first instance.  
So. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 188 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what was that page Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   342, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And you are looking for 367245 
going out to the Nadi system on the 24t h of September 2013. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct.  So just to clarity.  On the – it 
is a little bit difficult to see on the screen here – but this is 
the – I have now moved to a different sheet in the Excel 
spread – Excel workbook.   
 
I am now on the cash sheet.  I am now on the cash sheet 
10 
because obviously they are now transacting in cash.  And 
then we can see here on the 24t h of September 2013, we see 
an amount of 367 245 Dirham and it is described as Nadi 
Exchange Remittance.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   While we are on this page.  Can I 
ask you to flag also the second payment to the Nadi 
Exchange? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  So that occurs at row 31 directly 
thereafter and that is 367 255 Dirham as paid on the 
25t h (?)of September 2013.   
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if you go back to 681, can you 
show where that is reflected on your diagram? 
MR HOLDEN:   Certainly.  That is this transfer going down 
from Global Corporations, Bank of Baroda, Dubai account 
into the cash given Nadi Hawala.  I should mention that 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 189 of 376 
 
367 255 Dirham is roughly equivalent to 100 000 Dollars. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the Dirham(?), the one that 
appear...  It is not the one that appears at 671, is it? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   681, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   681. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   681.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And just to close that loop on the 
ledgers.  Can you go back to page 350 and show where the 
cash, the 367 255, how that cash is created because it has 
10 
come out of the – your diagram says it comes out of the 
Global Corporation, Bank of Baroda. 
MR HOLDEN:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Dubai bank account. 
MR HOLDEN:   So what we see here at row 258 on the 
spreadsheet on the screen.  The first party is Global.  The 
date is the 24t h of September 2013.  There is a description 
called Depo Con which I have never been really able to 
ascertain this – that meaning but it could mean deposit 
convert or something like that.   
20 
 
And then, further to the right here, we see 367 450 
Dirham withdrawal from Global, Bank of Baroda, Dirham 
account.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  So we have now 
finished.  If we go back to six...  We finished six, eight... The 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 190 of 376 
 
diagram on 681 which is step 4 of your description of these 
tranches.  And we now need to go to step 5 on page 682.   
CHAIRPERSON:   We might need to take a break.  How far 
are we from finishing for the day? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, in truth, where we finish...  
Now is a good a time any time to finish. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Because this illustration, we 
cannot do this for all eight diagrams. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, ja. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But what we will do is, we will give 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...a detailed referenced copy of 
each diagram so that all of that information is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then what we can do early 
tomorrow morning ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...or at the start of tomorrow 
20 
morning, is we can very quickly ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...just talk high-level about where 
this money goes, where it ends in five minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay but in terms of your plan, when 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 191 of 376 
 
do you think we will stop? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We will finish – with an hour 
tomorrow morning or maybe an hour and a half tomorrow 
morning, we will finish the Estina money flows. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then we will move over to the 
Transnet money flows. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Which will – we will have 
comfortable time to finish ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...given the time available for us 
tomorrow ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...and Monday evening and even 
Tuesday evening if we need to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Well, I take it that that means 
it might be convenient to adjourn his evidence now or would 
you like ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think it is as good a time...  It is 
20 
as convenient a time as any ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...now to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  Maybe we should 
do that.  Then when – then you start the next step tomorrow.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 192 of 376 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  And then we will continue.  So we 
can take the break.  I mean, if it mattered, we could have 
continued for some time ...[intervenes]  
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Chair, 
I 
wonder 
if 
we 
take...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If we now stop moving high-level. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Not... and maybe we should finish 
10 
Tranche 0. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Because we are in the middle of 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay maybe let us take five minutes, ten 
minutes’ break. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then we can continue and then stop a 
at a certain time.  Then I can hear the evening witness. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   There is an evening witness 
waiting and we should not – I do not want to inconvenience. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We can tailor our time tomorrow 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 193 of 376 
 
to... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, no.  That is fine.  But the 
evening team knows that I said we could start at four 
o’clock...  They should be here at four o’clock but we could 
start at five or half-past four.  So there is ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, no.  Look, from my 
perspective Chair, whether we finish now or in ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...half an hour’s time, it makes no 
real difference. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I would not want to inconvenience 
the evening session. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  Maybe then let us adjourn for 
the day in terms of this witness and then we continue 
tomorrow.  Then I will take a break.  When I come back, I will 
start with the evening session. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And now I can rest(?) for the rest 
20 
of the day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Then let us adjourn.  We will 
adjourn Mr Holden.  And then tomorrow, we start at ten as 
normal.  We start at ten, ja.  So we will adjourn for the day 
and you will come back tomorrow.  Okay.  The adjournment 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 194 of 376 
 
will be about 15 or so minutes to enable the evening team to 
setup and thereafter we will continue with the evening 
session.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon, Mr Seleka, good 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Good afternoon, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are indeed, Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, the witness for this 
session if Mr Matshela Moses Koko and he may take either 
the oath or the affirmation.  We will place on record the 
legal representatives afterwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Afterwards, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us do the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MATSHELA MOSES KOKO:   Matshela Moses Koko. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR KOKO:   No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 195 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give  
will be the truth the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth.  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
MR KOKO:   So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may be seated, Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you for coming to give evidence 
and assist the Commission.  Or then counsel for Mr Koko 
10 
can place themselves on record, you may do so from where 
you are if that is convenient. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Chair, my name is Frans Barrie, I am 
from 
the 
Johannesburg 
Bar, 
I 
am 
instructed 
Ndou 
Incorporated Attorneys.  Chair, as mentioned to you in 
chambers, there are some matters of housekeeping that we 
want brought to your attention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Because we were after nine yesterday 
evening supplied with a bundle that is going to serve 
20 
before you today and it is in certain respects deficient.  
The one aspect is unforeseen but we made available to the 
legal team an affidavit to correct minor errors in the 
affidavits 
that 
have 
been 
made 
available 
to 
the 
Commission. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 196 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Then we wrote to you a letter yesterday 
in 
relation 
to 
various 
aspects 
pertaining 
to 
these 
proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   My understanding is that that letter has 
not reached you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it has not reached me. 
ADV BARRIE SC:    Because we – one of the issues that is 
relevant here is that we have now for a period of more than 
10 
a year been trying to obtain our client’s cell phone records 
which you will know have in these proceedings been put to 
witnesses quite liberally and we have requested I think on 
the 29 October of last year already, we have requested that 
these documents be made available to us.  They were not 
made available to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you get a response at all? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   We did not get a response to that letter 
at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And that letter was then later followed 
up when – during this year, more recently, in a letter dated 
23 September 2020 and the letter that we sent to you this 
morning was to ask again, which was the same request that 
was made yesterday, that you should intervene and give 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 197 of 376 
 
some directive to the effect that those cell phone records 
have to be made available to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   It does to us, though, that we do not 
have any choice but to resort to the Promotion of Access to 
Information Act which …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, there should be no need for that.  If 
we have got the information it relates to him, I cannot see 
any problem why the Commission should not give those – 
that information. 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:   We, in the letter to you, we express our 
dismay at this situation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I cannot think of any reason why, if 
we have got them, why they cannot be made available.  
You referred to some occasion when they may have been 
mentioned.  I seem to think – but I do not remember 
whether it was Mr Koko’s cell phone records but I do know 
that at some stage, a few weeks ago or a few – two months 
ago, whatever, when we were dealing with Eskom matters 
there was a reference to some cell phone records but I 
20 
cannot remember they related to him or somebody else.   
ADV BARRIE SC:   No …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if we have got the cell phone 
records relating to him there is really – I cannot see any 
reason why they should not be made available. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 198 of 376 
 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Chair, the reason why I am mentioning 
that Act is if we have to resort to that, you will be person 
responsible to respond to it and we would not want you to 
take umbrage at that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But for the time being if I may hand up 
the affidavit correcting the prior affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:    And then the letter of yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Which was incorrectly dated, I must 
say, and then again the letter to us so that it is a matter of 
public record before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  He is going to check those. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   I have copies for my learned friends 
although I am sure they also have these documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the effect of the fact that you 
have not received those cell phone records …[intervenes] 
ADV BARRIE SC:   In terms of our continuing today? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   In terms of our continuing with the 
proceedings today? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:    Our decision is that we – my client 
needs to be heard. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 199 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   My client has been the victim of vicious 
trial by media over a number of years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And my client wants to be heard before 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   So we are not going to ask for 
postponement for any of the things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But we are in due course hoping to get 
those records. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine.  Do I – is it 
important for me to read these before we start or…? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   I would not think it is particularly 
important at this time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I can read them later. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But if you possibly overnight then – or 
in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   I may also mention that we have been 
requested to be here again on the 11 December. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Our understanding is that the present 
proceedings relate only to what is referred to as the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 200 of 376 
 
suspension of …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes of the executives. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Of executives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   We are currently going to be back on 
the 11 December, only an hour, we hope, when we will see 
you again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   So things that arisen possibly from the 
correspondence will then be addressed. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, that is fine then.  Thank 
you. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, what is the story about cell 
phone  records not being made available to Mr Koko’s legal 
team? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Thank you, Chairperson, the cell 
phone records that have been used before the Commission, 
they came through the evidence of Ms Veleti, Nonkululeko 
Dlamini Veleti.  The affidavit together with what was 
20 
contained in regard to the list of telephone exchanges 
between I and Mr Koko would have been provided to Mr 
Koko in terms of Rule 3.3 and indeed that was provided to 
Mr Koko prior to Ms Veleti coming to testify because the 
part of Ms Veleti’s evidence in the affidavit is captured in – 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 201 of 376 
 
is responded to in Mr Koko’s affidavit.  That is one. 
 
Then there was a general request for cell phone 
records which my learned friend is referring to.  There was 
a response to that, Chairperson, by letter dated 13 
November 2020 from the secretariat.  It is a two page 
letter.  It deals with all the requests that had been made 
from my learned friend’s attorneys and the letter is 
addressed to the attorney, Mr Phumudzo Ndou.  In regard 
to the telephone records the letter reads at paragraph 7: 
“Anymore 
by 
your 
phone 
records 
that 
the 
10 
Commission 
has 
in 
its 
possession 
have 
been 
obtained by virtue of the Commission’s investigative 
work.  In the event that the Commission wishes to 
present any such records as evidence during the 
testimony of your client such records will be part of 
the bundle of evidence that will be presented.  This 
information 
will 
be 
shared 
with 
your 
client 
beforehand to afford him an opportunity to prepare.  
Let us know if you require any further assistance.” 
So it is not correct to say there was no response to the 
20 
letter, there was indeed a response and insofar as the 
information was used before the Chairperson in regard to 
Ms Veleti, that would have been provided to Mr Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then – well, the letter says the cell 
phone records will be provided together with the bundle.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 202 of 376 
 
Has that happened? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, that is – we are not – that is if the 
Commission intends relying on that when your client comes 
to testify.  So we have not packaged the cell phone records 
as evidence for the purposes of Mr Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well is there any reason why you 
cannot share them with his legal team, the cell phone 
records?  Are they not relevant for some or other point? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  We have not, I have not looked at 
them except for the ones of Ms Nonkululeko Veleti, 
10 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which have been shared. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The one which is general question 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you say those ones have been 
shared? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The general question one, any cell 
phone records in the possession of the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Well, I think what should 
happen is have a discussion with Mr Barrie. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 203 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Have 
a 
discussion 
afterwards 
to 
understand exactly if they have received the earlier ones 
which you say were sent together with the Rule 3.3 notice. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And whether the request for other cell 
phone records is just to say any cell phone records that 
the Commission has …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or might have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or might have or relevant to a particular 
issue.  If the two of you talk, I am sure that will be sorted 
10 
out. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
We 
could 
certainly 
do 
that, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Chair, if I may, I did not intend to 
convey to you that the more recent letter was not 
responded to.  It was responded to, it took two months. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   The initial letter was never responded 
to.  We have not received any cell phone records. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But the real issue is the cell phone 
records are not only important for what my learned friend 
thinks they might be important.  They may be important for 
what they do not show. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 204 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
BARRIE 
SC: 
 
 
And 
we 
requested 
that 
quite 
unequivocally. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   We discussed it with my learned friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   We still do not have it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And it is beyond our understanding, to 
be perfectly frank, why – how this could happen. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, maybe what we should do is 
after – when we have finished this evening the two of you 
can talk.  Today is Thursday, the 11 t h is next Friday? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, when Mr Koko will be back.  I think if 
– or by Monday, latest Tuesday, the issue has not been 
resolved them maybe the two of you can see me at the 
hearing during one of the breaks and we can see what can 
be done, ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Very well.  Very well, thank you, Chair, 
20 
I think that is for the time being… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.  Okay, Mr Seleka.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, on that note 
we may proceed.  The bundle we will be using is Eskom 
bundle 15, EXHIBIT U27. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 205 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Koko should have the same bundle 
also in front of him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And let us confirm that for purposes of 
this evening, Mr Koko’s evidence will be confined to the 
issue of the suspension of the executives.  Any other 
matters in respect of which he may testify will be dealt with 
either on the 11 t h or some other time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Alright. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So the suspensions will not – his 
evidence 
on 
the 
suspension 
will 
not 
touch 
on 
the 
transactions which I know other people do know the 
transactions, 
the 
Tegata 
transaction, 
the 
Trillian 
transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That will be dealt with in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So Mr Koko, by way of the bundles you 
have Eskom bundle 15, EXHIBIT U27. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe what you should do, Mr Seleka, 
just for the benefit of the public. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 206 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I hear evidence during the day 
relating to this entity and then in the evening I hear 
evidence relating to another entity and the previous 
evidence relating to that entity happened weeks ago.  
Maybe you could just recap as to where exactly Mr Koko 
features in terms of his suspension so that when Mr Koko 
starts his evidence and the questioning starts the public 
can follow. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Follow, sure.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, this is – the evidence that will 
be presented is part of the Eskom work stream in regard to 
matters arising at Eskom back in March 2015.  On the 11 
March 2015, Chair, the Eskom board took decisions to 
suspend four executives.  Mr Koko was one of the four 
executives suspended.  
 
The three other executives were ultimately engaged 
in negotiations to leave Eskom.  Settlement agreements 
were concluded with them on the basis they separated with 
Eskom.  Only Mr Koko came back from his leave. 
20 
 
The evidence then he will – we hope he will adduce 
today, 
relates 
to 
the 
circumstances 
leading 
to 
his 
suspension and perhaps give the Commission insight into 
his return and when he is back then there are other factors 
or matters relevant to his presence at Eskom which are the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 207 of 376 
 
matter we say will be dealt with in due course. 
 
In a nutshell, his evidence fits into the issue of the 
suspensions, the decisions by the board relative to the 
evidence that has already been laid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the part that you may have not 
highlighted, which does need to be highlighted, is that 
there are some witnesses who have given evidence to the 
effect that whereas the suspensions were effected on the 
11 March 2015 he had called them separately to meetings 
that they had with him tougher with Mr Salim Essa on the 
10 
10 March.  That is the day before the board suspended the 
four 
executives 
where 
the 
information 
– 
where 
the 
discussions revealed that I think in respect of one of the 
witnesses, Ms Daniels, I think, he said it was Salim Essa 
who did most of the talking, if I am not mistaken. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he was the one who told her that 
four executives were going to be suspended including Mr 
Koko.  Mr Koko, according to Ms Daniels was in that 
meeting in Melrose Arch and Mr Masango gave evidence 
20 
this week, Mr Abram Masango.  He said he too was called 
by Mr Koko to a meeting at Melrose Arch on the 10 March. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   10 t h, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he said that he met with Mr Koko 
and Mr Salim Essa but he said it was Mr Koko who did the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 208 of 376 
 
talking, Mr Salim Essa was quiet most of the time, I think, 
and he said Mr Koko told him that there would be a 
suspension of executives which would include him, Mr 
Koko.  Ja and – ja, I think one can say that in Mr Koko’s 
affidavit, which is here, he has admitted that he had a 
meeting with Ms Daniels at a restaurant but has denied 
that there was any meeting that he had with her and with 
Mr Salim Essa at Melrose Arch on that day and discussing 
the suspension of executives.   
I 
have 
not 
seen 
anything 
he 
says 
about 
Mr 
10 
Masango’s evidence but it might be somewhere, I just have 
not seen it.  So I think it is important to understand that 
because I think it is an important part for both Mr Koko and 
those particular witnesses.  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, yes if we give that more 
detailed description then we might as well add there is also 
Mr Koko, the evidence of Ms Veleti who says she was also 
called by you on the 10 March 2015, that you – that Mr 
20 
Koko was asking her also to come to Melrose Arch, was 
asking for her CV.   
Chairperson, we have consulted with Mr Edwin 
Mabelane who is having to give an affidavit as well and he 
gives an information about him also being with Mr Koko in 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 209 of 376 
 
his office, in Mr Koko’s office, on the 11 t h midday or just 
after midday and being told by Mr Koko that we might be 
suspended but without specifying who are the we.  And he 
is coming in Mr Koko’s office to tell Mr Koko that I have 
just – I have received a call from the company secretary, 
he 
says 
tomorrow 
morning 
I 
should 
meet 
with 
the 
Chairperson.  He emphasises the importance of the time 
and in response Mr Koko said well, you might be asked to 
act and that meeting is probably about that, the meeting of 
tomorrow morning and he says he leaves the office of Mr 
10 
Koko with the impression that he is going to be asked to 
act in Mr Koko’s position and that is what happened.  So if 
we go into the detail, we can paint that picture in its 
entirety. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, that is fine.  So but it is 
important that we – that I hear Mr Koko’s side of the story 
today. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chairperson, this being an 
20 
evening session, I think, Mr Koko, you can accept that we 
have read your affidavit and we will cut to the chase.  So 
that file I have referred to, which is Eskom bundle 15 , 
contains your affidavit.  It contains – there are three – 
well, there is two affidavits …[intervenes] 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 210 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe I must say this, Mr Koko, 
nothing he says means you will not get a fair opportunity to 
put your case.  Okay.  So if – do not think that you will be 
prevented from stating your case. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Putting your evidence properly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I mean, I do not want to be disrespectful of 
you and if I am, my – I grew up with my grandfather, he will 
10 
smack me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   So I really – I have been criminalised and I 
have been criticised, I have been condemned.  I have been 
called names.  I have a son who comes back from school 
and I feel for him.  I look forward to today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:   I really want to assist you to get to the truth. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Wherever the truth gets you to. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
MR KOKO:   I had a long difficult discussions with my 
lawyers about we do not have this, we do not have that, 
and I said to counsel and my attorney that we do in there, 
whatever happens.  I have followed your sessions closely 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 211 of 376 
 
and I have no doubt that I will be heard.   
 
I am of the view that this is the only place giving 
the four years that I have been crucified, that evidence will 
matter and you will cut to the chase and separate 
allegations and just focus on the evidence and I really 
want to ask you that you allow me to make opening 
remarks.  And if you say no, it is okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I will allow you. 
MR KOKO:   I will be happy if you say no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, no, I will allow you.  You see, 
10 
if I had my way, people who have been vilified or feel that 
they have been vilified in the media and so called court of 
public opinion about matters that fall within the terms of 
reference of the Commission would come here and – 
because they would get a chance to put their side of the 
story.  We might make mistakes somewhere but certainly 
we try our best to make sure that everyone gets a fair 
opportunity.  That does not mean that we would allow 
anybody to just go on and on and on because obviously 
time is important but we would try and make sure that as 
20 
far as possible they get a fair opportunity to put their side 
of the story.   
So I have allowed other witnesses, we have asked 
for time to say something before the questioning starts and 
I would allow you.  Some have said can I have five 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 212 of 376 
 
minutes, others have said ten minutes, others fifteen 
minutes and we have looked at how much and then they 
would say what they wish to say before the questioning 
starts.  So I would allow you.  How much time would you 
like? 
MR KOKO:   Fifteen minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Fifteen?  Okay, it starts now. 
MR KOKO:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   I have a set of documents that have I brought 
10 
for your purpose. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I must say, Mr Koko, on one 
occasion, I do not know whether it is one or two, I allowed 
a witness to say something without a statement and 
without us having seen the statement, having seen what 
they are going to say in advance but then the witness 
started making statements implicating other people and 
those people had not been notified.  So I do not know 
whether you are able to assure me that you are not going 
to be mentioning anybody’s name that would be implicated 
20 
who has not been notified or anything of that kind.   
I just mentioned that because when it happened I 
realised that maybe in the future when witnesses or certain 
people want to make statements we should say give us the 
statement of what you are going to say in advance so that 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 213 of 376 
 
if we see that somebody will be implicated we can notify 
them. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I will not mention names that are 
not in my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.  Okay. 
MR KOKO:   And if I do …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, if they are in your affidavit, names 
that are in your affidavit, those people would have been 
notified and so on, so that should not be a problem. 
MR KOKO:   Thank you, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright, you may start. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I thought I must put it to you that I 
listened to the NPA giving feedback to parliament and I got 
extremely worried about what was said there, Hermione – 
Ms Hermione Cronje told Parliament that we don’t want to 
get to the lowest hanging fruit, we know who we are 
targeting and we prosecute them and he says it will be 
disappointing for them to get to the lowest hanging fruit but 
not get to the people they were set up to get, but I thought 
the prosecution is not set up to get to people, the 
20 
prosecution is set up to follow the evidence and get to the 
people that the evidence implicates.  
 
In the letter that you have received, and I had a 
long argument with my counsel and I forced them to write it 
to you, because I honestly think that by – unconsciously or 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 214 of 376 
 
consciously your investigators are following people and are 
not following the evidence, because if they follow the 
evidence I can assure you Chairman even people who were 
sitting 
– 
will 
be 
sitting 
where 
I 
am 
sitting, 
this 
...[indistinct].    
 
You will, and one of the things I appreciate with you 
is that you put your proposition so I listen to you and say 
this is what the Judge is thinking.  Chairman you are going 
to make a decision about where there was State Capture or 
not and you have clearly made it clear that State owned 
10 
companies were very competent companies in the past and 
then there was State Capture and then they are all in 
trouble, and you included Eskom.   I have in the event that 
you conclude that there is State Capture and in the event 
that you conclude there was State Capture at Eskom the 
difficulty you are going to deal with is this, Eskom in 2001 
was the global energy company of the year, I was there 
and the Chairman, the CEO then was Allen Morgan.  Show 
you on evidence and this is why I say this is the only place 
where evidence matters and I would like you to go to – it is 
20 
this graph Chair, I think it is in the ... 
CHAIRPERSON:   The document doesn’t have or does 
have page numbers? 
MR KOKO:  It does not have page numbers, I followed 
that, but it is written Eskom Operational Performance under 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 215 of 376 
 
different executives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes I have got it. 
MR KOKO:   You will see that is the Eskom performance 
since 2000, you will see the peak in 2001, that is when 
Eskom was the global utility of the year, you see the peak 
there, we were walking on water, we were proud of being 
Eskom people.  We travelled overseas and I was one of the 
few people fortunate to be part of the technical team that 
went globally and everywhere we went people came to us 
and asked us how did you do that.   Thulani Gcabashe took 
10 
over after Allen Morgan.   If you look from 2002 to 2000 
and – if you look at what’s happening in 2015 it is down 
here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was at its highest at around 2000/2001 
and then around 2003 came down then 2005 it rose again 
and then from roundabout 2005 it seems to have been 
going down right through and 2015 represents it seems the 
lowest point. 
MR KOKO:  Yes, and then 2015 look at what happens in 
2015. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then it rose up to a certain point in 
2017 and then it started coming down again. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   The submission that we make to you is that in 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 216 of 376 
 
2015/2016/2017 Eskom produced the best performance 
improvement ever since 2001, in all KPI’s, now the front 
page of your documents that you are looking at is Eskom 
KPI’s over ten years.   You choose any single KPI there, 
any single KPI you will see that it has been the best ever 
since 2001, the best improvement in the year that is today 
defined as the years of State Capture, so when you get to 
a conclusion that there was State Capture and it affected 
Eskom the challenge you are going to have to deal with is 
that in the years of State Capture Eskom produced the best 
10 
performance ever. 
 
The next graph I would like you to look at is the one 
that 
is 
after 
what 
we 
looked 
at, 
the 
one 
that’s 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry the red lines or vertical lines 
what do they represent, I was looking at that. 
MR KOKO:   The red lines you will see at the top it says in 
2005 the CEO was Mr Dames and the Chief Generation 
Officer was Mr ...[Indistinct] and then in 2014 the CEO was 
Mr Matola and the Chief Generation Officer was Mr 
20 
...[Indistinct] and then in 2015 the Chief Executive Officer 
was Mr Molefe and the Chief Generation Officer is Mr 
Koko, I call it the Molefe Matshella effect, Matshella Molefe 
effect is the best ever since 2001 and Matshella Molefe are 
being presented to you at the phase of State Capture. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 217 of 376 
 
 
When history is written and I can tell you now Mr 
Chair history will absorb us that we have showed the best 
performance ever since 2001.  When I became the most 
senior engineer in Eskom on merit my motivation was done 
by BGB in Germany and ...[Indistinct] in the US, purely on 
merit.  I took over from the gentleman, a gentleman called 
Mr John Beck, he passed on.  Twelve months after he 
passed on his wife called in and said in Mr John Beck’s will 
is mentioned your name and he has directed that you take 
all his professional library must be delivered to your 
10 
house, it was in his will, he says because you were one of 
the 
best 
engineers 
he’s 
known. 
 
That 
was 
not 
a 
deployment. 
 
Chair the next page after the one you are looking 
for, you know South Africa is a different country because 
even black people are not accepting that a black engineer 
can produce the performance that you see in front of you, 
so they employ a lot of people and the supposition was 
that the numbers that you are looking at are cooked and 
this draft comes from an emeritus professor in Cape Town 
20 
called Professor Anton Abal and when he did this work all 
what he thought to prove was that the numbers he 
produced was cooked.  Of course he is a professor, you 
could not prove that, but if you look at what happened 
between 2017 and 2018 the best he can do is that it is an 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 218 of 376 
 
outlayer, because they just cannot explain technically what 
we did. 
 
The fleet, the age of the generation fleet Mr Molefe 
and I managed was 36 years old and when you deal with 
this they will then want to tell you that no Mr Koko 
postponed maintenance and that is why he had the 
performance and they will not – they will resist looking at 
the data, they will deliberately not look at the data.  
Chairman I brought you the data and it is on the next page. 
 
You will see in 2016 that the only executives that 
10 
did the most maintenance in Eskom history since 2023, and 
I must repeat this and say it very slowly, the team that did 
the most maintenance ever in the history of Eskom was the 
team of Mr Molefe and my team and Dr Ngubani.  The 
number that we use is PCLF, it is a measure of the amount 
of maintenance that we see.   If you go and look at the 
history of Eskom 13% is the highest we have ever 
produced, so whoever comes to you and Mr – and Mr 
Mabusa tried to tell you that with maintenance, he never 
gave you evidence, he will never give you evidence, he will 
20 
never do that, evidence is in the documents that you have 
and they are all in Eskom yearbooks. 
 
In my time and in Mr Molefe’s time and in Dr 
Ngubani’s time we have done the most maintenance.  It is 
for that reason that you go to the next stage at the very 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 219 of 376 
 
last page and you see that we have reduced the diesel 
spend in 2015 the one we just had this one, this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes it would help ja.  Yes, oh yes, yes, 
let’s just  number them now, I think the first page let’s just 
mark it one, the next one two and the next one three, four, 
five, six, eight, nine, ten.  There are ten? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you Mr Barrie.  
MR KOKO:   Chairman if you go to page 9 this is the diesel 
spend by Eskom.  Now the amount of diesel you use to 
10 
keep the lights on it is an indication of incompetence, so if 
you look at 2014 you see the peak is R12.5billion.   In 
2013/14/15 
you 
will 
see 
that 
Eskom 
was 
spending 
R12.5billion a year, it is a billion Rands per month and I 
told Mr Matona and I told Mr Molefe I have been in this 
space for over 20 years.  We don’t need to burn diesel to 
keep the lights on and to do the maintenance that we need 
to do, we have got sufficient capacity.  I was taught that, I 
was taught by John Beck, Mr Beck, may his soul rest in 
peace.  I was taught by Mr Dames if there is any person 
20 
that has a feel of this system I am one of them.  To burn 
diesel to keep the lights on in today’s time is sheer 
incompetencies.   My team, and it is still there at Eskom, 
reduced the diesel spend in one year from R12,5billion to 
R200million, and I always make the submission that says if 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 220 of 376 
 
you burn more than R200million worth of diesel you are 
incompetent. 
 
In this financial year Eskom is spending R7.5billion, 
last year it spent R6.5billion.  So you know there’s lights 
off, generally it is called, generally it says Mr Koko burnt 
diesel to keep the lights on, and they don’t give evidence.  
Chairman I use this opportunity to give it to you that we 
never burnt diesel to keep the lights on.   
 
Chairman let’s go to page 8, page 8 is very, very 
important because page 8 is what brings us here.  We are 
10 
accused of State Capture, we knew what to do, I told the 
CEO’s that I worked with that all what we need to do at 
Eskom is to meet the demand which the customers wants, 
do that without burning diesel, and do that and still do the 
necessary maintenance that the fleet that is 36 years old 
requires, you have got enough capacity in the system.  
Two, drive down the cost of primary energy cost, and 
primary energy cost may mean three things, we mean coal 
costs, we mean IPP cost, we mean the diesel costs, and 
you have to be brutal with that, because if we are not 
20 
brutal you will die, they will survive, and when I had the 
opportunity to be brutal I was brutal and that is why you 
hear a lot of people who come to you and say the 
management style of Mr Koko this and that.   John Beck 
never took excuses from me, and in turn I never took 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 221 of 376 
 
excuses from anybody else.  We employed competent 
engineers, engineers that are competent don’t need to be 
told what to do, they get led, but you don’t tell a competent 
engineer what to do.  An engineer needs to be told what to 
do you dispense of him or her and you do that very quickly, 
that is what I did. 
 
The graph in personnel tells you that in the history 
and this is the graph that starts only in 2014 but the trend 
is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you go back to page 9 now?  
10 
MR KOKO:   Page 8, I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 8, okay. 
MR KOKO:   It shows the level of coal cost increases at 
Eskom.  Eskom costs has been increasing Mr Chair by 
minimum of 15% year on year, it is in the Eskom yearbooks 
you will know it.  Between 2007 and 2015 Eskom coal costs 
increased cumulatively by over 400% against cumulative 
inflation of 74%.  Eskom was bound to die.  What you see 
in front of you on page 8 you will see that the only time 
Eskom costs, coal costs reduced was again in 2017 and 
20 
2018, again in the time of Mr Molefe and Dr Ngubani after 
we left in 2018 things went worse. 
 
At this stage Chair I want to go to tell you a very 
painful experience that I had in 2018 January I think it was 
either 20 t h or 21 s t of January 2018.  It was over a weekend, 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 222 of 376 
 
I can’t remember whether it was a Saturday or Sunday and 
I was driving from Pretoria and I just joined N1 from 
Pretoria.  I got a call from the then Acting Deputy Director 
General in the Department of Public Enterprises, Ms 
Magola, and she said to me – she used to work for me, and 
she went to work for DPE and then she says to Mr Koko we 
haven’t talked for a very long time, I said yes I am on 
suspension so I avoid talking to you guys in case I put you 
into disrepute, so it is safer that I keep away from you and 
in case you call me and it is official I suggest we don’t 
10 
proceed because we don’t know where it will end up.  She 
says no, no Mr Koko I called you out of respect and out of 
courtesy because I know you.  I said okay, she says – and 
it was around five, it was towards five, she says the 
Deputy President is going to issue a media statement 
dismissing you.  I said oh, the Deputy President is going to 
issue a media statement dismissing me, how can I be 
dismissed by the Deputy President.  What reason is he 
going to give, what reason am I being dismissed for.  She 
says the new board will find a reason to dismiss you, will 
20 
have to find a reason to dismiss you but the instruction is 
that you must be dismissed.   
 
She says listen I cannot talk long, I thought it is 
respectful that I give you the call but the Deputy Minister 
who is sitting with me wants to talk to you.   And then she 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 223 of 376 
 
gave the number to call to the Deputy Minister, then 
Deputy Minister Ben Martin.   Deputy Minister Martin spoke 
in Tswana and then he says – and I am going to translate – 
he says Mr Koko let us not discuss this thing, we thought 
that you don’t hear from the media, this was just a 
respectful call, we thought we owe you the decency that 
this statement is going to come out and that is what it is.  I 
said okay thank you and then I drove – before I could even 
get home, between Centurian and Johannesburg headline 
news, Eskom new board appointed and Mr Koko asked to 
10 
resign.   
 
We ended up at the Labour Court and the Labour 
Court was very emphatic that the decision by the Deputy 
President then was unlawful.  I say this Chair because part 
of what you have been focusing on is on interference and 
regulation, and I am saying to you the Deputy President 
interfered in the affairs of Eskom, in ...[indistinct], the 
Board that has not even met says to the – this is a new 
board, it has not met, but dismiss Mr Koko, go find reason 
to dismiss Mr Koko.  I deal with that in detail in my 
20 
affidavit. 
 
What is more important Chair, and this is why I am 
saying I get a feeling that the investigators are not 
following 
the 
evidence, 
because 
this 
is 
an 
unlawful 
instruction and I will lead it later on to Optimum, because 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 224 of 376 
 
the Chairman of Optimum in 2012 and 2014 was the same 
Deputy President when Eskom was not paid what was due 
to it at the tune of R1.4billion.  I will make the submission 
on the 11 t h to say Optimum is lying when it says they spent 
over a billion Rands to buy Optimum Mine without doing a 
due diligence.  Glencore is a very sophisticated business 
to spend over a billion Rand to buy Optimum without a due 
diligence.  They did that, the Chairman was then was Mr 
Ramaphosa.   They owed Eskom penalties of R1.4billion, 
they never paid Eskom and there is no reason to explain 
10 
why the R1.5billion was not paid to Eskom, it was due to 
Eskom.  They queried the tariff of the coal price.  The coal 
price that was a consequence of an arbitration in 2011, 
they refused to go to arbitration.  
 
When it became unreasonable and unpalatable to 
continue not to pay Eskom in 2014 they then concocted the 
famous cooperation agreement which I argue is unlawful, 
and your investigators are not saying what is the legal, 
what is the authority that was relied on to sign this 
cooperation bargaining.  In my letter of last night I say to 
20 
you Optimum when they bought – OCH when they – 
Glencore when they bought Optimum they had an Ace up 
their sleeve and the Ace up their sleeve was the political 
connectivity of the current Head of State and that is why 
you cannot explain why Glencore did not pay Eskom the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 225 of 376 
 
1.5 that is due to it.   
 
When you say that and people come in and say but 
you gave it to Tegeta, let’s listen to the dates; between 
March 2012 to June 2014 Glencore did not pay Eskom 
R1.4billion, nobody at Eskom chased it.  My friend and 
colleague, former friend and colleague, Mr Marokana, was 
sitting here, he was asked how did they suspension affect 
you, he was not asked Mr Marokana why Eskom was not 
paid R1billion under your watch, he was not asked that, 
because your investigators are not following evidence. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well when he was here he was dealing 
with suspensions, that might explain why, just like you will 
talk about suspensions only and then come back later and 
deal with a lot of other transactions, that might explain why 
he might not have been asked a question that you thought 
was important to ask. 
MR KOKO:   I accept that, I hope that one day he will come 
and 
explain 
why 
Optimum 
did 
not 
pay 
Eskom 
the 
R1.5billion, so Tegeta was not in the picture two years 
later.  The recordings of 2015 March that are being 
20 
...[indistinct] clearly say that we have got an elephant in 
the room, and there is recordings here, one of the biggest 
disappointments I have, and it hurts me, is that the 
minutes of Eskom that you read and the audios are chalk 
and cheese and the privilege I have is that now I have 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 226 of 376 
 
listened to the audio and I am going to encourage your 
investigators not to only look at the minutes, the audios 
tell a different story. 
 
When you finally engage with the evidence you will 
conclude that the real capture of Eskom is Glencore and 
the best we did was to deal with that, and that is what has 
been criminalised.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR KOKO:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you Mr Koko.  What I want to say 
10 
to you is it is important that the perspectives that you may 
have, part of which is what you were telling me, it is 
important that you finish them to the Commission in written 
form to the extent that you may not have done so, because 
we are interested in all perspectives, but what happens is 
that some people give us information and they will say 
certain things about other people and those other people 
don’t give us information about those people and then 
sometimes the Commission is accused of having evidence 
only coming from certain people but when those other 
20 
people don’t give us the information when everybody is 
welcome and invited to give information they deprive the 
Commission of the opportunity of seeing all perspectives, 
so if you haven’t done so in terms of giving us all 
perspectives that you believe are relevant to the terms of 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 227 of 376 
 
reference 
of 
the 
Commission 
insofar 
as 
Eskom 
is 
concerned please do so, particularly because you will still 
come back on the 11 t h, I would prefer it if whatever you 
might need to say we have got it in written form.  I know 
you have given us quite a detailed affidavit, for purposes 
of today I have looked at those parts of that affidavit that 
are relevant to today’s proceedings, but I think I previously 
had a look at other parts, so – but if you have covered 
everything you wanted to put before us in that affidavit 
then it is fine, but any other information that you may have 
10 
which you think is relevant to our terms of reference 
please feel free to furnish it. 
 
Of course I must just say that as I said to another 
witness maybe two weeks ago there is some limitation 
when we get new information at this stage, because the 
Commission is close to the end of this last term, it would 
have been different and easier if we got information much 
earlier and there was time to investigate.  Now it is quite 
limited the ability to investigate and the opportunity is 
limited, but nevertheless whatever you have which you 
20 
believe is relevant let us have. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman thank you, I really appreciate, I will 
take advice from Counsel and I will waste no opportunity 
and I will give it to you.  Chairman I forgot one thing if you 
may allow me. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 228 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   If you go to page 10, if you go to page 10, 
this is the work that was done by CSIR, it shows load 
shedding since 2007, you will see that in 2015 we had very 
bad load shedding, again in 2016 and 2017 we had no load 
shedding and then I got that famous letter, a call, famous 
call that says you will be dismissed and I heard from the 
news that I will be dismissed, and look at what load 
shedding did afterwards.  The consequences of that call is 
the load shedding of 2018, 2019, 2020 and at the bottom 
10 
there you will see there is an amount of R87,50 is the cost 
what you call the cost of load shedding per megawatt 
hours, the cost of ...[indistinct] image.  I want to make a 
submission to you and this is the painful truth, and 
because they assuming a particular line, the difficulty you 
are going to be faced with that I am submitting to you, the 
consequences of the statement by Mr Ramaphosa in January 
2020/21 was load shedding on 2017, 2018, 2019 and the 
cost as worked out by CSIR IS 266 billion rands to the 
economy.  That is the cost of the call that I received in 
20 
January 2020/21.   
Finally, finally I have, it has been alleged that I gave 
my daughter a billion rands contract out of Eskom.  It is also 
being alleged that I lied on national television.  One of the 
things I had expected is that the people who says that, come 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 229 of 376 
 
to present that evidence to you.  Or they got to the Hawks or 
to the police.  And the police or the Hawks or you deal with 
that.   
For four years I have been accused of giving my 
daughter a billion rand.  For four years I have not been 
talked to by the police or the Law Enforcement Agency or the 
Commission about a billion rand.  Do you know why?  I never 
did it.  And we’ll get into that detail because I know where 
that comes from.  But it cannot be Mr Chair that journalists, 
commentators continue to say I gave my daughter a billion 
10 
rands and have nothing to show for it.   
It cannot be.  You know there is a gentleman who 
made an affidavit, to submit an affidavit.  He went to 
parliament and he said, I told Eskom Board that even when, 
even when Mr Koko is acquitted by a ...[Indistinct], he must 
still be dismissed because he lied on national television.  
And I said to my wife, you know I wish the Chairman Zondo 
asks me about that because I am going to ask the Chairman 
Zondo to put the vid – the catagal(?) interview.   
And I am going to say Mr Zondo let’s sit back to 
20 
check the line.  I am hurt, I am pained.  My kids are paying, 
my kids are hurt because people think that when they are in 
trouble they must claim the Koko Gang(?).  And they will 
have the sympathetic ear.  All what we are going to discuss 
here is the evidence of witnesses, two main witnesses that 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 230 of 376 
 
are in trouble.   
One of them came here.  He did not even tell you that 
he’s on a bail of R300 000,00 for fraud or corruption on 
charges that I received.  The other one was a national talk 
show and she says I committed crime.  And when she was 
asked, what do officers of a court do when they commit 
crime.  She said, I expect to be arrested.   
And to get away with it, they join the Koko Gang and 
they think they will get an audience with you.  But I will stop 
here and you will get … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you Mr Koko.  Mr Seleka. 
MR SELEKA:  Thank you ...[Indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may start.   
MR SELEKA:  Thank you Chairperson.  I was going to ask 
but 
the 
same 
thing 
in 
regard 
to 
this 
documentation 
Chairperson that it be supported by an affidavit explaining … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  I think that would be quite 
convenient. 
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If it could be annexure to an affidavit Mr 
20 
Barry(?).  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  As you please Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  The issue here is and it is something 
address - the address in the letter to you. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 231 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  It ...[Indistinct] of the directors of the 
Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  The attention of witnesses are focussed 
on very, very particular issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  They are not asked to give a general 
overview … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that’s true.   
10 
ADV BARRIE SC:  So and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  We look forward … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  To providing an affidavit during the 
course of … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV BARRIE SC:  Of next week. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you.  Okay Mr Seleka. 
MR SELEKA:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think if you cut to the chase down.  It, it 
will be … 
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Fine because Mr Koko has had a chance to 
… 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 232 of 376 
 
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Deal with certain matters.   
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SELEKA:  Thank you.  So Mr Koko the file before you 
which is Eskom bundle 15, has two affidavits of yours and 
one statement you submitted to the Parliamentary Patrol 
Committee.  The first affidavit which is the second of the two 
affidavits is on page 5.   
Now the page numbers I am referring to are on the 
10 
left-hand corner.  That’s right.  The black numbers as 
opposed to the red numbers.  So that’s the first affidavit.  It 
runs up to page 152.  On page 5 to 152.  And on page 152 
there is a signature.  Do you confirm that that to be your 
signature? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I do confirm that that’s my signature.   
MR SELEKA:  The affidavit it says the 22 September 2020.   
MR KOKO:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You lowered your voice Mr 
Seleka.   
20 
MR SELEKA:  Ja, the affidavit is dated 22 September 2020. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
MR SELEKA:  Chairperson it’s already marked as a exhibit.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 233 of 376 
 
Exhibit U27.  Should we … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But mine is not marked.  You would like it 
to be admitted as exhibit? 
MR SELEKA:  27.1.   
CHAIRPERSON:  27?  27.1? 
MR SELEKA:  Yes.  27.1.  Thank you Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Matshela Moses Koko 
starting at page 5 will be admitted as Exhibit U27.1.   
MR SELEKA:  Then there is ...[Indistinct] on page 971.   
CHAIRPERSON:  On page? 
10 
MR SELEKA:  971. 
CHAIRPERSON:  971.   
MR SELEKA:  it’s the – it’s another affidavit which was the 
first affidavit you submitted to the Commission.  It runs up to 
page 986.  Chairperson in between there’s a thick bundle of 
annexures.  Up – I was saying in between there is … 
MR KOKO:  I am there Chair.  I am there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay let’s deal with this one first.   
MR SELEKA:  Yes.  So page – it runs up to page 986, there 
too there’s signature above your name, Matshela Moses 
20 
Koko.  You confirm that to be your signature? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I confirm that’s my signature. 
MR SELEKA:  The affidavit is dated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It does not look like it’s an affidavit.  Oh 
there is a Commissioner of Oaths certificate there. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 234 of 376 
 
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is just that it is not legible.  Okay. 
MR SELEKA:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  It is an affidavit.   
MR SELEKA:  There.  Indeed Chair the heading on the first 
page is written, submission.  But it gets to be commissioned 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SELEKA:  On the last page.  The affidavit is dated 1 
September 2020.  Chair I beg leave to have it admitted as 
10 
Exhibit U27.2.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Koko has confirmed to that.  This is one 
of his affidavits and that this signature, the first signature, 
well maybe not the first, the signature above the name 
Matshelo Moses Koko is his.   
MR KOKO:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR KOKO:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Matshelo Moses Koko 
started at page 971 is admitted as Exhibit U27.2. 
20 
MR SELEKA:  Yes.  
MR KOKO:  Chair may I – I’m … 
UNKNOWN MALE:  Correcting affidavit, just put in the 
...[Indistinct].   
MR SELEKA:  My learned friend wants me to put in the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 235 of 376 
 
correcting affidavit.  Is it the three page or what? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay ja that can be done but … 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes.  The original of that we have handed 
up to you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  It is before you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Initially and it would probably be 
appropriate then to mark that U27.3 or whatever. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well there is in the third one, there is 
10 
still that one coming which starts at 988. 
MR SELEKA:  Correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then I think that the supplementary 
affidavit … 
MR SELEKA:  As it … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can come after that one. 
MR SELEKA:  Correct.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR SELEKA:  So on page 988 that was – it’s a written 
submission.  This one it is the submission, it’s not under 
20 
oath, unless Mr Koko given at the Parliamentary Portfolio.  It 
runs up to page 1046.   
MR KOKO:  That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  And the signature is definitely mine.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 236 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.   
MR SELEKA:  The submission is dated 21 September.  21 
January 2018.  I beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The written submission of Mr Matshela 
Moses Koko starting at page 988 is admitted as Exhibit 
U27.3. 
MR SELEKA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
And 
I 
think 
we 
can 
then 
do 
the 
supplementary affidavit quickly.   
MR SELEKA:  Sorry ...[Indistinct] Mr Barry ...[Indistinct]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got it Mr Koko.  That affidavit has 
got 1, 2, 3, 4 pages and then the last page 5 is just I think 
the Commissioner of Oaths certificate.  Do you confirm that 
that is your affidavit, the one that has been handed up by 
your counsel? 
MR KOKO:  Yes I do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And your – there are two signatures 
on page 4 of that affidavit.  Just one is that of the deponent, 
that would – do you confirm that that is your signature?  The 
one that is above ...[Indistinct] deponent.   
20 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I don’t have it in front of me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You don’t have it in front of you.  Registrar 
please take and – the signatures on page 4. 
MR KOKO:  Yes, I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is your signature. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 237 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  I don’t know this document and it’s my 
document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, alright.  Mr Seleka you want me 
to admit it as Exhibit U27.4? 
MR SELEKA:  Correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:  27.4? 
MR SELEKA:  .4 Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Mr Koko’s affidavit starting at, 
it will start at page 1047 will be admitted as Exhibit U27.4. 
Okay, alright.  Then let’s continue. 
10 
MR SELEKA:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Koko we have read your 
affidavits in regard to your appointment at Eskom.  The 
evidence is extensively been lead and it’s evident from your 
affidavits that you were an employee at, at, of Eskom until, I 
think you say until your resignation on the 16 t h of February 
2018. 
MR KOKO:  That is correct.  That’s correct Chair. 
MR SELEKA:  And that also you were an employee back in 
March 2015, at least before you – well ja, even during the 
suspension you were still an employee.  March 2015 and can 
20 
you remind us again what was your position at the time in 
March 2015? 
MR KOKO:  I was the Acting, I was the Acting Group 
Executive Technology and Commercial.   
MR SELEKA:  Technology and commercial.  What, which 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 238 of 376 
 
position was your permanent position? 
MR KOKO:  I was a Divisional Executive Technology. 
MR SELEKA:  Ja.   
MR KOKO:  Chairman, my apologies.  I was confirmed in the 
job, I was no longer acting.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR KOKO:  I was confirmed in the job ...[Indistinct]. 
MR SELEKA:  In this position? 
MR KOKO:  In that position. 
MR SELEKA:  Of GE Technology and Commercial? 
10 
MR KOKO:  Technology and Commercial. 
MR SELEKA:  Ja.  Now Mr Koko this is a commission that 
investigates to get the facts.  And I welcome your statement 
that you want to assist the Commission to get to the truth in 
your opening address.  Could you tell the Chairperson, have 
you spoken to any of the witnesses who has testified here 
before the Commission?   
CHAIRPERSON:  You want to indicate when you are asking 
him in terms of when you would like to know whether he has 
spoken in the last month, in the last week?  Just few months. 
20 
MR SELEKA:  Recently.  I had no ...[Indistinct] towards the 
end of November? 
MR KOKO:  I have, I have not spoken to the suspected 
people suspended.   
MR SELEKA:  You can tell me which of the witnesses. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 239 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  Oh the witnesses? 
MR SELEKA:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  The witnesses.  I have not spoken to any of the 
witnesses that came to speak here.   
MR SELEKA:  You have not sent … 
MR KOKO:  I have not spoken, the only person, I have not 
spoken to Ms Phileppe(?).  I have not spoken to Mr 
Marokane.  I have not spoken to – the only person I spoke to 
was Dr Ben Ngubani(?). 
MR 
SELEKA: 
 
Have 
you 
not 
recently 
spoken 
to 
or 
10 
communicated by text with Mr Matona? 
MR KOKO:  I have spoken to Mr Matona.  I have 
communicated with … 
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Mr Matona ...[Indistinct]. 
MR SELEKA:  Yes.  Because I was wondering why you didn’t 
mention him in the names that you mentioned.   
MR KOKO:  I have communicated.  I have not – I had a text 
...[Indistinct], text discussion with Mr Matona yes.   
MR SELEKA:  What was it about? 
20 
MR KOKO:  I received a 3.3 notice.   
MR SELEKA:  What was your text message about? 
MR KOKO:  I cut and paste, I cut and – I cut and pasted a 
3.3 notice, where exception on Mr Matona that he sent to 
me.  That I received which really shocked me.  I said, but Mr 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 240 of 376 
 
Matona this is shocking.  Because it’s false.   
MR SELEKA:  You cut and pasted what?  You say a 3.3 
notice.   
MR KOKO:  I had a 3.3 notice. 
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which came from the Commission. 
MR KOKO:  Which came from the Commission, which was a 
lie.   
CHAIRPERSON:  in respect of which witness was it? 
MR KOKO:  Mr Matona. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Matona’s statement or affidavit? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  So you were sent a 3.3 
notice by the Commission and either the whole affidavit of 
Mr Matona or a portion of it. 
MR KOKO:  Yes.  A portion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Just a portion.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, portion was sent.  Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR KOKO:  So … 
MR SELEKA:  Sorry Chair.  [Indistinct].  Which portion was 
that? 
MR KOKO:  I note Mr Koko’s rule in the suspension, it was 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 241 of 376 
 
something like that.   
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  I note Mr Koko’s rule in the suspension of the 
four executives.  It was something to that effect. 
MR SELEKA:  Ja and what did you say to him? 
MR KOKO:  I, I posted to him and put question marks like 
that.  I don’t, I don’t remember.  I just put question marks.   
MR SELEKA:  Yes, so what message are you communicating 
to him?  Why do you lie?  Did you say that? 
MR KOKO:  No I didn’t.  You asking what message you, was 
10 
I communicating to him? 
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Yes.   
MR SELEKA:  But how will you know, how will he know you 
are say why are you lying if you are not spelling it out?   
MR KOKO:  I don’t understand the question now. 
MR SELEKA:  You didn’t write anything.  You said you put 
question marks.  So I’m asking you what ...[Indistinct]? 
MR KOKO:  Either I put a question mark.  No, ja.  I phoned 
to him and he immediately phoned back.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You sent him a portion of … 
MR KOKO:  Of his statement.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Affidavits. 
MR KOKO:  I sent him a portion of his statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that you considered to ...[Indistinct]. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 242 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  That I considered to be … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not true. 
MR KOKO:  Not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And there you put a question mark? 
MR KOKO:  No I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not put a question mark? 
MR KOKO:  I, either I put a question mark. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Or I just ...[Indistinct] but he immediately called 
back. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, oh.  You sent it to him and then he 
called back? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.   
MR SELEKA:  Are you in, in pursuit of the truth willing to 
share that SMS with the Commission? 
MR KOKO:  Not no, but after this.  Or yes ...[Indistinct] if I 
still ja, or I hope I can have it.  Ja. 
MR SELEKA:  I can’t hear. 
MR KOKO:  I will send it to you certainly.   
20 
MR SELEKA:  Thank you.  So the two of spoke. 
MR KOKO:  The two of us spoke. 
MR SELEKA:  And did you explain yourself the text you sent 
to him? 
MR KOKO:  Actually he did more the talking than me. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 243 of 376 
 
MR SELEKA:  Ja, but my question is did you explain your 
message to him? 
MR KOKO:  No, he called me.  And I think he understood the 
point. 
MR SELEKA:  Mr Koko did you explain? 
MR KOKO:  No. 
MR SELEKA:  Your message to him? 
MR KOKO:  No I did not. 
MR SELEKA:  Why not? 
MR KOKO:  Because he immediately started talking.   
10 
MR SELEKA:  So are you saying Mr Matona did the talking, 
say goodbye and you never said a word? 
MR KOKO:  No I respect, I responded to his explanation of 
what that text message, that cut and paste meant.   
MR SELEKA:  So if he says to me that you were fuming on 
the phone saying he is throwing you under the bus, is that 
not the truth? 
MR KOKO:  No that’s not the truth. 
MR SELEKA:  It’s not the truth? 
MR KOKO:  No. 
20 
MR SELEKA:  Okay.  So I should ask him to provide us with 
an affidavit. 
MR KOKO:  No, he must do that. 
MR SELEKA:  Okay.  Now you have provided us with your 
affidavits dealing in parts with the suspensions. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 244 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
MR SELEKA:  And you have dealt with the issues of 
suspension at quite at length to demonstrate why, what 
reasons you believe you were suspended for. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
MR SELEKA:  Ja.  Now you were asked at the Parliamentary 
Portfolio Committee why didn’t you deal with what Ms Susan 
Daniel 
had 
submitted 
to 
the 
Parliamentary 
Portfolio 
Committee in regard to the meeting at Melrose Heights.  
That that portion was not contained in your affidavit, in your 
10 
written submission.  And indeed it is not contained there.  
And it was put to you that is because you couldn’t deal with 
it.  It is the truth? 
MR KOKO:  No, that’s not the truth. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I, can I start from here?  Mr Koko 
when did you learn for the first time that you were going to 
be suspended in March 2015?   
MR KOKO:  Chairman.  On the 8t h of March 2018.  I had a 
very long discussions with Mr Matona.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Matona? 
20 
MR KOKO:  With Mr Matona. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja on the 8 t h of March. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  And it was a continuation of a long telephone 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 245 of 376 
 
calls on the 7t h of March.  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Between the two of you even on the 7t h of 
March. 
MR KOKO:  On the 7t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  And that is why it’s very important for the 
telephone records to be made available.  Because I am 
certain the telephone records will confirm that.  And Mr 
Matona was very concerned about the approach from Mr 
Tsotsi that Mr Koko has run amok, he is running amok.  And 
10 
has suspended Malisela.  Mr Kassiem there for no apparent 
reason.  And has instructed Mr Matona to make sure that we 
un-suspend Malisela.  And I said to him, no Chief I cannot.  
There’s a valid reason for that and I will make the documents 
available to you when we first, on the following day on the 
Chair.  And I did that.  And then he said to me, Chief we are 
going to be suspended if we don’t un-suspend Malisela.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You said we? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Meaning yourself and him? 
20 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  I said we are going to be suspended when – if 
we don’t bring Malisela back.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 246 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  I said, but Chief we can’t.  We can’t.  He says, 
it’s, it’s very difficult for me to deal with Mr Tsotsi.  Because 
his mind is made.  I said, but Chief look at the documents.  I 
have given them to you.  Then I disappeared from the office.  
The following day he then called me again and said, Chief 
we’ve got a meeting here.  The Minister is attending.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That is on … 
MR KOKO:  On the 11t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the 11t h? 
MR KOKO:  On the 11t h. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MR KOKO:  The Chairman is attending.  The Minister is 
attending.  Mister, and then he showed me a WhatsApp 
message, not WhatsApp message.  Text messages.  And he 
said to me, look at these text messages.  I’m getting threats.  
Mr Tsotsi is threatening me with this text message.  Mr Tsotsi 
is even saying this is not the first problem you have had with 
him.  There was a gas transaction that you refused to 
cooperate.  And this cannot continue.  I said, when I wrote 
my affidavit I asked Mr Matona for those text messages.  He 
20 
let me have those text messages because I want to include 
them in my affidavit.  He promised to give them to me.  He 
never, he never did and that’s why I did not include them 
because I will not be able to get that.  It is going to be he 
says, he says.  I would have wanted to do that.  But now that 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 247 of 376 
 
I have read his replying affidavit, that’s why I mentioned it.  
So I have learned for the first time about the possibility of 
our suspension through the telephone call on the 9t h of 
March, on the evening.  It was a very long call Chairman.  
And that call spends more if I recall more than 10 minutes.  
But the telephone records will show that.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
MR SELEKA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then maybe I must ask.  That was 
about your – excuse me.  That was about you learning about 
10 
your possible suspension, maybe you and Mr Matona.  Is 
that right? 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And when did you hear or learn for the first 
time about the possible or the suspension of yourself, Mr 
Matona and the other two executives? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I learned of the rest of the 
suspensions on the evening of March 2011 when they 
happened.   
CHAIRPERSON:  March 11? 
20 
MR KOKO:  March 11, 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  2015 When they happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
MR SELEKA:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Koko we don’t have the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 248 of 376 
 
telephone records between you and Mr Matona.  Are you 
able to provide the Commission with those telephone calls of 
8 March and 9 March 2015? 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the 7t h I think he said, 7t h March. 
MR SELEKA:  Definitely.   
MR KOKO:  Definitely.   
MR SELEKA:  Thank you.  Now we hear for the first time 
from you that you were shown text messages by Mr Matona. 
MR KOKO:  That’s correct. 
MR SELEKA:  On the 11t h.   
10 
MR KOKO:  Are you saying are you hearing for the first 
time? 
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  You are hearing for the first time? 
MR SELEKA:  Yes, I didn’t come out with that in your 
affidavits. 
MR KOKO:  No, but I’ve just said to you.  I just said to the 
Chairman I asked Mr Matona, he promised to give them to 
me because I wanted to include them.  And when he failed to 
give them to me, I then kept that out because I can’t back it 
20 
up.   
MR SELEKA:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  I wanted to say these are the messages, but he 
could not give it to me.  So I, I did not want, I did not want to 
say he said this.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 249 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Those would have been messages on his 
phone? 
MR KOKO:  Those are the SMSs messages between him and 
Mr Tsotsi.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Which you say he had shown you on 
which date, 11 t h? 
MR KOKO:   On the 11 t h of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Threatening him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, threatening him? 
10 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With what, with suspension? 
MR KOKO:   Threatening him that he is failing to deal with 
me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I am saying the very explanation 
you are giving now that you were not given the text 
messages it to is not in your affidavit.   
MR KOKO:   The question for me that I did not expect, it 
did not matter to me.  I did not - that line did not matter to 
20 
me because I – my affidavit was telling the real issues so 
my message was coming across.  I was saying in my 
messages – I did not say also in my messages that Mr 
Matona called me on the evening on Saturday it did not 
matter.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 250 of 376 
 
All what mattered to me to convey to you is that Mr  
Matona told me that on Sunday evening.  I said that at the 
Parliamentary Commission, I repeated it in my affidavit.  
The SMS’s and the friction messages and because I did not 
have them I did not think that it is relevant and adequate.  
But I put it to you Chairman that if Mr Matona denies it I 
will be extremely surprised, I will be shocked I will 
question his motive.      
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, but you need to give him the 
opportunity in your affidavit explaining that I asked him, he 
10 
showed me this text messages I asked him to provide them 
to me and he failed to do so that is why I do not have 
them.  So that when you come here he has had the 
opportunity to look at your affidavit and say yay or nay to 
that allegation.   
MR KOKO:   Chairman that is why there are supplementary 
affidavits I got, I received his Mr Matona’s supplementary 
affidavit I have not responded to it in total.  I have read it I 
have not responded to the other supplementary affidavit 
but when we do we will mention it.   
20 
Remember that it was a supplementary affidavit of 
Mr Matona.  Mr Matona did not say in his original affidavit 
that he talked here, we talked or we did not talk.  When he 
denied it I saw a need that when I come here I must deal 
with it and if I had the opportunity to put a supplementary 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 251 of 376 
 
affidavit I would have dealt with it but I did not expect Mr 
Matona to deny or disown that we had a telephone 
conversation on March 11, I did not expect him to do that.   
His supplementary affidavit says we could not have 
talked on the phone we talked the following day, now that 
calls for a response.       
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am not sure which point your dealing 
with, I am asking you for him to deal with your version you 
have to put it in writing in your affidavit or even way back 
in 2018 when you did your written submissions to the 
10 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee it is still fresh in your 
mind.      
MR KOKO:   No, Chair I…[intervene] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have not finished, then he has the 
opportunity to say yay or nay to your version as we have 
done here in respect of your affidavit.  We gave him your 
affidavit; we say Mr Koko says this about you what is your 
response because this is an investigatory Commission.     
MR KOKO:   No, Chair I do not accept that, I was not 
accusing Mr Matona of anything I was telling him my 
20 
version.  The issue is how did I know of my suspension, I 
leant of my suspension on 8 t h of March 2017 that is what I 
sort to convey to the parliament is what I sort to convey to 
you as a Chairman of this Commission.   
The threatening messages does not explain to you  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 252 of 376 
 
where I got to know about the suspension.  The answer I 
was answering at all material times is when did I know and 
when it happens the 11 t h of March.  The story grows legs 
when there is a supplementary affidavit.     
ADV SELEKA SC:   So…[intervene] 
ADV BARRIE SC:   May I just point out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV BARRIE SC:   That the witness’s affidavit that is 
before you is dated the 22 n d of September of 2020 while Mr 
Matona’s supplementary affidavit in terms of which he 
10 
denies having spoken to Mr Koko on the 8 t h of September, 
on the 8 t h of March is dated the 28 t h of October 2020 more 
than a month later.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Mr Koko we dealing with your 
version and it seems you do not have…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let me put it this way and see 
whether we capture what you have in mind.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If the position Mr Koko is or was that 
you were suspended because Mr Tsotsi – as I understand 
20 
your affidavit was unhappy that you did not exceed on your 
version to his suggestion or request I do not know if it was 
a demand that the suspension of Mr is it Sakazimbi, the 
official who were being suspended.  Is it Mr Sakazimbi?    
MR KOKO:  Sakazimbi.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 253 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sakazimbi, ja.  If your version was my 
suspension really was because of Mr Tsotsi who was 
unhappy that I had refused to ensure the withdrawal of the 
suspension of Mr Sakazimbi and you were aware that prior 
to your suspension or maybe on the day that you were 
suspended Mr Matona had shown you messages exchanged 
between himself and Mr Tsotsi which included messages or 
a message from Mr Tsotsi which was threatening or maybe 
threatening to suspend you, both of you or threatening 
whatever but in connection with this point whether the 
10 
suspension of Mr Sakazimbi should be withdrawn.  Would 
that not have been something quite important that you 
would have wanted to put in your affidavit irrespective of 
what Mr Matona says when you tell your story of how and 
why you were suspended?        
MR KOKO:   Chairman it would not hurt; it would not hurt.  
Originally when I said earlier when I was putting together 
my affidavit for this Commission not for the parliamentary 
enquiry at the parliamentary enquiry it did not matter to 
me, that part did not matter to me.   
20 
But I have put my affidavit here after listening to a  
lot of Zola Tsotsi’s, Mr Tsotsi’s submissions and Mr Zola 
Tsotsi’s submissions, I had a nice way of putting it but I 
would respect this Commission and not say but made me to 
want to dig more and prove my case and one of the things 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 254 of 376 
 
that I remembered I said but hey Mr Matona showed me 
this, his messages and I have asked him can I have the 
message he said I will look and he never found it and I did 
not want to sit here and argue there was and there was 
not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
MR KOKO:   I left it because the important part for me is 
answered how did I know.  The only thing, the only reason 
that it is becoming material is because of his response 
affidavit that comes a month later after mine and then I sit 
10 
back and I say maybe I should have put this, maybe I 
should have put the calls as well because I did not put the 
calls either. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.      
MR KOKO:   I did not put the calls I did not – you know all 
these things matters Mr Chair when there is a dispute, 
when there is no dispute then they do not matter but now 
that there is a dispute then you sit back and say then how 
do I prove my case and then you go and dig. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Seleka.    
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Yes, so you have 
said it for the third or fourth time that the text messages 
did not matter to you, the threatening text messages you 
say or alleged that Mr Matona showed you they did not 
matter to you.  Yes, or no, you have said three times of 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 255 of 376 
 
four times now?  
MR KOKO:   Yes or no it did not matter.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Koko it is a yes or no.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on just repeat the question Mr 
Seleka.  
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
You 
said 
it 
three 
to 
four 
times…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me hear the question…[intervene]  
ADV BARRIE SC:   But I have to object to that type of 
question it is not for the Evidence Leader to limit a 
10 
witness’s answers, he has to ask a proper question as 
beholds an advocate of his status.  
MR KOKO:   Chair I answer yes or no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second.  
MR KOKO:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay he said…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not hear the question, there are 
questions which do require a yes or no answer.  There are 
questions which do not and there may be a situation where 
there is a need for clarification.    
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what was the question? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The question was he said it repeatedly 
here three to four times that the threatening text messages 
that were allegedly shown to him by Mr Matona did not 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 256 of 376 
 
matter to him.     
CHAIRPERSON:   And what is the question?  
MR KOKO:   No, no Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want him to confirm that he said 
that?  
ADV SELEKA SC:   The Chairperson must confirm 
…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hold on one second did you want him to 
confirm that he had said that?  
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay alright.  Mr Koko do you confirm 
that you said that?   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson may I say something? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, let him answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let him answer first Mr Koko.  
MR KOKO:   Chair I am going to ask, to answer yes or no 
but you will have to allow me after I have said yes or no to 
explain. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.    
20 
MR KOKO:   I say yes, yes it did not matter to parliament.  
Once 
there 
was 
a 
dispute 
a 
month 
later 
after 
the 
supplementary affidavit of Mr Matona it mattered when I 
went to look for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.       
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 257 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   Thank you, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka you wanted to say something.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, my learned friend uttered the 
perverse word Chairperson and I think…[intervene] 
ADV BARRIE SC:   I cannot hear, I say he is talking 
nonsense, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, Chair. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   I am not going to get involved with this 
10 
type of nonsensical argument with my learned friend.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no Mr Barrie you – that is not very 
collegial, it is not very collegial to say this.  Let us try and 
focus on the work, Mr Seleka you wanted to.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I could continue Chairperson he 
uttered a swearing word.  You did Mr Barrie, there you go.  
Just repeat it again for the Chairperson that is what he 
said.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Barrie? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   As such Mr Chair and I apologise to my 
20 
learned friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja it is not - let us adjourn and let me 
see Mr Barrie and Mr Seleka in my chambers.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we are going to adjourn.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 258 of 376 
 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Chair if I may, again I apologise to my 
learned friend for offending him.  But I must point out 
though Chair that in terms of the Regulations of this 
Commission, particularly Regulation 8.3.   
“Any witness appearing before the Commission may 
be cross-examination by a person only if the 
Chairman 
permits 
it. 
 
Such 
cross-examination 
10 
should he deem it necessary and in the best 
interest of the function of the Commission.” 
 
That is the regulations under which we operate 
here.  I am aware of the rules.  I am aware of the rule 
stating that the Commission, that questions can be asked 
by the legal team, but the Rule 3.7 and all the rules … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let’s … 
ADV BARRIE SC:  The main subject … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let’s separate sir, I’ll give you a chance 
to deal about, to deal with the – that issue.  I just want to 
20 
deal with the issue that arose before we adjourned. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Mr Barrie used language that I 
consider unacceptable in speaking to the evidence leader 
Mr Seleka.  He has apologised to Mr Seleka.  And to the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 259 of 376 
 
Commission.  And I hope that going forward there will be 
collegiality as is to be expected it been counsel and we will 
proceed on that basis.  Thank you.  Okay Mr Barrie you 
have something else that you want to raise? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Yes.  I raised the issue of Regulation 8.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  8.3 Of – which is over arching in terms of 
which this Commission exercises its rights. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Etcetera. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  The rules are subservient to the 
regulations.  And that is something that has to be taken into 
account.  I am aware of the fact that the regulations make 
provision for the evidence leader to ask questions aimed at 
assisting the Commission and assessing the truthfulness of 
the evidence of witness, but in terms of the regulation, 
unless you in the interest of the work of the Commission 
believe that cross-examination is appropriate, it is not 
allowed.   
20 
So there is somewhere, there must be a line to be 
drawn by you regarding what Rule 3.2 allows.  And what is 
allowed well in terms of Regulations 8.3.  We don’t, my 
learned 
friend 
can 
ask 
the 
witness 
questions. 
 And 
unfortunately if these types of questions are asked, and they 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 260 of 376 
 
are clearly within the realm of cross-examination, it does put 
us in different camps.   
As opposed to somebody who asked question to 
elucidation, so as to assist the work of the Commission.  So 
and my learned friend I believe has over stepped the mark 
set in terms of Regulation 8.3 as and the same applies to 
Regulation 3.7.  But I am not going to go insofar into that 
particular arena.  That is for you to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  For you to decide.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I’m not looking at the rules at the 
moment.  What I can say is that there might be a very fine 
distinction 
if 
any, 
between 
cross-examination 
and 
questioning to establish the truth in certain circumstances.   
Sometimes it’s easier to Chair, sometimes it might 
not be easy.  But as for now I had not picked up anything 
that I thought would, that I thought would be, would be 
unfair.  I’m not looking at the rule, at the rules at the 
moment.  So maybe let’s proceed and then let’s see that I 
have not picked up any, anything that I found objectionable.   
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka. 
MR SELEKA::  Ja.  Just quickly Chair, I think the point Mr 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 261 of 376 
 
Barrie is raising, he has answered it himself by reference to 
that rule.  That is one, number two that he does not call for 
bad language.  A objection can be made, but we can’t deal 
with in the manner it was now.  But we’ve passed that, we 
accept their apology. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
MR SELEKA::  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Let’s continue.   
MR SELEKA::  Yes Mr Koko in your affidavits when you 
contended the first one, well when I say the first one, the 
10 
first one in your, in your bundle.  If you turn to page 29.  
Page 29 is starting from paragraph 92.  You specifically refer 
to what you say Mr Matona told you.  Mr Mothola then 
informed me that if I refuse to un-suspend Mr Sikathembe, 
Mr Tsotsi would have us suspended.  You see that? 
MR KOKO:  Yes I see Chair. 
MR SELEKA::  It is a threat of suspension, isn’t it? 
MR KOKO:  That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka, I think it’s going to, the public 
is going to follow. 
20 
MR SELEKA::  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Koko’s evidence and understand it 
correctly if we put it differently. 
MR SELEKA::  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because we have read his affidavit.  We 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 262 of 376 
 
know what he says, what his version is, but the public hasn’t 
read it.  So they just hear about the suspension of Mr 
Sikathembe.  They don’t know where that comes in, so I 
think it’s important that he tells me about that suspension. 
MR SELEKA::  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because how it came about. 
MR SELEKA::  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And, and his discussion with Mr Tsotsi. 
MR SELEKA::  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that the public can understand his 
10 
version in that regard. 
MR SELEKA::  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Properly. 
MR SELEKA::  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, so I think if you can ask him to talk to, 
talk about what the whole issue was about Mr Sikathembe’s 
suspension, so what was he suspended for.  And who 
suspended him?  And then the meeting that or discussion he 
had with Mr Tsotsi.  And then the rest can follow, can come 
after that. 
20 
MR SELEKA::  Yes.  Thank you Chairperson.  Yes Mr Koko, I 
think that well following up on the question the Chairperson 
had asked you earlier, which was when did you become 
aware that you were going to be suspended.  You have given 
an answer to that and now as the Chairperson has suggested 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 263 of 376 
 
that we could deal with how did your suspension come 
about?   
You could give us what is your version in regard to 
how the suspensions came about?  Your suspension came 
about.   
MR KOKO:  Chairman, thank you.  Let me say from the 
beginning that Mr Tsotsi and I had very difficult relationship.  
And I want to refer to the affidavit or Mr Johan Bester that is 
before this Commission and I want to refer in particular to 
paragraph 21 and paragraph 22 of that ...  (indistinct).   
10 
Mr Bester talks to a meeting that was called by Mr 
Tsotsi around the, around March 2014 to address the primary 
energy team.  Members of my staff, without talking to me.  
Eskom is contrary to many things you hear, Eskom is a 
highly governed and regulated business.  The Chairman of 
Eskom is not an executive and there is nothing in the 
delegations of authority that enables him or that he can rely, 
that he can rely on to address the members of my staff.   
But I went to that meeting.  And we actually walked 
together to make, to that meeting.  But before I could do that 
20 
I went to, to CEE at the time, Mr Matjila and there’s a big 
difference Mr Chair between Mr Matjila … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Majela and Mr Matjila.   
MR KOKO:  And the same way there’s a big difference 
between Saleka and Seleke.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 264 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  So, so and I asked the CE my boss then, what is 
this meeting all about.  He says I don’t know, which meeting?  
There is no such a thing.  I said, no but the Chairman is 
going to address my whole department.  Mr Matjila did not 
want to get involved.  He, he just shook his head and walked 
out.  But I walked to the meeting.  In that meeting and Mr 
Bester describes it quite nicely.   
And he testified here and one of my discomfort is that 
he was not asked to expand on that.  And, and this is why I 
10 
am saying evidence is not being followed.  People are being 
followed because there is enough in that paragraph for one 
to follow and appreciate the conduct of Mr Tsotsi when we 
talk about interference in operational issues.  He talked, he 
told members of my staff and I was there.   
And he said, we are doing anything and everything to 
disadvantage black coal suppliers.  Mr Bester also talks 
about coal trackers, I don’t recall about the coal trackers.  I 
recall about the coal transport, the coal suppliers.  It was a 
very difficult address.  He was very ...  (indistinct) to my 
20 
team.  Mr Bester says after the address, Ms Maharaj stood 
up and, and cordially closed the meeting.   
It was not Ms Maharaj, it was actually me.  I could 
not allow a confrontation of my staff who are, who are forced 
to defend themselves because they have just been accused 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 265 of 376 
 
by the Chairman, and to and fro.  So I said to the Chairman I 
am hearing this for the first time. I will go and discuss with 
team.  And we will come back to you.  Suzanne later came 
back to me and said … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Susan Daniels. 
MR KOKO:  Ms Daniels yes.  Ms Daniels actually came back 
to me and say, actually the coal contracts that Mr Tsotsi says 
we are delaying are actually there at Brakfontein ...  
(indistinct) at ...  (indistinct) contracts.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Let’s go back to the meeting.   
10 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What are the main points that Mr Tsotsi 
conveyed to that meeting, apart from saying your team, I 
don’t know if he had directed this to you, that your team or 
Eskom in general were that you were, your team was 
disadvantaging black coal suppliers.  What were the main 
points? 
MR KOKO:  There was one single important point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Mr Tsotsi conveyed to the, to my team and I was 
20 
part of it, and very junior staff.  He called everybody, the hall 
was full with my ...  (indistinct).  And he says he heard 
complaints from coal suppliers that we are delaying the 
conclusions of the negotiations to conclude their contracts.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So then you closed the meeting. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 266 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  Then as I said … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Mr Chair I should be accounting to you about 
these allegations.  I do not know them.  My team is ready to 
respond to you and I don’t think it is right.  I closed the 
meeting.  But Ms Daniels comes to me and says, actually the 
contract that Mr Tsotsi says we are delaying is the Tegeta(?) 
Brakfontein contract.   
So I do confirm that the affidavit paragraph 21 of 
your Mr Bester is correct.  Interestingly the Brakfontein 
10 
contract eventually was signed by Mr Bester and Mr Mboweni 
on the 10t h of March, the day before I was suspended.   
CHAIRPERSON:  10t h Of March 2015? 
MR KOKO:  2015.  And in his affidavit, Mr Bester says the 
contract that he negotiated and signed with Brakfontein 
Tegeta, he has no doubt it was a lawful contract.  That if Mr 
Bester in the affidavit before you.  And the only reason that 
went wrong, was when Mr Koko started interfering and 
suspending the people who were managing coal qualities.   
I always say, God is on the side of Moses.  Because 
20 
we now know through the North Gauteng High Court that that 
3,7 billion rands that Mr Bester said was lawful, that he 
negotiated and concluded, has been set aside as unlawful.  
And Mr Tsotsi came here and says, Tony Gupta told me we 
appointed you, you work for us, now you, we have fallen out 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 267 of 376 
 
of favour.  But the Tegeta contract that we are ...  (indistinct) 
of was Mr Tsotsi’s work.   
I did not know that I aggrieved Mr Tsotsi when I dealt 
with the gas contract.  I only learned about it when Mr 
Matona talked about those threatening messages through the 
SMS.  I was shocked, I did not know.  All what I did with the 
gas contract was to put my foot down, took no prisoners, 
acted in the best interest of Eskom.  I have only learned 
through this affidavit of Mr Tsotsi here that actually the gas 
contract was OCGT contract at Ankerlig and Gourikwa.  
10 
[Indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay remember … 
MR KOKO:  Now I am giving you, I am giving you … 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will talk later about those.   
MR KOKO:  I am giving you … 
CHAIRPERSON:  ja. 
MR KOKO:  I am giving you, I am giving you, I am giving you 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The context. 
MR KOKO:  The contract, the context.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  My submission is that we did not have a good 
relationship with Mr Tsotsi because of Mr Tsotsi’s fiddling in 
the operation at best that he does not belong to.  Around 
June 2014 … 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 268 of 376 
 
MR SELEKA::  Sorry Mr Koko just before you move on, just 
two points I need clarity on.  Did you say the Tegeta contract 
was Mr Tsotsi’s contract? 
MR KOKO:  I am saying the Tegeta contract … 
MR SELEKA::  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  That was set aside by the North Gauteng High 
Court, 3,7 billion rands. It is the same contract that Ms 
Daniels told me.  
MR SELEKA::  But did you say it’s Mr Tsotsi’s contract?  Or 
no?  Okay.  The meeting you referenced … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let’s get that Mr Koko when you 
shake your head that will not be captured by the … 
MR KOKO:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Recording.  You need to say no. 
MR KOKO:  I, I did not say the Tegeta contract is Mr Tsotsi’s 
contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MR KOKO:  I did say, the Tegeta contract of ...  (indistinct) 
veld it’s a contract that Mr Tsotsi referred to when he took 
my staff to trust, in March 2014.  It is referenced by Mr 
20 
Johan Bester in this paragraph 21 and 22 of his affidavit and 
I confirmed that that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  Alright. 
MR SELEKA::  So that meeting you are referring to about Mr 
Bester, is that the meeting that took place in March 2014? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 269 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  That’s correct. 
MR SELEKA::  Then you can proceed.  
MR KOKO:  In June 2014, around June 2014 and Mr Tsotsi 
walked into my office.  He had a full time office at Mega Watt 
Park. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He had? 
MR KOKO:  He walked into my office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  And discussed the issue of Mr Sikathembe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sikathembe? 
10 
MR KOKO:  Sikathembe.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What was the issue of Mr Sikathembe that 
time? 
MR KOKO:  That no, he did not discuss the issue of the 
Sikathembe.  He discussed the issue of Simmo Tommo.   
CHAIRPERSON:  The issue of? 
MR KOKO:  Simmo Tommo.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Simmo Tommo, ja. 
MR KOKO:  Yes.  Simmo Tommo had apparently written to 
him to ask for his intervention. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mind us who or what his position was at 
Eskom? 
MR KOKO:  No, Simmo Tommo was a supplier. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was a supplier, okay.  Mr Sikathembe was 
an official ...  (indistinct). 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 270 of 376 
 
MR 
KOKO:  Mr Sikathembe 
was a general 
manager 
commodities ...  (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.   
MR SELEKA::  Sumier(?).  Let me Chairperson, Tommo is it 
just a ...  (indistinct) company that ...  (indistinct) Mr Koko 
will then explain what the position was with this Japanese 
company. 
MR KOKO:  They manufacture transformers.  They had 
apparently written to Mr Tsotsi and say Eskom placed a 
contract with us, we have done a job to the tune of 69 million 
10 
rands, and it must – Eskom is refusing to pay us.  I said, I 
don’t know much about it, I have heard about it.  My team 
has been investigated and investigated it.   
I had it on the corridor stock.  And once I am familiar, 
in fact I said to Mr Tsotsi I was very polite to him, because 
he’s an old man, but I basically told him that whether you are 
right or wrong, it’s none of your business.  You are an 
executive chairman … 
CHAIRPERSON:  So but you may have been ...  (indistinct) 
by Mr Seleka’s question.  You had said Mr Tsotsi walked into 
20 
your office. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but you have not said what he said.  
What the discussion was about. 
MR KOKO:  Now, now before that, then the transaction, then 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 271 of 376 
 
I heard all of a sudden there’s a letter that was signed 
committing Eskom to pay Simmo Tommo 69 million rand.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that before your discussion with Mr 
Tsotsi when he walked into your office or is that after when 
you became aware of such a letter? 
MR KOKO:  That’s before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before? 
MR KOKO:  Yes, before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who had signed that letter? 
MR KOKO:  Mr Tsotsi signed that letter. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was it addressed to? 
MR KOKO:  It was addressed to a CEO Chairman of Simmo 
Tommo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what was the gist of the content of the 
letter? 
MR KOKO:  That Eskom commit to pay Simmo Tommo 69 
million rand.   
CHAIRPERSON:  69 Million rand? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And your understanding of this 69 million 
20 
rand at that time was that it was supposed to be for what? 
MR KOKO:  Well my team had done investigation.  My team 
had briefed me that Simmo Tommo is not entitled to 69 
million rands.  It not Simmo Tommo … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of the letter what did the letter 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 272 of 376 
 
say the 69 million rand was for?   
MR KOKO:  The letter was saying, we commit to come to 
your workshops to investi – to do inspections of the place of 
the transformers that have been manufactured for Eskom 
and once the inspection is done, they will then be delivered 
to Eskom and Eskom will pay 69 million rand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  You knew nothing about this 
and your team had investigated and what did they find?  
What had they found? 
MR KOKO:  My team was very clear and very emphatic that 
10 
there was no need, there is no order number, Eskom don’t 
need this things.  And it then explained to me why there was 
a squabble between Mr Tsotsi and Malihlele(?) who wants to 
pay and the team that is doing the real work.   
Because the team that’s doing the real work.  No, no, 
we did not place an order.  There is no order number.  So we 
can’t even go and inspect because we don’t need this things.  
So I said to Mr Tsotsi … 
CHAIRPERSON:  So what did he say, and did he talk about 
this particular issue when he came to your office? 
20 
MR KOKO:  No, he came to my office and say, why don’t you 
pay this people.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did he say? 
MR KOKO:  Why don’t you pay these people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why don’t you pay these people? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 273 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Meaning? 
MR KOKO:  Simmo Tommo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, right.  And what did you say?   
MR KOKO:  And I said to him very polite way, I told you first 
there is no order number.  There is no goods received so we 
can’t do what we call in Eskom procurement processes, the 
three were mentioned.  But thirdly, lastly I am not taking this 
matter any further, for me it’s dead.  And I remember what he 
told me.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did he tell you? 
MR KOKO:  You are stubborn, I will sort you out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are stubborn and I will sort you out? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Is that how your discussion ended 
on that day? 
MR KOKO:  That is how the discussion ended. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that was 20`14? 
MR KOKO:  That, that was 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you remember around which month 
20 
more or less? 
MR KOKO:  It was after June. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After June. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 274 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then when did – was there any further 
discussion between yourself and Mr Tsotsi about, about this 
issue before your suspension? 
MR KOKO:  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In 2015? 
MR KOKO:  So on that, on towards the end of March, 
towards the middle of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2015? 
MR KOKO:  2015.  I picked up … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But before you were suspended? 
MR KOKO:  Before I was suspended.  I picked up that the 
letter was signed.   
CHAIRPERSON:  The letter was? 
MR KOKO:  Was signed.   
CHAIRPERSON:  When you had known about the letter 
before he came to your office in 2014, the letter had not 
been signed. 
MR KOKO:  The letter has not been signed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you had seen it or you had been told 
20 
about it? 
MR KOKO:  No, no.  No.  What I had seen when he came to 
my office, with the Simmo Tommo letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or which was complaining. 
MR KOKO:  Was complaining.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 275 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but at that stage had – were you aware 
that there was already a letter purporting to be from him or 
did that only happen in 2015? 
MR KOKO:  No that happened in 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In 2015. 
MR KOKO:  That happened at about 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh alright.  So when did you see this letter 
that was signed by him. 
MR KOKO:  Actually not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not see it? 
10 
MR KOKO:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you were told that ...  (indistinct). 
MR KOKO:  I was told the letter is signed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And who told you about this letter? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I don’t remember, but what I do 
remember is that once I heard it, once I heard about it I 
wrote Malisela an email.  Mr Sikathembe.  I say Mr 
Sikathembe I have since learned that there’s a letter been 
signed by the Chairman, I direct you to regularise it and go 
to the panel committee for condonation.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now this would have been when in 2015?  
Around mid, around January, February? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman that would have been first quarter.  I 
don’t, I don’t … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because your suspension was on the 11t h. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 276 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  Yes, so I will – Mr Sikathembe is suspended on 
the 2 nd of March.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh Mr Sikathembe was suspended on the 
2n d of March. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay so when, when you were 
suspended in – on the 11t h it was only about two weeks after 
Mr Sikathembe has … 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
10 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you made the decision to suspend 
him? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  So between the meeting, 
the discussion you had with Mr Tsotsi when he came into 
your office in 2014, in the second half of 2014 and the 2 nd of 
March when you suspended Mr Sikathembe, the two of you 
namely, you and Mr Tsotsi ever discussed this issue again? 
MR KOKO:  No. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had not discussed the issue again? 
MR KOKO:  No I don’t remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He could never argue same. 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I do not remember discussing with 
him.  I do not think, I do not think I did. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 277 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, alright.  So you suspended Mr 
Sikathembe. What was the reason for suspending Mr 
Sikathembe? 
MR KOKO:  I suspended him pending investigations.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was the allegation that, that lead to 
his suspension? 
MR KOKO:  So there was a clear instructions from me to him 
in writing, that he must not sign the letter.  He must, we are 
not going to pay this. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He must not? 
MR KOKO:  We are not going to pay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, you won’t pay, ja. 
MR KOKO:  We will not pay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Eskom. 
MR KOKO:  Eskom, this thing is dead. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja. 
MR KOKO:  Then I later found out that the letter is signed.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Now the letter that you were told you 
signed, you had told was a letter by whom to whom? 
20 
MR KOKO:  It was a letter that was originated by Mr 
Sikathembe, that was signed by Mr Tsotsi.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Now okay, but you at that stage you had 
not seen the letter, but you were told about it? 
MR KOKO:  Yes.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 278 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, you can’t remember who told you 
about it? 
MR KOKO:  No I can’t remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did Mr Sika – did you ask Mr Sikathembe 
about it? 
MR KOKO:  I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before suspending him? 
MR KOKO:  Yes, I called him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  I even emailed him.  I even emailed it.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Did he, did he – what did he say 
about the existence or none existence of that letter?   
MR KOKO:  Chairman he had the support of the Chairman, 
so … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what did he say?  Did he say he knew 
about the letter?  He knew the letter it existed?  And … 
MR KOKO:  Oh ja, there was no dispute about the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, he admitted it? 
MR KOKO:  No, there was no dispute about the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But he didn’t show it to you, he didn’t 
20 
produce it?  You did not ask for it? 
MR KOKO:  No, no, there was no, there was no dispute 
about the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so did he explain about the letter? 
MR KOKO:   How he came about it. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 279 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   How the letter came about, did he draft 
it for the Chairperson or what? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman there was a hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, afterwards? 
MR KOKO:  Afterwards and there was evidence led and the 
sequence of events is nicely tabulated in – I think it’s 
NK33. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:  And the senior counsel who chaired the 
meeting 
was 
satisfied 
that 
the 
letter 
was 
actually 
10 
originated from Mr Sakazimbi, and he was also satisfied 
that the letter is unlawful. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was he found guilty of something? 
MR KOKO:  He was found guilty and the sanction was a 
dismissal, which I implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that was now, that happened after 
you came back from ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   After ...[Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so when you were suspended Mr 
Sakazimbi was also on suspension and when you came 
20 
back the issue had not been finalised. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and then it was finalised, you 
implemented the dismissal. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 280 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That had been recommended by the 
Chairperson. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so the dismissal therefore of Mr 
Sakazimbi and his suspension centred around this letter 
that you understood had been signed by Mr Tsotsi? 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Committing Eskom to paying R69million 
for something that you regarded as not needed by Eskom 
or not necessary. 
10 
MR KOKO:   Well there was no order number and all – and 
the evidence that was led in the hearing says that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes, did you by any chance have a 
copy of the ruling of the Chairperson. 
MR KOKO:  MK33 sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   It is in this bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, no that is fine, okay Mr – I 
think at least now I understand that part. 
MR KOKO:   Now but let me tell you, let me complete the 
20 
picture.   Let me complete the picture.  I have learnt about 
the meeting of the 6 t h of March, I have learnt about the 
meeting of the 7 t h of March in Legani. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   But of particular importance is what happened 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 281 of 376 
 
in the meeting of the Board of the 11 t h of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With respect to your suspension? 
MR KOKO:  With respect to my suspension, and that is why 
I don’t buy these other stories.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:   Because in that meeting Mr Zola Tsotsi says 
we are going to investigate these four areas, and the 
investigations is triggered by the load shedding with this 
generation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is now him speaking when you were 
10 
– you had been called? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
MR KOKO:   And then he says you are responsible for the 
load shedding, Mr Tsotsi has said that many times in this 
Commission and one of the frustrating things Mr Chair is 
sitting at home somebody giving evidence here and being 
untruthful and you cannot do anything about it, it is like 
you must break the TV now.   Mr Tsotsi says Mr Koko is 
responsible 
for 
generation 
because 
he 
is 
doing 
the 
20 
maintenance.  The Eskom delegations of authority that Mr 
Tsotsi himself signed clearly says he is lying to you.  He 
was taking you for a ride and when the Board took him to 
task and said but maintenance, load shedding is not 
maintenance, the Eskom Board and I have cut and pasted a 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 282 of 376 
 
section 
that 
Mr 
Tsotsi 
signed 
clearly 
says 
that 
the 
responsibility for a new generation lies with the Group 
Executive Generation, and if we are going to go on that 
line then the head of generation who runs generation would 
have been suspended, but every time in going listening to 
the audio of 11 t h March every time Mr Tsotsi is told but 
what about generation, he says no, no, no generation is Mr 
Koko, and the only reason he did that is because he 
wanted to create a ...[indistinct] an excuse that I must be 
part 
of 
that 
because 
the 
person 
who 
is 
managing 
10 
generation at that point was Ntsokolo so if generation was 
to be investigated then the head of generation should have 
been suspended, not the service provider who is distant 
from generation and where still the Eskom reputation and 
Chairman I am going to 
ask you 
please, ask 
your 
investigators 
to 
go 
and 
look 
at 
2012 
organisational 
structure that Mr Tsotsi himself signed it is attached Mr 
Tsotsi was taking you for a ride. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now of course you make the point that 
you make about what Mr Tsotsi said at the meeting of the 
20 
11 t h when you had been called in. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say your suspension was driven by 
Mr Tsotsi am I right to understand it like that? 
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 283 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   Of course you have been listening 
to the evidence that has been heard, what do you say to 
the evidence both by Mr Tsotsi as well as by Mr Nick 
Linnell that at the meeting in Durban on the 8 t h you were 
included among the three executives that that he says he 
was told by I think Ms Dudu Myeni were supposed to be 
suspended or whose suspension was contemplated, what 
do you say about that? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman I have listened to the evidence of 
Mr Nick Linnell, I have listened to the evidence of Mr 
10 
Tsotsi, I was shocked at times almost angry that there was 
such a meeting, it really shocked me, but Mr Tsotsi did also 
tell you that the idea of an inquiry into Eskom was an idea 
that he was thinking about, he was thinking about it.  On 
the 6 t h in the Presidential Guest  House Mr Linnell and Ms 
Dudu Myeni allegedly discussed that further.  I think Mr 
Tsotsi was not there, no Mr Tsotsi was not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja he was not there. 
MR KOKO:   And the affidavit of Nick Linnell says he is the 
one who mooted the idea that says you cannot do this type 
20 
of an investigation without suspending people that are in 
charge, I think that was Mr Linnell.  He then said on the 
following day they met at the Presidential Guest House and 
the discussion of the areas of discussion continued in two 
meetings, one attended by Mr Masonga the other one by 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 284 of 376 
 
the President and Mr Masonga was there or not and right, 
and then he says they then agreed on the three areas that 
had to be investigated, Generation, New-Build and the 
Commercial.  Mr Linnell says I did not know Eskom people, 
the name, the names were emailed to me later, that is the 
evidence of Nick Linnell, so the names were attached by 
Mr Tsotsi and if Mr Tsotsi was truthful when he attached 
the name he would have attached the Generation name 
there, but he did not, he attached my name because he 
was determined to make sure that I am part of that pack 
10 
that must go. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you don’t accept the evidence that 
your – in terms of the discussion at the Durban meeting on 
the 8 t h, that your area was included in terms of the 
portfolios that had to be investigated and whose heads had 
to be suspended? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman I don’t accept it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t accept it. 
MR KOKO:   And let me tell you more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, h’m. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Mr Linnell reads a document that was 
submitted by Mr Masongwani, it is a conspiracy theory and 
please let us go back to it, he says there is a sabotage at 
Eskom, the open turbines have now been converted into 
combined cycle, into base load operation and there is no 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 285 of 376 
 
need to do so.  You may not understand the jargon there, 
first, the first conclusion that I have on that letter is that it 
was written by a non-technical person, by mixing the 
words, it is somebody who is not involved in our business, 
a distant person.   Secondly what he was trying to do there 
he was trying force in the commercial part of the business 
because according to them Eskom is spending R1billion of 
diesel and somebody else is benefitting, and at that time 
you may remember or you may not remember there was a 
lot of stories that says the medical doctors are getting 
10 
diesel contacts from Eskom, it was a very common 
accusation, so all what Mr Masongwane was doing with 
that conspiracy document was to force an argument that 
says there is a sabotage, one, two this sabotage has led to 
the use of diesel at R1billion a month and certain 
characters that they may or may think they know are 
benefitting to it.  When you take that line you then 
conclude that then commercial must be included and I was 
the head of commercial, but it was a big sell and that is 
why Mr Tsotsi pushed me into generation, he said you are 
20 
Mr Generation when he knows that Mr Generation is Mr 
Ntshekolo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:  And Chairman please go and read, your 
investigators must go and read and come and advise you, 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 286 of 376 
 
go and read the organogram of Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What you must do, anything that you 
think is relevant and important talk to your legal team they 
can furnish it. 
MR KOKO:   My affidavit deals with that Chair, I have 
included it in the affidavit, I have even quoted Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Seleka you can start 
where you want to start but at some stage I am sure you 
will talk about the issue of the Durban meeting and so on. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, ja.  Chair I see it is nearly quarter 
10 
past seven. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And we did not agree on how long we 
are going to run. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Ja I know that my own 
contemplation was that we would finish by about seven, we 
have not.  I am prepared to continue subject to everybody, 
I think that maybe we should continue and see where we 
are by eight and take it from there.  How is that for you? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, that will still be a short time, it 
20 
seems to me I need to traverse ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I am not necessarily saying what will 
happen, I am saying we will assess and take it from there 
at that time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, I see. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 287 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Barrie how is that for you? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   In terms of – are we going on? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRIE SC:   I have no difficulty with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I was saying let’s go on until eight 
and see, assess at that time whether we go on further or 
what we do. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that alright?   Mr Koko that is fine 
with you? 
10 
MR KOKO:   That is fine, may I ask for a comfort break? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright, let’s take a short 
break, ten minutes?   Okay let’s take a ten minutes break. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us proceed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  While doing justice to the issues we will 
need to try and use the time properly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Efficiently. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of the pace. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 288 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but in the end we must do justice to the 
issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Indeed Chair.  Mr Koko so we are in 2014 
you were relating the story in 2014 Mr Koko coming to you 
10 
June 2014.  What was your position in 2014? 
MR 
KOKO: 
 Acting 
Group 
Executive 
Technology 
and 
Commercial. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Were you working with – or was 
she working for you Ms Daniels? 
MR KOKO:  Correct.  Correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So just explain for us is she working in- 
was she working in your office at the time? 
MR KOKO:  Chair you – I always have a difficulty explaining 
what Ms Daniels was doing at my – in my – what her role 
20 
was but I found her in that office.  And he was the senior 
manager in that office for the previous executives.   
 
When I got there I did not really appreciate her role 
and I think she picked it up and she went to Mr Marokane 
and she knew that Mr Marokane and I were tight.  Mr 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 289 of 376 
 
Marokane and I come a long way.  We actually – we are very 
close. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair – sorry Chair should I leave it up to 
you to manage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No you can also – you can also do it. 
MR KOKO:  She was a… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja – no you… 
MR KOKO:  Ms Daniels was a senior manager in my office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR KOKO:  And mainly looking at regulatory and legal 
issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  I just wanted to put across. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  How he ended up in my area. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine. 
MR KOKO:  But his – her main focus Chair was regulatory 
and legal issues primarily on the coal contracts. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR KOKO:  She then was very strong on coal contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay that is alright. 
MR KOKO:    I beg yours Ms Daniels. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 290 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Daniels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
MR KOKO:  I beg your pardon Ms Daniels. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay let me take step by step because 
you have mentioned quite a number of issues.  You said in 
the letter from Sumitomo and in the letter of reply from Mr 
Tsotsi they specifically dealt with the R69 million one on the 
south of Sumitomo that Sumitomo wanted to be paid and two 
on from the south of Mr Tsotsi that Mr Tsotsi in his letter 
committed Eskom to pay. 
10 
MR KOKO:  Correct.  Chair what I may not remember clearly 
is whether the letter from Sumitomo that came mentioned the 
R69 million.  I think the letter from Sumitomo may or may not 
but it is clearly what I – what it clearly did was to say to 
Eskom you have got a contract with us we have done the job 
you need to come do inspections and you need to pay us.  
And that was not happening. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So is that the only correctly you wish to 
make in that regard? 
MR KOKO:  Yes Chair.  Remember this is five years’ ago so I 
20 
am working from memory but I think that is what it is all 
about. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. We have shared with you the affidavit 
with the annexures of Mr Sicasimi [?]. 
MR KOKO:  That is correct Chair. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 291 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The letter of Mr Tsotsi to Sumitomo is 
also contained in the annexures to his affidavit.  You have 
seen that? 
MR KOKO:  Chair I  have not – I do not recall – I do not 
recall seeing the attachments.  Chair it is the second 
mistake I think this commission is being told.  They said the 
same with the affidavit of Ms Nonkululeko Dlamini Vilette 
that they have sent an affidavit and it included telephone 
records.  I did not comment but it was incorrect. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Now the letter Chairperson is in the 
10 
Reference Bundle Eskom. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  If I may be permitted the affidavit that 
was sent to us did not contain the annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:    I can refer you to though to the finding 
of the – Mr [00:05:44] which is – starts at page 344 of the 
bundle before you where part of the letter is quoted if I can 
refer you to the relevant page that is page 349 is where the 
letter or portion of it is quoted in this dismissals finding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Koko what I am going to do just so 
that you have the benefit of the exercise I am doing is to put 
the other person’s versions to you.  You would have seen in 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 292 of 376 
 
the commission we have done that at this commission and 
we allow you to comment on that. 
 
So I will do that by reference to this affidavit because 
I have also looked at that letter and I could not find the 
reference to that R69 million.  That you will find on page 747 
of Eskom Bundle 13.  I will ask my junior to assist you. 
MR KOKO:  This [00:07:02] here. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 747 Eskom Bundle – Reference 
Bundle 13 – 13.   
MR KOKO:  I got it. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You got it? 
MR KOKO:  I got Chair thank you.  Yes thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  There is just for the Chairperson to know 
whether or not indeed there is a R69 million and we just 
move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you can proceed Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 747. 
MR KOKO:  7? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  747.  It will be on your right.  I think it is 
under item 18 – under item 18. 
20 
MR KOKO:  I am getting there Chair my apologies Mr 
Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  747.   
CHAIRPERSON:  The black numbers not the red numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am – yes I am there. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 293 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Now can you identify – well shall I 
help you quickly because we want to use time efficiently.  
This is a letter you can see – oh but you did have this letter 
which you showed to Mr Matona by the way? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Remember you showed Mr Matona 
according to your affidavit? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That Mr Tsotsi has signed this – is this 
the letter? 
10 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Dated 11 August 2014 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Is addressed to Assistant General 
Manager a very difficult name there. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Masato Taguchi. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And on the next page is Mr Zola Tsotsi’s 
signature? 
20 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  I went through the letter to see 
where you found the R69 million I could not find it in this 
letter.   
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 294 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So can you recall exactly where – so 
there is no commitment to pay R69 million in the letter can 
you recall where you got the figure from? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman it is quite simple and here I am going 
to ask us painstakingly to go to the – to MK33.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on let us finish here first. 
MR KOKO:  I am answering that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Of the 69 million where it comes from. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you accept that it is not in the letter? 
10 
MR KOKO:  I accept that it is not in the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay but you say it is somewhere? 
MR KOKO:  Let us go to page 69.  You note that MK33. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that page 69 Mr Seleka do you know 
where we found that – find that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  He says MK. 
MR KOKO:  MK33. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that an annexure to your affidavit? 
MR KOKO:  33 yes – my counsel talked to it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No, no I understand. 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:  It is at the page number I referred you to 
earlier Chair at page 344 of the bundle before you the 
annexures to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To his affidavit? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  To that affidavit yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 295 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so what is the page number again? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  340. 
CHAIRPERSON:  340. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is in Mr Koko’s bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the bundle we have been using up to 
now.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Koko I gather from Mr Barrie that that 
is the disciplinary ruling. 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Is that the disciplinary ruling? 
10 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so – so are you saying Mr Koko you 
got the 69 million – the figure of R69 million in the ruling of 
the disciplinary hearing? 
MR KOKO:  No, no, no remember the ruling – the ruling it is 
the consequences of submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  The ruling is the consequences of submissions 
and Chair I may want to you know if – let us assume that – 
let us take it that I may have forgotten which document. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ja. 
MR KOKO:  I find form. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  But I am saying the evidence that was led. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 296 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  At the disciplinary hearing clearly details where 
the 69 is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Confirmed that the amount was 69 million. 
MR KOKO:  Confirmed that the amount was 69 Chair I have 
– I want you to go to – I want you to go to page 347. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Seleka is 69 million an issue if we 
do not see it here? 
MR KOKO:  Can I read – can I read page 347? 
“In April 2014 Somutomo made a demand of 
69 million payment on the basis that it is – it 
10 
had 
purportedly 
manufactured 
goods 
pursuant to the contract.  It is not in dispute 
that the goods were neither inspected nor 
requested under the purchase order nor is it 
in dispute that there was neither a budget 
nor need for allegedly affected items.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If it is not – if the figure is not an issue let 
20 
us move on. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes no that is correct Chair we just trying 
to clarify the version that it is in the letter and committing 
Eskom to that 69 million. 
MR KOKO:  And Chair might I say – might I say. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 297 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR KOKO:  In this letter and I need to read this you see – 
so just for the record to those who are watching I take off my 
glasses when I read.  Because people read a lot into that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Is it still the ruling? 
MR KOKO:  Yes it is the ruling. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What are you looking for in the ruling? 
MR KOKO:  In the ruling Mr – the Chairman says he is 
satisfied that the signature by Mr Tsotsi is unlawful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay well if you say it is there. 
10 
MR KOKO:  It is there Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We – we can… 
MR KOKO:  Yes but the important part is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  There - that is what Mr Tsotsi was afraid of.  Mr 
Tsotsi knew that what he did was unlawful and if this matter 
is taken into conclusion and the letter is found to be unlawful 
the he has got an issue with the board and the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Now this – Chairperson I am going 
20 
to try to expedite. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Ja not everything is important for our 
purposes so… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja let us focus on important issues for 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 298 of 376 
 
purposes of suspension. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the question of course of – of the 
letter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is important for the reasons that as far as 
Mr Koko is concerned that is where the origin is of why he 
was he was suspended. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the question of the amount I think we 
can accept that even if it was not 69 million it appears that it 
would be quite a substantial amount. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So Mr Tsotsi does not denying the 
letter.  He accepts that he signed the letter.  And I think you 
were saying earlier that you had not had sight of the letter. 
MR KOKO:  Of course I did not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  So Mr Sikathembe in his affidavit 
you know he details references to emails and he says that 
20 
when this issue to his attention he referred it to Mr Charles 
Khalima and then he attaches the emails of Mr Charles 
Khalima corresponding with Suzanne Daniels in – who was 
reporting to you.  And that they – the two of them drafted the 
letter and indeed there is an email from Ms Daniels saying 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 299 of 376 
 
the draft has been prepared and I think it is being forwarded 
to language – you had a language department I believe? 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  To oversee the draft.  I mean it is 
documents that got to be issued by Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But Mr Seleka why are we going there? 
What will be the point for our purposes?  You want me to 
give you some leeway? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And the draft letter Ms Koko was in fact 
copied to you in the email of the 14 May 2014.  The email is 
on page 745 of the – that Reference Bundle that other one.  
But it is detailed in Mr Sikathembe’s affidavit he says that – 
ja keep to that 745.  There is Ms Suzanne Daniels’ email to 
Leo Dlamini you are copied in that email. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say page 745? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  745 Chair yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of which? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The Reference Bundle. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you did not say the Reference Bundle 
so I was looking at the…  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry Chair the Reference Bundle. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 300 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  745. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  At the top of the page.  So there is a trail 
of emails with Ms Suzanne Daniels.  So we have prepared a 
draft hereon and will let you have it once gotten it back from 
language.  So according to Mr Sikathembe you would have 
been aware of the draft as it was being prepared? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I do not recall this – this email.  It is 
clearly copied to me.  I do not recall seeing it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  And – but let me read what the Chairman rules 
10 
after this evidence has been led before him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Or you can just tell us in a nutshell 
what this it says. 
MR KOKO:  No, no it is – it is important that I do this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:   
“The Chairman had no mandate to change 
the terms of a contract as this had to be 
referred back to the tender committee.  The 
employee who is Mr Manisela – the employee 
20 
was aware that this and as a senior manager 
was or ought to have been aware that the 
procurement policy prohibits a change to the 
terms of the contract.  The payment to 
Sumotomo was subject to obtaining of three 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 301 of 376 
 
signatures as per the Eskom processes.  The 
employee admitted that he signed the earlier 
version of the letter – draft letter despite 
being aware that there was no purchase 
order, no budget and no inspections of an 
alleged manufacturing.  It follows therefore 
that 
the 
employee 
was 
aware 
that 
no 
payment was due.” 
Now Chair I do not recall the – the email. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The email okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ys. 
MR KOKO:  But – but even the employee’s version says no 
work was done, no money is due so why would I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Support it when the senior employee himself 
knows that no work was done, no amount is due?  But he still 
causes – write the letter and pretend to have copied to me.  
Many people when you are in that senior position Chairman 
people copies you in anything and everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:  So he – he in his own version he knows he 
should not have done this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. Hm.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Thank you Chair.   
MR KOKO:  But Mr Tsotsi is not my gripe is that Mr Tsotsi 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 302 of 376 
 
has not been taken to task for acting unlawfully by the 
investigators of this commission.  That is my gripe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well okay let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I assume that – or by the time you returned 
from suspension Mr Tsotsi was no longer a chairperson – 
was no longer a member of the board? 
MR KOKO:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  And he still deemed it important to come back 
10 
and to testify in favour of Mr Sikathembe and his testimony 
was reflected. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes thank you Chair.  I think there is 
further on also – I will expedite this further an email on page 
753 where according to Mr Sikathembe you are requesting 
documents from Mr Mongese and that is in regard to the 
Sumitomo matter.  So page 753 quickly. 
MR KOKO:  On the Eskom Bundle? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja that Reference Bundle. 
20 
MR KOKO:  753. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka I have given you some leeway I 
am not sure that we should be going that far but … 
MR KOKO:  But I will tell you why I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may be knowing something I do not 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 303 of 376 
 
know that is why I am giving you leeway but we should get to 
it as soon as possible. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I will Chair. 
MR KOKO:  Page 753. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 753. 
MR KOKO:  Yes this is  
CHAIRPERSON:  75? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  53. 
MR KOKO:  No, no.  753 on the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the Reference Bundle. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair. 
MR KOKO:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  I beg your pardon, I beg your pardon Sir.  
Bundle 15? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  13 no. 
MR KOKO:  No. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Not your bundle the Reference Bundle. 
MR KOKO:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes not your bundle. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The one with this email.  753.   
MR KOKO:  I am there Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So from the bottom up that is your email 
Matshela to Mongese and Tsokolo Sumitomo matter and  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 304 of 376 
 
“In our discussion with chairman you made 
reference to the information sent to you by 
Colin Reddy.  I requested this information so 
that both of us can work from same set of 
facts.  I do not have this information as yet.  
Kindly make it available that we can move 
this matter forward.  This is September 
2014.” 
And he says: 
“You are welcome to come to my office any 
10 
time.” 
And at the top of it you say to Malisela Sikathembe. 
“Please get whatever Mongese has with him I 
am out of the office for a week.” 
So you have seemed to be hands on on this matter? 
MR KOKO:  Ja – oh ja Chair and I am very proud of this. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  I am extremely proud of this because here I was 
applying my mind.  Mongese is a user.  If there is a person 
who should know whether we need transformers and there is 
20 
an order number where do I go?  I went to the right person 
and I – when I decided – when I showed Mr Tsotsi the door I 
had applied my mind I went to the right people.  The users 
told me we do not need this thing.  We have not placed an 
order. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 305 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  And Chair I know you are anxious. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I - I do not see the point and it is 
taking long to come. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Can I – can I do one more thing? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Koko the disciplinary hearing was – 
was based on a report.  There was an investigation report by 
Ernst and Young.  Correct? 
MR KOKO:  Chair the – Mr Sikathembe was suspended 
10 
pending an investigation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  There must have been a company that – or there 
must have been somebody who did the investigation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja but did you not see the investigation 
report when you came back? 
MR KOKO:  No Chair I – I may have seen it I may not have 
seen it but the way things work you suspend a person, you 
do the investigation and Ms Daniels dealt with it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja but it is the Chairperson who wants 
20 
me to cut to the chase 
MR KOKO:  Ja I do not recall seeing it Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja that investigation report is on page 
785.  It is Ernst and Young investigating report to which. 
MR KOKO:  785? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 306 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.   
MR KOKO:  I am there Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You found it.  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  July 31 s t. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And in the interest of time if you 
turn the page 804. 
MR KOKO:  8. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  804.  The investigators had – 804. 
MR KOKO:  Yes I am there Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.   You see against paragraph 6.2 Mr 
10 
Daniel Tulanko’s [?] name. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
And 
then 
the 
investigators 
had 
interviewed him. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And they set out there in those 
paragraphs that he is the one who – he says that the draft 
that was received which was firstly sent to you apparently 
you refused to sign it.  He then amended that draft to include 
Mr Tsotsi’s name and to word it the way he did. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What happened? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr [00:27:07] the head of legal 
Chairperson when interviewed by the investigators he says  
CHAIRPERSON:  Went interviewed? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  When interviewed. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 307 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  When interviewed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja when interviewed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  By the investigators he tells them he is 
the one who ultimately worded the letter that Mr Tsotsi 
signed.  The letter was meant to be signed by Mr Koko but 
when Mr Koko refused to sign he changed it and – and it 
became the last – the product – the last – the final product 
which Mr Tsotsi signed. 
MR KOKO:  Chairman no. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No he has not finished. 
MR KOKO:  You know.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Do you know what the point I am making 
which is what Mr Sikathembe is making because Mr Koko 
has said the letter originated from Mr Sikathembe – 
originated from Mr Sikathembe not – but Sikathembe says 
here are the emails. The letter is being drafted by Khalima 
and Suzanne Daniels.  It is ultimately finalised by Mr Nel [?] 
he tells the investigators that and not Mr – so Mr Sikathembe 
was not responsible for drafting the letter and causing the 
20 
chairperson to sign it. 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Mr – hang on.  But Mr Seleka 
where will that take us?  Let us assume Mr Sikathembe was 
innocent he should not have been suspended. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 308 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where does that – how does that help us 
with the issue of the suspensions and Mr Koko’s suspension.  
He has a certain version about why he was suspended. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It may or – it may be right – it may not be 
right but even assuming that Mr Sikathembe was innocent of 
the allegations how does that… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well we will try… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Help with the question of the suspensions 
10 
we are dealing with? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair.  That is – that is goes – the 
Chair  
CHAIRPERSON:  I would… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You will – I will bring to you Mr Koko’s 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But I think he could answer the question 
then I will leave that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but… 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Link it to his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No but if I do not know – if I do not see 
how – why the question is important should we not move 
onto something else? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 309 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And even if Mr Sikathembe was innocent 
how does it help us with the suspensions of the four 
executives. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  No correct Chair but I am not 
moving I am linking it to his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And why is it important even if you link it?  
That is my ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It goes to the veracity of Mr Koko’s 
version.  I am putting it in general terms. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I think let us move on to...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us talk – let us go to the issues about 
the fact that Mr Koko’s name or his portfolio ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...was mentioned in the Durban meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us talk about the fact that certain 
20 
witnesses have said they had a meeting with on the 10t h 
where – with him and Mr Salim Essa.  Let us talk about the 
time when he was called to a meeting and told about these 
suspensions.  Let us talk about the time where there was a 
discussion with him and the delegation of the board about 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 310 of 376 
 
him coming back.  Those, as I recall, are really the important 
features. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There may be some that I am leaving 
which you will... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But will remember, of course. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me get to that Chairperson this way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, because Mr Koko, obviously, it 
10 
weighs heavily with you this matter of Sumitomo and 
Simbi(?) (Sekhasimbe).  And the – what you say is an 
unlawful instruction by Mr Tsotsi and you use the word to 
“unsuspend” Mr Sekhasimbe.  It weighed heavily with you.   
MR KOKO:   What is the question? 
MR KOKO:   It weighed heavily with you. 
MR KOKO:   I am waiting for the question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is the question.  The statement to 
you.   
MR KOKO:   I am saying ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes or no? 
MR KOKO:   It is what caused my suspension. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, it weighed heavily with you. 
MR KOKO:   I do not understand that question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes or no? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 311 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I do not ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   You were saying:  I was very upset and 
angry about what I regarded as the pressure being put on 
me.  
MR KOKO:   Oh, of course.  Yes, Chair.  Of course. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now Mr Tsotsi says in February 2015, he 
was called by Minister Brown and told that you are 
interfering in management.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Meaning him, not Mr Koko. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, that Mr Tsotsi is interfering in 
management.  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just that you are speaking to 
Mr Tsotsi and you are saying you.  [laughs].  That you are 
saying ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...Mr Tsotsi says he was told you are...  
And it could be ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, okay. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It could mean that – it could give an 
impression that Mr Tsotsi was being told the Mr Koko was 
interfering whereas what you mean is ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 312 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, thank you for the clarification 
Chairperson.  Mr Tsotsi is told by the minister that you, Mr 
Tsotsi, I have received reports that you are interfering in 
management. 
 
Now 
the 
minister 
in 
her 
affidavit 
has 
responded to that.  And she says:  Yes, she received 
complaints from management or the executives.   
 
But one she can recall is that of the Sumitomo matter 
where it was alleged that Mr Tsotsi had signed a contract 
which later reveal what Minister Brown said.   
“That 
the 
chairperson, 
allegedly, 
interfering 
in 
10 
management and I tried to... 
There had been complaints about Tsotsi, both from 
the executives and the directorate. 
What comes to mind in particular was that one of the 
executives came to me in person, complaining about 
Mr Tsotsi’s interference with operational issues, 
producing a letter, allegedly by Mr Tsotsi to a 
Japanese company about buying oil or some other 
fuel. 
I decided I had to intervene.  This is why I invited 
20 
Mr Tsotsi, reprimanded him and directed him from 
interfering with management.” 
 
Mr Tsotsi thinks it is you who told the minister this.  
What is your ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you asking whether he told the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 313 of 376 
 
minister that Mr Tsotsi was interfering? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And in particular about this 
Sumitomo matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I can tell you upfront.  I have never 
talked to the minister about this.  And if the minister says 
such an executive, she must come and account. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   But I have never talked to the minister about 
10 
this matter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   I always – and that is you – when you are an 
Eskom person, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   When your blood is blue, protocol matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR KOKO:   My blood was blue and I looked down at people 
who will jump the CD(?), jump the board, go to the minister.  
20 
In the Eskom I grew up in, that is uncalled for.  Mr Tsotsi has 
got his own issues and he is looking for friends and this 
time, he stands alone. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will come by to you another issue. So 
you say you did not tell the minister.  At the time of your 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 314 of 376 
 
suspension, you have detailed in your affidavit what you said 
to the board.   
 
That is also captured in the minutes of what they say is 
PMG Minutes of 11 of March 2015.  You refer to that in your 
affidavit.  This matter does not appear there that you had 
reported it to the board.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Which matter? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The matter of Sumitomo, Mr Tsotsi giving 
you unlawful instructions, and this being the reason why you 
are being suspended.   
10 
MR KOKO:   Does not appear on the board of the 
11t h of March, that testimony(?). 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It does not even appear in your version 
of what you told the board.  You told the board you are – why 
are you not suspending the people who are responsible for 
Generation.  You mentioned two names.  Mister... who? 
MR KOKO:   And then Mr Govender.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Govender and...? 
MR KOKO:   Ja.  Mr Sekhasimbe. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  And the answer is simple Chair.  You 
walk into a board meeting.  The board has been 
deliberating the whole day.  
 
They have reached a conclusion and you want to 
assume that the board is acting bona fide and is not 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 315 of 376 
 
influenced by other things.   
 
What just did not make sense to me was that the 
person who – the other person should be – if the – if 
what the board’s bone fide is correct, then you expect 
other people also to be suspended.   
 
And it was a very difficult meeting.  And all what I 
wanted to know from the board is that.  I am not saying 
you are not making sense but let us take your logic to 
the conclusion.  You are just not making sense.  If what 
you are saying is correct, you are not making sense.   
10 
 
And when they asked me to go out and I spent 40-
minutes out, and they were deliberating, I thought they 
were hearing me that really this person is making 
valuable inputs.   
 
When I came back after 40-minutes, there was no time 
to talk.  Take this letter, sign here, go.  So that when I 
had an opportunity to meet the board again somewhere 
in May 2015, I told them.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  What is clear from the evidence 
Mr Koko is that, you seem to have been given more time 
20 
than the others.  And it is apparent from the minutes a long 
portion there appears of the meeting with you and the board.  
So you had time.   
 
And let us look at this against the background of what 
you say is the reason for your suspension.  It dates back 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 316 of 376 
 
from the 7t h, at least on your version, of March 2015.   
 
You say Mr Matona calls you.  On the 8t h he speaks with 
you.  On the 9t h he speaks with you.  On the 10t h he speaks 
with you.  And then on the 11 t h, in the morning, he still 
speaks with you and says you are going to be suspended.   
 
But even before the 11t h, on the 10 t h you are angry and 
you leave your office.  You go to Melrose Arch.  You call 
Ms Suzanne Daniels.  This thing is bothering you.  And you 
wanted her to advice you.   
 
So this thing is weighing heavily with you for seven, 
10 
eight, nine, ten – five days.  And there, you are in the board 
meeting – in the meeting with the board delegation and they 
say we are suspending you.   
 
And you say in you affidavit:  I knew the reason for my 
suspension.  So why do you not say:  But board members, 
this chairperson is misleading you. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, Chair I did tell the board that.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   On the 11t h? 
MR KOKO:   I did tell the board that on that day that this 
chairperson is misleading you but on a different note.  The 
20 
reason I did not raise the Sumitomo matter is because when 
I met with Ms Daniels in Melrose Arch, she made me 
understand that any suspension based on Sumitomo, it will 
not hold.  The board will have to find a better reason to 
suspend you.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 317 of 376 
 
 
So when I listened to the board on the 11t h of March, I 
took the bone fide.  Whatever I wanted to say to...  You know 
Chairman, March 2015 was very difficult for Eskom and I did 
invite you and your investigators to go and look at the...  I 
have seen minutes of 26 February.   
 
In the minutes of IFC of February, the IFC was saying 
we are load-shedding, we are bankrupt.  Government is not 
going to bail us out.  So when you know that, so you do not 
understand that...  No board can sit and do nothing.  But all 
that I wanted is that we must all do the same and we are not 
10 
doing the same.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But you see.  If Ms Daniels said to you on 
the 10t h of March, the day before, that on the basis of that 
the board would have no grounds to suspend you in 
connection with the Sumitomo matter, was that not all the 
more reason why... 
 
If you thought that was the reason you had been 
suspended, that you should have raised it because you now 
had the backing of a legal person saying there are no 
grounds on what you are telling me. 
20 
MR KOKO:   The reason for that Chair is, I was going to 
appear as if I am was sour grapes.  I am accusing Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, but you – if the position, as I 
understand it and you must tell me if I misunderstand the 
position.   
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 318 of 376 
 
 
Even as at on that day as the suspension – as the board 
was mentioning that you had to be suspended.  You thought 
the reason why you are being suspended, you thought that 
Mr Tsotsi was behind your suspension.   
 
And that he was behind your suspension because of 
your clash with him with regard to this Sumitomo matter 
being the suspension of Mr Sekhasimbe.   
 
Obviously, that is when you should have said:   
Hang on.  Board members, there is something that 
you might have not known.  You might not know this.  
10 
This man, the chairperson, is the one that seeks me 
to have me suspended and it is not something that 
is starting now.   
For the past five days, I have been having a 
discussion.  I knew.  I have been told that I was 
going to be suspended and that it was because of 
the Sumitomo matter.   
This man, we have had a clash, and he is driving – 
he is behind me being suspended.  So I want you to 
know that these are the facts. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Yes, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it not...  In other words, was the fact 
that Ms Daniels had told you this Sumitomo matters provides 
no good grounds for the board to suspend you, was that not 
a stronger reason for you to raise that issue, that to the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 319 of 376 
 
board – the meeting with the board? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, you are making perfect sense and maybe 
I should have done it.  I did not do it.  And the reason I did 
not do it is because the board was putting different reasons 
which, if true, I could even be arrested. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, you could be? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Could not be arrested? 
MR KOKO:   The board was giving different reason that if 
true, I could even be arrested. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even be arrested. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
MR KOKO:   Because the board was saying, there is 
sabotage in your area.  Mr Koko, we have reason to believe 
that in your area of business there is sabotage.  And I had 
no reason to say to the board that line is far-fetched.   
 
I did not know what...  I know now that the board had no 
evidence to that effect but that is what was put to me.  And it 
would not serve my purpose at that time, I thought, to argue 
20 
the Zola Tsotsi line when this sabotage being alleged on my 
part.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Of course, that suggest to me that 
when the board put the reason that they were putting before 
you, the sabotage and so on.  At that stage, your 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 320 of 376 
 
understanding was that the reason for your suspension was 
different. It was not the Sumitomo matter.  Is that right? 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Correct.  And the only difference is that, with 
time, I realised that the allegations of sabotage were fake.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
MR KOKO:   And my letter of suspension clearly says, the 
board has got the intention to investigate sabotage in my 
10 
area.  The letter of suspension clearly says that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So the unlawfulness of the instructions 
of Mr Tsotsi was not raised with the board.  The threats that 
he 
will 
suspend 
you 
because 
you 
have 
refused 
to 
unsuspend, in your words, Mr Sekhasimbe, was not raised 
with the board.  
 
That Mr Matona had come to see you and met with you 
or spoke with you, you showed him the letter, and he asked 
you unsuspend Mr Sekhasimbe.  Otherwise, you and I are 
20 
going to be suspended.  It was not put to the board.  Is that 
what you are saying to the Chairperson? 
MR KOKO:   Chairperson, on the 11 t h? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  No, my first opportunity with the board, I 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 321 of 376 
 
have raised it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   After you came back? 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no.  While I was still in suspension. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, during suspension. 
MR KOKO:   During suspension. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
Sometime 
around 
May, 
we 
met 
in 
a 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that with the delegation that was 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...saying yes. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was to happen ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes, I met with Ms Daniels.  I met with 
Mr Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I met with...  That was the first opportunity 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   ...I could deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   Because I realised, this sabotage story that the 
board told me, it is fake. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 322 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but...  Ja.  We do not leave it 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is right. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We do not leave it and Mr Koko has the 
first opportunity.  Because the first opportunity is what the 
PMG gave the people before they were suspended.  So they 
made representations to PMG. 
MR KOKO:   But Chairman, I am saying.  The first 
10 
opportunity I had with the board on the 11t h of March, the 
reason for my suspension which is written in my letters – if 
you will go to my letters, you will find it – was that the board 
is investigation possible acts of sabotage on my part.  And 
that threw me out. 
 
Even if I can argue the Zola Tsotsi matter, what is it that 
the board has before them that would justify a charge of 
sabotage? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   In...  Remember, I am a Senior Executive of 
20 
Eskom.  Eskom is a national key-point.  A sabotage in 
national key-point is treason.  So that throw you out.  So 
whether the Sekhasimbe issue or not, it becomes irrelevant.  
These people are accusing me for treason.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 323 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you accepted and you must tell me 
if you did not accept it.  I think you accepted the proposition 
that 
after 
the 
board 
had 
told 
you 
their 
reasons 
for 
suspending you or wanting to suspend you, you accepted the 
reasons they gave you as genuine reasons. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So then Mr Koko.  
Here is the version.  If you did not tell the board about all 
that, which are ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   No, Chair.  I object that I did not tell the board.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you step in before he could finish. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe he was going...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes.  No ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to say on the 11t h. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, on the 11t h. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Wait until he has finished. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 324 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am talking the 11 t h.  So then comes 
this aspect.  Because if you did not tell the board about this 
issue that is the very basis of your affidavit as to why you 
were suspended.   
 
The version of the other witnesses is this.  Let us start 
with Mr Masango.  Mr Masango says you called him to 
Melrose Arch on the 10t h.  He comes there.  He does not 
know the place.  He sees you on the balcony.  You are on the 
phone with him, giving him directions.  And he alights from 
the vehicle.  He comes up to you.   
10 
 
You take him into an office.  And prior to you moving into 
that office, you asked for his cell phone, to hand over his 
cell phone.  And you go into a meeting with Mr Salim Essa 
on the 10t h.   
 
And you start talking about how four executives are 
going to be suspended.  Three will not return but you will 
return.  S 
 
o according to that version, you knew about the 
suspensions before they took place.  And no wonder you did 
not bother to tell the board about the Sekhasimbe story. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I confirm to you that I knew about the 
suspensions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MR KOKO:   And please ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Your suspension ...[intervenes]  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 325 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   My suspension ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...but your suspension. 
MR KOKO:   My suspension. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   And please Chair, please indulge me because 
we are going to get to this.  But I do think you have got a 
difficulty in the witness called Mr Masango.  We will go to – 
we will get into Suzanne Daniel’s issue as well. 
 
The affidavit of Ms Molefe says she went to Mr Matona 
on the 11t h of March before the meeting of the 9 t h.  She then 
10 
told Mr Matona that:  I hear we are going to be suspended 
today.   
 
Mr Matona’s response in Ms Molefe’s affidavit is that:  I 
know.  I also heard from outsiders.  Now, either Ms Molefe is 
lying to the Commission or Mr Matona is lying to the 
Commission.  They cannot both be right. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can I assist you there Mr Koko?   
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that we can expedite this. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  Ja, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Koko, Ms Daniels says in the same 
light as Mr Masango.  After meeting with you at Melrose 
Arch, she called Dan Marokane.  She met with Dan 
Marokane that evening and Mr Dan Marokane told – in fact, 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 326 of 376 
 
called and met with Ms Tsholofele Molefe that same evening.  
That is why Ms Tsholofele Molefe would have known on the 
11t h.   
MR KOKO:   Chair, Mr Seleka is not assisting you.  Let me 
repeat. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   Ms Molefe got this from ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But let us start you...  You started off by 
saying you knew about your statement ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR KOKO:   Yes and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to just finish that point? 
MR KOKO:   No.  Well, I am finishing that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   But I am finishing this point because it is 
important. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   Ms Molefe was told by Dan, Mr Marokane.  That 
is correct.  After she has been told, in the morning of the 
11t h of March, she then approached Mr Matona and she says:  
20 
I hear that we are going to be suspended.   
 
Her affidavit does not say she heard from – she told Mr 
Matona that she heard from Dan.  But she has said it.  So I 
can accept that she said she heard it from Mr Matona.   
 
She says Mr Matona’s response is that:  I know about 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 327 of 376 
 
the suspensions.  Right?  So Mr Matona, on the 11t h of 
March, before the meeting of the 9t h, she says to mister – he 
says to Ms Molefe:  I know about the suspensions from the 
outsiders.   
 
In his affidavit, Mr Matona says:  I only learnt about the 
suspensions when it was said to me after hours.  So my 
submission to you is.  I knew from Mr Matona.   
 
And Ms Molefe is correct when she says that Mr Matona 
told her before the meeting of 9 in the morning that there 
would be the suspensions. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before the meeting of the 9t h? 
MR KOKO:   Before the meeting of nine o’clock in the 
morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of March? 
MR KOKO:   Before the meeting of 11 March.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Oh, before the meeting of the 
board at ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...on the 11t h? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  And remember, the suspensions were 
discussed in the board meeting of one o’clock after the 
minister has left.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 328 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   So Mr Matona could not have had the benefit of 
that meeting to know that there will be suspensions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   But Ms Molefe says he had that benefit to know 
that there will be suspensions.  And it is correct.  Because 
that is what he told me on the 8t h of March in the evening.  
So 
I 
knew 
about 
the 
suspensions 
and 
I 
knew 
the 
suspensions from Mr Matona. And I think Ms Molefe’s 
version is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you saying that you only got to 
10 
know about the fact that the other three executives would be 
suspended on the 11t h? 
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But as far as your own suspension is 
concerned, you knew before the 11t h? 
MR KOKO:   I knew about the likelihood of my suspension 
and that was Mr Matona. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   From Mr Matona. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR KOKO:   On the 8t h of March in the evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   On the call that lasted more than ten minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   But he has been discussing it with me even on 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 329 of 376 
 
Saturday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And I said I will make the telephone records 
available.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But in terms of what - you said likelihood.  
So at that stage, there was no certainty that you were going 
to be suspended. 
MR KOKO:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Matona was saying:  You and I 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR KOKO:   Will most likely be suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Will most likely be suspended. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  That is what you are talking about. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But then, that suspension ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, sorry.   
ADV BARRIE SC:   With respect Mr Chairman.  The point 
20 
that the witness is making is that Mr Matona in this hearing 
says that he only learnt of the suspensions eventually when 
he was suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   He did not know about it at all 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 330 of 376 
 
beforehand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Which the witness contests.  Because he 
said on the 8t h ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   ...he was already told that most likely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   The point is though – I am making is that 
Ms Tsholofelo Molefe has testified that in that morning, she 
was told by Mr Matona, confirming that he knew about the 
10 
suspensions.  That is the issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja.  Okay.  I guess, let us go back to 
Mr Seleka your question to Mr Koko about Mr Masango’s 
version about the meeting of the 10 t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So Chair ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I did not answer that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, you have not answered that. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay let us clarify for the purposes of 
the hearing.  Your knowledge of the suspension of likelihood 
of suspension relates to the unlawful instruction from 
Mr Tsotsi? 
MR KOKO:   Correct Chair. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 331 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So it is not the type of suspension 
we are talking here which the board ultimately effected that 
four executives will be suspended?  It is not that time? 
MR KOKO:   Well, does the type matter?  No, it does not to 
me.  The type of suspension and the reasons of suspension 
were irrelevant to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   In my mind, the suspension would occur 
because of Mr Malesela.  When it happened, it was 
sabotage. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And it threw me out.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So I think Mr Seleka’s point is.  The 
suspensions that were affected on the 11t h, including your 
suspension ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I did not know those things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...was not said by the board to be 
connected with the Sumitomo matter. 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR KOKO:   And I did not know of that type of suspension.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right.  So Mr Masango then says:  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 332 of 376 
 
Right, Ms Daniels.  They go to - they meet with you there.  
In the case of Ms Daniels, it is Mr Salim Essa introducing 
himself 
as 
the 
adviser 
to 
the 
minister 
saying 
four 
executives would be suspended and in the case of Mr 
Masango, 
it 
is 
you 
doing 
the 
talking 
and 
aided 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Take one at a time Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One at a time, thank you, Chair.  Let 
me stick …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Daniels or Mr Masango, finish with it, 
10 
ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, let me stick to Mr Masango.  Mr 
Masango, then he says you add that you will return.  
Furthermore, you say to Mr Essa about Mr Masango that he 
has the potential to act as a CEO.  But let us go to three – 
four will be suspended, three will not return but I will 
return.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let us start here.  Mr Koko, did 
you call Mr Masango to a meeting at Melrose Arch with you 
on the 10 March 2015? 
20 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, when I watched Mr Masango’s 
testimony at a critical point when he was asked what is 
your relationship with Mr Koko the TV went blank, so I did 
not 
catch 
his 
answer. 
 
But 
let 
me 
tell 
you 
this 
…[intervenes] 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 333 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He said it was a good relationship. 
MR KOKO:   Well, it was much more than that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You called each other Maki. 
MR KOKO:   It was much more than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Mr Masango umakelwane and because 
umakelwane, we call each other Maki. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And not only that, his son …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
That 
is 
neighbour 
in 
isiZulu 
or 
10 
…[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Yes and his son is also Moses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   So his son and I – his son looks after me.  
And at Eskom I mentored Mr Masango.  I mentored Mr 
Masango from being junior.  During those days positions at 
Eskom that Mr Masango had were not applied for, they 
were appointed by the board, by Exco.  Wherever Mr 
Masango went I make sure that he gets appointed purely 
on 
competency. 
 
He 
was 
a 
general 
manager 
at 
20 
Mpumalanga, he went to Kusile.  I took him to the US for 
project management training.  So we are much more than 
umakelwane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you come a long way. 
MR KOKO:   We come a long way.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 334 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   On the 10 May, when I was running away from 
Mr Tsotsi, I did not expect to see him at Megawatt Park 
because he was not based at Megawatt Park. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 10 May 2015? 
MR KOKO:   On the 10 March 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   10 March 2015? 
MR KOKO:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   I did not expect him at Megawatt Park. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Because he is based on site. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I saw him – I think we had small pleasantries.  
I do not even recall …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  And he was reporting to you at the 
time? 
MR KOKO:   He was not reporting to me at the time, he 
was reporting to Mr Marokane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, but I thought you said you were 
20 
acting on that day. 
MR KOKO:   No, no, Mr Marokane was on leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And I do not remember but I will not quibble 
with it, I think I was acting on Mr Marokane’s position.  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 335 of 376 
 
Then I left to Melrose Arch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And there is no suspicion why I ended up 
there, I just like the place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR KOKO:   There is no suspicion why I ended up at 
Melrose Arch . 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I just like the ambience there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MR KOKO:   I still do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   When I was at Megawatt Park – and my 
telephone records will show you, I phoned Suzanne, I 
phoned Abram Masango, I phoned Nonkululeko Veleti.  
Those are my people that were very close to me.  They 
were not only other people, I did not call people at – I 
phoned Vusi Mboweni. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I – because I was traumatised and I called 
20 
people that I thought were at Megawatt Park. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Because I want them to tell me what is going 
on there because I expected commotion on that day.  I 
spoke to Mr Masango. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 336 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why were expecting commotion on that 
day? 
MR KOKO:   Because I was told, that is why I ran out of 
the office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were told…? 
MR KOKO:   I was told that we will be suspended on that 
day, that is why I ran out of the office so that I do not meet 
Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes, but what about the – what 
would have caused the commotion? 
10 
MR KOKO:   Well, typically when you suspend me and 
suspend the CE word flies and news fly, people know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so – ja, you thought that the two 
of you, Mr Matona and yourself, were going to be 
suspended? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  So I phoned him, I says Maki, where are 
you?  And then he told me he is in a meeting at Megawatt 
Park and he was busy, he was not available the whole day.  
20 
I can tell you now with no – unequivocally, that I never met 
Mr Masango at Melrose Arch.  I phoned Mr Masango 
towards five o’clock, I was driving towards – and my 
records will again show that, I was driving to meet Mrs 
Nonkululeko Veleti and she says I can come to where you 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 337 of 376 
 
are, Matsh, I said no, Maki, do not worry because I am 
going to meet Ms Veleti so there is no need and my 
suspicion is that probably close to where we live, Witbank, 
so you do not need to come back.  My relationship with him 
would have been such that if I called that evening to come 
because I am in trouble, chances are he would have come, 
but I did not meet him there.   
So I can tell you now I did not meet Mr Masango at 
Melrose Arch, I talked to him towards five o’clock and I cut 
his call short because I did not know where to locate Ms 
10 
Veleti, I had to call Ms Veleti.  So again my telephone 
records will show that.   
 
The problem you are faced and all – I recall that 
part, when Mr Masango was asked have you met Mr Essa?  
His answer was I do not remember but when Mr Koko said 
we must meet Salim Essa I refused. 
 
If you go to the affidavit before you, before you in 
the Commission of Ms Goodson, in her affidavit before you, 
I was introduced to Mr Masango by Salim Essa in the 
office.  So this story that I know the office, I – there was 
20 
no [indistinct] 6.58.  Unless Ms Goodson is lying, Ms 
Goodson says Mr Masango was introduced to me by Salim 
Essa in the office.  So my proposition is that these two 
have relationship. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Does she give a date, Mr Koko? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 338 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   She says towards December. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Of which year? 
MR KOKO:   2015. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, but we are talking March now. 
MR KOKO:   No, all that I putting to you is the relationship 
and Salim Essa and Mr Masango that is concealing from 
this Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which preceded 10 March or which came 
after? 
MR KOKO:   Well, the meeting …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you do not know. 
MR KOKO:   The meeting that is referenced that is before 
you in affidavit is post March but I cannot rule out that that 
relationship predates …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   10 March. 
MR KOKO:   10 March.  The question is, why did Mr 
Masango not tell you when he was asked did you meet Mr 
Essa?  But that is one part.   
 
The second part I got, Mr Masango, is that he is a 
difficult witness. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is a…? 
MR KOKO:   Difficult witness for you because in parliament 
with Ms Daniels he says and Ms Daniels says I worked 
together with Ms Daniels to get rid of Mr Koko at Eskom 
because he was corrupt.  He says so in his – telling the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 339 of 376 
 
Commission.  What he did not tell you is that he is out on 
bail, 300 000 bail on charges of fraud and corruption that 
were initiated by me and when I did that and there is 
another famous meeting of the 2 March 2017, again please 
go and listen to the audios, when Mr Masango wrote a 
whistle blower report after I confronted him with evidence 
that was made available to me and I removed him from his 
post.  He responded by offering a whistle blower report of 
which I was charged on and Mr Seleka was quite excited 
about it when he talked about it.  But the fact is, nothing 
10 
happened to Mr Masango since I made the information 
available to the board of Eskom and I know they have 
opened a case and nothing happened but this is what 
happened. 
 
By grace I was approached by Mr Paul O’Sullivan.  
Mr Paul O’Sullivan says I have watched your tweets, I have 
followed your tweets, you may have information that I can 
use.  What is going on at Eskom?  I said Mr Paul 
O’Sullivan, the criminals at Eskom who are being listened 
to, who are darlings of the media, who are on the Koko 
20 
hunt, does not matter the evidence that they have.  They 
are on the Koko and they are being given the benefit and 
we can go into the Koko hunt, I have got a version of why 
there is a Koko hunt. 
 
Mr Paul O’Sullivan took the documents, I gave them 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 340 of 376 
 
to my attorney and my attorney can make them available to 
you including the bank statements.  Mr Paul O’Sullivan 
came back to me the following day in an email which my 
counsel said he says, Mr Koko, I have looked at this 
evidence against Mr Masango and others, I do not know 
why they are still here but I can bet you, now that I have it, 
they will not spend Christmas outside. 
 
On the 18 March Mr Paul O’Sullivan called me and 
says 
your 
friends 
are 
being 
arrested 
based 
on 
the 
information that you have submitted.  On the 2 March 2017 
10 
not only did I give the board that dossier but I also gave 
the board the names of the people at Kusile that I think 
were in a corrupt relationship with Mr Masango and one of 
them was Ms Nhlahla Kraai.   
She is no longer working for Eskom, I do not know 
why.  I was not surprised when I saw her evidence with Mr 
Masango joining the Koko hunt.  For the record, Chair, I 
have never met Mr Masango with Salim Essa at Melrose 
Arch.  That meeting did not happen.  Mr Masango is a 
potential criminal and will end up in jail. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if Mr Masango – if there are 
allegations of corruption against Mr Masango in relation to 
Eskom, make that information available to the Commission. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If it has not already been made. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 341 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, in my letter to you of last night I 
quibble that the allegations of corruption against Mr 
Masango are common cause, are common knowledge and 
one would have thought that an Commission of Inquiry that 
is set up to investigate for a corruption in state owned 
companies 
would 
not 
have 
missed 
Mr 
Masango’s 
allegations of corruption. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Secondly, one would have thought that Mr 
Masango would not have come to this Commission and 
10 
instead being asked about his pending charges. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it helps if those who have the 
information facilitate by giving the information because of 
course, you know, the levels of corruption in South Africa 
are so high, if the Commission was going to follow every 
allegation it would be here for 100 years.  So if those who 
have got information furnish it, it makes it [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, but Chair …[intervenes] 
ADV BARRIE SC:    Mr Chairman, with all respect, there 
20 
was a whole television programme about these events, 
about Mr Frans Hlakudi, Mr Masango, 60 million bribe 
money going through the account, some of which went to 
Mr Masango.  This is – if you go onto Google it is 
immediately 
available. 
 
It 
must 
be 
available 
to 
the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 342 of 376 
 
investigators but it is not put before you.  That is the issue 
what we are raising in the letter that we wrote to you 
yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, that is fine.  All I am saying 
is we have asked – I have asked since 2018, invited 
everybody who has information about corruption to make 
the information available.  Of course somebody might have 
watched that programme, they might not have watched, 
somebody might have read some article in the newspaper.  
But as I say, in the end even within the SOEs we might not 
10 
be able to follow up everything because that might just 
need a lot of time but it helps if somebody who has 
knowledge of something like that, prepares a statement or 
whatever and furnishes it to us.   
ADV BARRIE SC:   With respect, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   The question that I would respectfully 
submit that you should be asking is why your investigators 
are unaware of things that are public knowledge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, what …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And it is not brought to your attention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, what …[intervenes] 
ADV BARRIE SC:   That is the question that we submit is 
the relevant question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I hear what you are saying but 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 343 of 376 
 
what I am saying is surely there are even some things that 
we might be aware of but we just do not have the time and 
capacity to check with every SOE, every government 
department, every municipality, so it is important that 
those who have got information furnish it to us, there is a 
lot of information that they get which has been brought 
before us but if we had all the capacity we wished we 
would be able to collect everything.  But that is fine, let us 
not spend too much on it.  It will be made available to us. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   The issue, though, again that we 
10 
pointed out in the letter to you is that the witness like Mr 
Koko is asked by you to direct his attention at very specific 
subjects. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV BARRIE SC:   The directives given to witnesses, 
including Mr Koko, are to the effect that they have to direct 
their intention and dies, including Mr Koko, are to the 
effect that they have to direct their intention and discuss 
very particular aspects, which they do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but that …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV BARRIE SC:   That baffles me and that is why we 
wrote to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   That is why we wrote to you, is to 
question why is it that something that is in the public 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 344 of 376 
 
domain very clearly is not raised before you when that 
witness testifies and we find it totally [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Mr Barrie, you have made the 
point.  I have said – or let me say, when we issue a 10.6 
directive, that is usually towards the end.  Much earlier I 
said an invitation has been made from 2018, so Mr Koko 
could 
have 
responded 
to 
that 
invitation 
to 
say 
the 
Chairman of the Commission says anyone who had got 
information about allegations of state capture, corruption 
10 
and fraud in the public sector, bring it.  But I am saying, 
the fact that he might not have brought it forward then 
does not mean that we should not ask him to give it to us 
now. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   But again, with due respect, how could 
Mr Koko in his wildest dream have thought that your 
investigators, fulltime people, an Eskom work stream would 
not miss …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Barrie …[intervenes] 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Would miss the one – the one 
corruption case that goes to court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are not going to …[intervenes] 
ADV BARRIE SC:   And they will not inform you of it. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 345 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are not going to resolve this 
…[intervenes] 
ADV BARRIE SC:   There is something wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   We are at 18 minutes to nine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think we will stop at nine.  Let us 
continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Mr Koko, there is one thing I did 
10 
not pick up from the testimony of Mr Masango at the 
parliamentary Portfolio Committee.  You say he said I 
worked with Ms Daniels to get rid of Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:   That is correct, Chair.  So if you listen to the 
video you will – on both Mr Koko – on both Mr Daniels and 
Mr Masango, unequivocally, we worked together with a 
journalist to get rid of Mr Koko because he is corrupt. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Okay but then when did they work 
together to get rid of you? 
MR KOKO:   They testified at a parliamentary committee 
20 
and it is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is 2018. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, 2018. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
MR KOKO:   It is in that parliamentary committee, which 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 346 of 376 
 
pained me, Chair, because I was involved in the Vusi 
Mboweni(?) document when it is in that inquiry that Mr 
Masango actually said I was the – I actually was the author 
of the Vusi Mboweni report.  I thought – ja, my goodness. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me put this to you, Mr Koko, so 
that I hear what you have to say.  You have said that Mr 
Masango, Ms Daniels, Mrs Veleti, were people who were all 
close to you. 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   In 2015 at least. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now those – two of those people, Ms 
Daniels and Mr Masango, have both said that you called 
them to a meeting in Melrose Arch separately.  They met 
with you and you were with Mr Salim Essa and you told 
them about the impending suspensions of the executives.  
Now, as Mr Seleka said, Ms Daniels says it was Mr Salim 
Essa who was talking the whole time.  Mr Masango says it 
was you who was talking when you met him.  And then Ms 
20 
Veleti has said that on the same day, on the 10 t h, you 
called her and, if I recall correctly, she said you called her 
wanting her to come to a meeting at Melrose Arch but she 
did not because she did not – she was not allowed because 
she was busy with something else. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 347 of 376 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is [indistinct] 20.45 she said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She says later on – I think she says she 
met with you and you asked for her CV, which she says you 
had asked for during the day, but she thought she had sent 
it to you but you had not received it and she said you met 
and she asked what this is about or you shared the 
information.  Whether she asked you or you volunteered it, 
I am not sure, that there were to be suspensions and you 
wanted her CV and you said she could be asked to act in 
one of the positions.  Now …[intervenes] 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, in the position …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In the position of the FD. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, in the position of the FD. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now on your own version, at that time 
you had a good relationship with these people.  Now 
according to Mr Dan Marokane and Ms Daniels, I think the 
two of them had a meeting that day or that evening where 
Ms Daniels told Mr Dan Marokane about her meeting with 
20 
you and Mr Salim Essa.  According to Mr Masango and Ms 
Kraai, Mr Masango told Ms Kraai either on the same day or 
the following morning about this meeting that he says he 
had had with you and Mr Salim Essa.  Ms Kraai confirms 
that and then Ms Molefe says she was told by Ms Veleti 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 348 of 376 
 
about your call during the day to her.   
 
Now if these three people were close to you, why 
would they all lie about you having met with them on this 
day at a time when they had a good relationship with you? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, they are not lying to me at the time 
when they had a good relationship with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR KOKO:   They are not lying about me when they had a 
good relationship with me, they are lying now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
10 
MR KOKO:   When we do not have a relationship and, you 
know, I say …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you saying – I am sorry, I am 
interrupting you, so you are saying it is something that 
they …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Concocted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Conspired …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Conspired, exactly, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …concocted about after the relationship 
between you and them had soured? 
20 
MR KOKO:   Exactly and I tell you, let us start with Ms 
Daniels.  I go into details with Ms Daniels.  I even mention 
the time and the calls she make and the What – and the 
messages, text messages, I am surprised that I have not 
asked 
– 
I 
guess 
Mr 
Seleka 
will 
ask 
me 
to 
give 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 349 of 376 
 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, ja, we are not done yet, ja. 
MR KOKO:   Ja.  So I mention from the 23 March after 
Minister Brown issued a statement post Brian Molefe 
matter, how Ms Daniels come to my house telling me that I 
know you are the friend of the President, I know the 
President listens to me, I know the Minister has an ear for 
you, please stop - go intervene and ask them to stop 
throwing me under the bus because, according to her, both 
the board and the Minister are putting the 30 million matter 
10 
on her.  I said to her, Ms Daniels, I cannot, I am on 
suspension.  If I had an influence of the minister and the 
President I will not be sitting at home.  She broke down 
and cried in my house.  She sent me text messages and 
say hell will break loose, there will be no winners.  And at 
the parliament committee, again it was very painful, Chair, 
when she told parliamentary committee that Mr Koko is a 
brazen thief and has caused the theft of R5 billion at 
Eskom, when she was party to all these transactions.  But 
what was most important, the only joy I had is that she 
20 
testified before me, so I knew what she was saying. 
 
And then I went to the records, to the documents on 
the Trillian matter.  You know, Chairman, one of the things 
you have to deal with – and I do not want to raise 
eyebrows, you know, people are out there and say the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 350 of 376 
 
judges are captured and they make an example of the 
North Gauteng High Court.  I do not buy into that story but 
one of the things I am hoping and praying that this 
Commission does is to deal with the decision of the North 
Gauteng High Court that found that Mr Koko was tasked on 
the 6 July to negotiate the contract with McKinsey when I 
was sitting at home.  I am baffled that three senior judges 
of North Gauteng High Court make the conclusion that 
while I was sitting at home on suspension I was asked to 
negotiate the contract with Trillian.  They could have only 
10 
done that and their first paragraph says that there was 
state capture, they were caught in the state capture theory 
but – and they relied on the work this man did with 
Bowman Gilfillan.   
When I wrote my reply, I went to my records, I took 
out the motivation for – that was brought to me by Ms 
Daniels 
and 
in 
that 
motivation 
it 
is 
– 
and 
in 
the 
parliamentary inquiry, Mr Seleka, you may want to pick 
that, I say it is Edwin, it is actually Ms Daniels.  They 
brought to me and say the board has approved the 
20 
settlement agreement with McKinsey for R460 million and 
please approve it so that we can pay.  It did not make 
sense to me, McKinsey and Trillian, it did not make sense 
to me.  I refused, I sent to back to her. 
Chairman, now during the Commission I had the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 351 of 376 
 
privilege of listening to the – of the recordings of the 
meeting of the 8 February, it is shocking and it is going to 
make you fall off your chair.  The submission made by 
Suzanne Daniels and the project manager, Prish Govender, 
in two minutes, without paperwork, the board approves 
R460 million payment to McKinsey and then he goes to 
parliament he says it is Mr Koko.  She did not think at that 
point.  She did not think at anticipate at that point that I 
will have the benefits of the audios that proves that she 
was lying with her teeth.   
10 
She concocted that story in parliament because 
there are facts – and please go and – I have got those 
minutes, I will sent to your committee.  You will see the 
person that is making that submission is Suzanne Daniels, 
that leads to the 460 million approval.  When she is 
confronted, Mr Vanara took my affidavit to her and say Ms 
Daniels, Mr Koko has a different version and Mr Koko’s 
version is that you actually did the recommendation for the 
settlement with McKinsey and he refused to sign it, here is 
your submission.   
20 
Do you know what Ms Daniels said?  She says in 
hindsight I had a lapse of mental concentration.  This is 
the witness that he is talking about that is capable of 
fabricating things and evidence is before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 352 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   Ms Nonkululeko Veleti in her affidavit she 
says I met Mr Koko, she told me she will be suspended 
with other executives and then she says Mr Koko – and 
again I am inviting you to go and read it, she says Mr Koko 
did not tell me who are the executives who will be 
suspended.  She writes it that way.  When – and she looks 
at you, she looks at you inclination what you want to hear 
and she thinks you want to hear that I said Mr Molefe will 
be suspended she says so.  If that is what I said why did 
she say the opposite thing in her affidavit?   I mean these 
10 
are the type of – I have a lot of respect for Ms Nomkulela 
Villeti but I don’t understand how can she write in her 
affidavit that Mr Koko did not – let me quote – she says, 
she told me Mr Koko told me that he would be suspended 
along with others, with other few executives.  He did not 
indicate who the other executives to be suspended were.   
How do they move, or  how does a chartered accountant 
move from this and I am looking at the audit trail, to then 
coming back and ...[indistinct] here and saying Mr Koko 
told me that the FD will be suspended.   I heard when 
20 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   No sorry, I don’t think she said that. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, she said, I have got it, I can quote it 
again, let me quote it, and that is you talking, you are 
saying to her: 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 353 of 376 
 
“So he said he was going to be suspended and he 
said there was a possibility that the Financial 
Director will be suspended as well?” 
That is you putting it back to her, and she says: 
“Yes Chair and other executives.” 
That is a quote verbatim from the transcript.  How do you 
then move from saying Mr Koko did not tell me who else is 
going to be suspended to come in here and responding to 
you and say yes Mr Koko said the Financial Director will be 
suspended, it is unlike Ms Nomkulela Viletti, I overheard 
10 
and I may be wrong that there was a supplementary 
affidavit which was not sent to me, and I don’t know what 
she said about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   But I am quoting verbatim, I am not 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine sir, now you say it was only 
after your relationship with them had soured that they said 
they had this meeting with – in the case of Mr Masonga 
and ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR KOKO:  Yes Chair I don’t have a sour relationship with 
Ms Nomkulela Villeti. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
MR KOKO:  I don’t have a sour relationship, I am still 
baffled how she respond the way she does, which time I 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 354 of 376 
 
will know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but there is not, your relationship 
with her is fine? 
MR KOKO:   My relationship with her as far as I know the 
last time I met her we remain family friends. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  So it is just Ms 
Daniels and Mr Masango. 
MR KOKO:  Yes and all this Mr – all the other people are 
quoting these two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
10 
MR KOKO:   Now they put ...[indistinct] and I apologise 
you know there is this four letters of suspension that were 
written on the 10 t h of March seven o’clock from the 
properties.  This property says these suspension letters 
was originated by Suzanne and edited by Salim Essa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   When in one of the emails and I watched it 
and this I found quite interesting, Mr Seleka put it to Dr 
Ngubani, it was an email that originated from outside 
Eskom allegedly and then it was about suspensions of Mail 
20 
and Guardian, Business Day,  City Press which the Board 
acted all.  Mr Seleka said somebody shouted at him from 
the back and then he says the properties of this document 
says the document was initiated by the manager and edited 
by Salim Essa.  That was Mr Seleka. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 355 of 376 
 
 
Now – and nobody pushed back that you can’t rely 
on the metadata of this document, the Commission seems 
to have taken a few that says you can rely on the 
metadata, now here the document, four documents written 
by Suzanne, the metadata shows that she is the originator 
and the editor is Suzanne Daniels.  
 
In 
the 
meeting, 
in 
the 
alleged 
meetings 
with 
Suzanne Daniels with Salim Essa she says I was told that 
four executives will be suspended, I was told there will be 
an inquiry, she also says something else she has never 
10 
said before, even at Parliament, that they will not return, 
that was you, when you asked her did you put it in 
Parliament inquiry she said yes, and she lied, it was not 
there. 
 
She also says Mr Seleka put it to her were you 
asked to assist Salim Essa or Mr Koko with the suspension 
letters, she says no.  So if you can rely on the metadata as 
Mr Seleka has relied on the ...[indistinct] Salim Essa and 
you rely on the metadata what are these suspension letters 
doing on her computer. 
20 
 
Now Chair let me tell you a story, when I was 
suspended with the 20 – infoportal address which shocked 
me, I took documents out – I went to – I had to look into 
documents, I picked up an email, this email was from 
Suzanne’s email address to infoportal address.  I said to 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 356 of 376 
 
my counsel you know this infoportal address I know where 
it comes from and now it is my baby, and Chairman it will 
come, and I tell you I have not communicated with Salim 
Essa on emails, I never knew Salim Essa in 2015. 
 
I gave to my counsel I said this go to Eskom, show 
Eskom this letter, let them go to Ms Daniels computer, they 
will find more, Ms Daniels when she testified here she says 
Eskom relied on discredited Mr Koko but the fact is they 
took her computer, they emailed it and they found more.  I 
am inviting you Chairman you have got a emailed computer 
10 
of Ms Daniels, you will most likely find those four 
suspension letters on this computer and the question is 
why if she was not asked to assist Mr Salim Essa. 
 
I can tell you now like Mr Masango there is a 
relationship Ms Daniels is concealing with Mr Essa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now I wanted to put this to you to hear 
what you have to say, there are these other people who 
say they were told by Ms Daniels, Mr Masango, Ms Viletti 
either on the same day, namely the 10 t h of the following 
day in the case of Mr Masango telling Mr Dan Marukane I 
20 
think a week later or a few weeks later but at that time 
even with Mr Masango and Ms Daniels on your own version 
your relationship was – had not soured. 
MR KOKO:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so why would they have decided to 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 357 of 376 
 
concoct as you put it a story at that time about having met 
you at Melrose Arch with Mr Essa because at that time your 
relationship with him was fine?  
MR KOKO:   Chairman knowing what I do now I can’t 
dispute that Suzanne on her own met Salim Essa, I can’t 
dispute that and the suspension letter, the four suspension 
letters that has properties that are originated by Suzanne, 
edited by Salim Essa propose to a relationship on the day 
they are dated, the 10 t h of March.  When Ms Daniels was – 
when Ms Daniels was asked did you ever – were you ever 
10 
asked about suspension letters, her response was I wrote a 
template and Mr Koko may have taken my template and 
given it to Salim Essa.  Chairman I can tell you now 
suspensions 
in 
Eskom 
is 
a 
custodian’s 
of 
industrial 
relations, there is no template at Eskom, there is no such a 
template, she was lying.  She knows what happened on the 
day, she must explain herself what are these documents 
doing, why are the properties saying it is written by 
Suzanne Daniels, edited by Salim Essa, there must have 
been contact with her and Salim Essa on that day.  Go to 
20 
her computer, it is imaged, my computer gets – you know 
what hacks me is that at every second chance, at every 
first opportunity people go to my emails, people go to my 
computers, why can’t people do the same with others.  Why 
do I have to write a letter to you to say Mr Chairman 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 358 of 376 
 
please I don’t have the investigative capacity that you 
have, please go to Ms Suzanne Daniels, here are four 
suspension 
letters, 
you 
will 
find, 
and 
that 
is 
my 
proposition, that Suzanne on the day she may have heard, 
she may have met Mr Essa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let’s assume that she had met Mr 
Essa on her own, without you, my question is at that time 
she has a good relationship with you, the two of you are 
close, why would she tell Mr Marokane, I think on the same 
day, I don’t know the same day or the following day. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The same day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The same day that she had this meeting 
with you and Mr Salim Essa at Melrose Arch, why would 
she falsely put you into a meeting in which you were not 
there? 
MR KOKO:   Because she has – she had the – she met 
Salim Essa, she had the urge to go and meet Dan, they are 
also friends, but she has to find a link, she can’t use a 
name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you see at that time if she had gone 
20 
to, she had met Mr Essa on her own she had no reason to 
tell Mr Dan Marokane about that meeting at all, she could 
have kept that secret to all, she didn’t have any reason.  
She told him, as I understand the position ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Chairman there are many things we can’t 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 359 of 376 
 
explain about Suzanne, let me give you another example.   
Mr Koko called me to come with to go and meet the 
Minister to talk about independent power producers, we 
ended up at Melrose Arch, she kept me outside, she had a 
meeting with Mr Salim Essa, Mr Salim Essa came out after 
the meeting and said tell your boss to stop ...[indistinct] 
and then that’s it, come let’s go.  How do you explain that?   
How do you explain, there are just too many things that Ms 
Daniels says and put across that I cannot – I find them 
difficult to explain. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s go to Mr Masango. 
MR KOKO:   Mr ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, let us go to Mr Masango again, 
he is somebody very close to you at that time, the 
relationship has not soured, he is your maki, or as you put 
it much more than maki, the two of you are close.   He tells 
Ms Kraai either on the same day or the following morning 
that he had this meeting with you, I think Ms Kraai says in 
her statement or affidavit, if I am not mistaken, she said 
she had a meeting with you, with a short man, a short 
20 
Indian man or something like that.  Now why would falsely 
implicate you in this meeting at that time when the 
relationship between the two is still fine? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman I dispute that that conversation 
happened there, I dispute that completely.  That discussion 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 360 of 376 
 
was concocted after I put Ms Klein and Mr Masango’s letter 
for corruption investigations.  It happened only after that, I 
dispute that it happened there.  I can tell you I dispute it.   
This is the story that was done by both potential criminals 
working together against a complainant. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When did you lay a complaint about 
them, a criminal complaint? 
MR KOKO:   It must have – the meeting that was set up by 
the Board, I mean and this is another point Chairman, this 
is another point that you need to take very seriously.  I 
10 
have information of corruption, I take immediate action, I 
remove people that I think are corrupt I remove from the 
scene of crime.  He conspires with the Board and then the 
Board ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Who is that now? 
MR KOKO:   Mr Masango. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   The Board calls me to suspend me because I 
suspended Mr – I allegedly suspended Mr Masango.  They 
called me I say to them it was not a nice meeting, I said Dr 
20 
Ngubani, Dr Ngubani if you suspend me today for the way I 
dealt with Mr Masango I am going straight to the police 
station, you are defending corruption and then they backed 
off, then they became so nice afterwards, I gave them the 
document, I said instead of suspending me here is the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 361 of 376 
 
dossier, these people must be arrested.  That meeting was 
on the 2 n d of March 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay.  So ultimately your criminal 
complaint that you laid, if that is what you did against Mr 
Masango, I don’t know whether him alone or Ms Kraai as 
well, that happened in 2017/2018? 
MR KOKO:   The criminal complaint was opened by Eskom, 
not by me personally. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, alright. 
MR KOKO:   And on the basis of the information I gave 
10 
Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you gave them that information 
when? 
MR KOKO:  In 2017, March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In 2017, March.  So before that, before 
2017 March your relationship with Mr Masango was fine? 
MR KOKO:  Chair it – my relationship with Mr Masango – 
and let me tell you this story, let me put this story on the 
table.  I was approached – everybody knows at Eskom that 
me and Abram in the township ...[indistinct] we are tight. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you are very close. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.   I got a document from somebody who 
says listen there’s a big corruption happening at Kosile, I 
will not tell you much but here is a document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is when now? 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 362 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:   2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   2017 towards December, or no 2016 towards 
December. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:  I took this document and after looking at this 
document I realised I can’t sit and do nothing, I have no 
reason to believe that what I am reading here is true, but I 
cannot sit and do nothing.  So I called Abram, Mr Masango, 
I beg your pardon.  I said me and you are friends, I think I 
10 
know your ...[indistinct] I have a difficulty but I can’t ignore 
this and what I am going to do Maki I am going to remove 
you from your position as a Group Executive, Group 
Capital, I am going to remove you there, I am going to put 
you in my office and these following people at Kosile that 
are implicated I am going to remove them as well, we are 
going to appoint a new person in your position and we are 
going to replace these people at Kosile.  The new people 
who come in must investigate this and if there is merit in 
this then we deal with it, that is what I did. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that’s 2017. 
MR KOKO:    2017, I also said to him – 2016 December, 
2016, I also said to him listen to take away the noise I will 
also send you to Harvard for advance management training 
and when you are done at Harvard I am going to send you 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 363 of 376 
 
to Lufthansa to learn best maintenance practices, that is 
how much I valued that guy.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR KOKO:  So he then decided he is going to fight back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let’s hang on, that is 2017, I am in 
2015.  Now in 2015 your relationship with Mr Masango is 
fine. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now he has testified or Mr Dan 
Marokane has testified that I think it was still during March 
10 
2015 that Mr Masango told him ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   On the 14 t h Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh ja, told him that – about this meeting 
that he says he had with you and Mr Salim Essa at Melrose 
Arch and Mr Dan Marokane has confirmed that if I recall 
correctly. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman he told Mr Marokane he says and 
you 
repeated, 
Mr 
Seleka 
repeated, 
did 
you 
tell 
Mr 
Marokane about that meeting in Melrose Arch that said four 
people were suspended and four people will not return, he 
20 
said no.  Chair his affidavit does not say that too, Mr 
Masango’s affidavit does not say I met them on the 14 t h of 
March and I told him that I met Salim Essa and Salim Essa 
said four executives will be suspended and ...[indistinct] 
does not say that, so I dispute that he said that. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 364 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what about what Mr Dan Marokane 
says about what Mr Masango – what he says Mr Masango 
told him? 
MR KOKO:  I don’t know what Mr Marokane says, I have 
not seen Mr Marokane ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh you didn’t get his affidavit? 
MR KOKO:   I have not seen Mr Marokane’s affidavit, all 
what I know is Mr Marokane denies having such a 
discussion with Mr Masango, and the only reason I know 
that is because I listened to Mr Seleka. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Seleka? 
MR KOKO:   Seleka. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and then of course you have Ms 
Viletti and you say your relationship with her as far as you 
know is still fine, what do you say about what she said you 
said to her on the 10 t h when you called her and she says 
you called her for a meeting at Melrose Arch, if I recall 
correctly you asked for her CV and then of course the two 
of you she said met later in the day.  What’s your version 
...[intervenes]  
20 
MR KOKO:   Chairman I – I never – everybody that I called 
on that day I told them who I was, so it is no ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So you have no issue with that. 
MR KOKO:   There is no issue, I told him, I did not call her 
to come to Melrose Arch, I did not. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 365 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you told her you were 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Ja, everybody that I on that day everybody 
that I called I told him or her my difficulties and where I 
was and where I was working on that day.  When I met Ms 
Viletti and I still say I don’t remember the restaurant we 
met, she says McDonalds or KFC, I don’t quibble with that, 
and by the way it was not a short meeting, we did not have 
a short meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not have a short meeting? 
10 
MR KOKO:   We did not have a short meeting, she says so, 
it was not a short meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja, I think she said it might have 
taken 20 minutes. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, it was not a short meeting.  I had a long 
discussion with her, she was extremely sympathetic with 
me, she was saddened and then she says to me you know 
interestingly I am looking for a job, my CV is ready, I am 
sending my CV’s around.  I will send it to you, if you can 
help me that is fine.   It was not the first time me and Ms 
20 
Viletti had a discussion about her CV, it was not the first 
time.  She has sent her CV’s to me before when I 
nominated her to be Executive of the year and she was an 
executive of the year, she is an extremely competent 
upright person, that is Ms Viletti that I know. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 366 of 376 
 
 
So I called her, I told her I am at Melrose Arch, I 
wanted to – I actually thought she is Megawatt Park, 
because she was senior enough now.  She also says I told 
her that she will act on the FD’s position, she is mistaken, 
Ms Viletti was the – she set up the shared services for 
Eskom, which is for transactional activities but it is mainly 
commercial.  I was the GE of Commercial, so when I told 
her that I will most likely be suspended and she says so 
scenarios who will act, I said well who is the most senior 
commercial person at Eskom now as we speak, in rank.   It 
10 
was her. 
 
So you would not have a difficulty if ...[indistinct] to 
say who is the next commercial person to step in, she was 
– she set up shared services, I think she had graduated to 
go to do what do you call, Business Productivity Workshop 
so she was a natural candidate and I said well who knows 
you might be the next in line.  I said in jest.  When she sat 
here and in my affidavit I said we were shocked, and she 
denies being shocked, that hurt me, because I met her 
eventually and we sat and say – you know when we met 
20 
and joked about it we never thought it will happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so now – yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair I missed what were they talking 
about? 
MR KOKO:  No I am saying when I told her that I was most 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 367 of 376 
 
likely going to be suspended in that discussion she raised 
who – so who are they going to get to act in this thing, I 
said I don’t know.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   In your position?    
MR KOKO:   Yes in my position, yes in my position.  I don’t 
know but you might act because – I didn’t even tell her 
why, but in my mind the most senior commercial person 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   That’s fine, Chair I hope you don’t 
forget your question. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, no I won’t. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
May 
I 
follow 
up 
or 
should 
I 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I – let me finish and then you can 
follow up.  With regard to Ms Viletti you have no reason 
that she would deliberately falsely implicate you in this, in 
asking her to come to a meeting in – because – in Melrose 
Arch because your relationship was fine and it is still fine?  
MR KOKO:   Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She must be mistaken? 
20 
MR KOKO:   Certainly she is mistaken, she is mistaken 
that 
I 
called 
her 
to 
Melrose 
Arch, 
I 
did 
tell 
her 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes, that you were there. 
MR KOKO:   Where I was, and when I was telling her 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 368 of 376 
 
Chairman she was very impatient and after reading her 
affidavit I now understand why she was impatient because 
she was moving from lunch to a meeting with a team and 
now it makes sense, that is why I said no listen I will call 
you later in the evening, we will meet later in the evening, 
I will tell you what is actually happening to me, but I think 
she is mistaken to say I called her to Melrose Arch and I 
think she is mistaken to say to create an impression to say 
I asked her for her CV.  Firstly I didn’t even receive that 
CV, she said she sent it again, I didn’t receive it. 
10 
 
She told me that she is on the lookout and she is 
sending CV’s and she will her send her CV to me and if I 
can assist in my connections please do so.  I said that’s 
fine, I don’t recall receiving that CV because the following 
day I was out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the meeting that she says the two of 
you had I think which you admit you had did she not 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I said it by the way, it is not her who said the 
meeting, it is me, I said, I told the Commission that I had a 
20 
meeting with her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No I think she also said ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   She confirms it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, I might not have seen 
whatever you had ...[intervenes]  
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 369 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  She confirms it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but did she not give you her CV at 
that meeting? 
MR KOKO:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think she said ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:  She said she sent it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But I don’t remember, I don’t recall ever 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   She said she thought she had sent it 
10 
during the day, but she said when she met with you in the 
evening she gave ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:  Ja, and I am saying I don’t ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t remember. 
MR KOKO:   I don’t and the reason I don’t remember 
having it is because the following day I was out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR KOKO:  I was out of the system. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, now you have said that you in 
your affidavit you did meet with Ms Suzanne Daniels at the 
20 
restaurant in Melrose Arch but you have said you didn’t 
have a meeting with her at – with Mr Salim Essa? 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Did you remain in Melrose Arch for 
quite long after she had – your meeting with her at the 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 370 of 376 
 
restaurant had finished? 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, time up.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, we have got to adjourn, it is twenty 
five past nine, but maybe you had one or two questions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Chair thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Koko I see that you emphasize that 
things are not in somebody’s affidavit like Ms Viletti saying 
10 
she will act in the position of FD or that the FD will also be 
suspended, which I think is implicit in saying she will act in 
the position of FD. 
MR KOKO:   No it is not implicit Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But there is a number of things.  Now 
in regard to Ms Viletti you are saying I am looking, she 
said I am looking for a job, my CV is ready, I have been 
searching, I have been distributing it, but it is nowhere in 
your affidavit.  Can you explain that?   Now I am 
concentrating on Ms Viletti. 
20 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Viletti – I said in jest that you might 
act in my position it is nowhere in your affidavit.  She is 
mistaken that I have asked her for her CV.  She was the one 
giving me the CV.  It is nowhere in your affidavit. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 371 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I think Mr Seleka is probably trying to 
be – to mislead you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No it is not a misleading. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are all of these things in your affidavit – 
are they in your affidavit? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman these issues came after my affidavit.  
I have not responded to that affidavit.  So if there could not 
have been – there could not have been because this affidavit 
came after.  Look at the dates and he must tell you the 
dates. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:  It came after the 1 – that affidavit came after the 
1 September.  My affidavit responding to these issues was 
after the 1 September. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is not going to be the – we have not 
– we are not done so we will have to come back. 
MR KOKO:  Ja it is simple Chair.  But it is simple Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair let me – no. 
MR KOKO:  Look at the 1 September I can tell you now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:  And I confirm to you now that Ms Nonkululeku 
Vilete’s affidavit that she is referring – he Mr Seleka’s is 
referring to only came in response to my first or second 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 372 of 376 
 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Tell the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Koko tell the Chairperson that after 
the date of the 7 September 2020 which is Ms Vilete’s 
affidavit. 
MR KOKO:  You speaking of the 22n d affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You received the – you filed an affidavit 
of the 22 September 2020.  And you say in your affidavit: 
“I do in some places herein elaborate on 
10 
what I stated in my previous affidavit or refer 
to the same facts differently.” 
By this time you have Ms Vilete’s affidavit and here you 
saying you could elaborate or refer to the same facts 
differently but you did not incorporate what you are telling 
the Chairperson now. 
MR KOKO:  Ja Chair that was for me not the making – you 
got the focus of – the commission gave me three directives.  
So the directive – I responded on the 1 September my 
directive or my submissions of the 22 September was mainly 
20 
focussed on the issues that I was asked – on the – that were 
due on the 22 September.  I dealt with other issues that were 
obvious.  I did – and we have said in my – and this is the 
crux here because that was four o’clock in the morning.  We 
said in the affidavit of the 22 nd we will put a supplementary 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 373 of 376 
 
affidavit.  We said so.  And in the supplementary affidavit we 
were going to deal with these things.  We told Mr Seleka that 
we are going to put a supplementary affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that supplementary affidavit the one 
that was put up today? 
MR KOKO:  No the supplementary affidavit that was put 
today was to deal with the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Correct certain things. 
MR KOKO:  Counsel thought that the errors that were there 
are not befitting his leaders. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but then if there was an intention in 
September to put up a supplementary affidavit why is the 
supplementary affidavit not – why has it not been put up by 
the 4t h or 3r d of December? 
MR KOKO:  Chair it is a timing issue.  It is a timing issue 
between me and my counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay.  I think we will. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Can I end with this Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Because in addition to this Chair Mr Koko 
20 
were would have received the Rule 3.3 Notice in regard to 
Ms Vilete on the 28 September 2020 that she is going to 
testify on the 7 October 2020 and that rule notice tells you 
you could bring an affidavit – you could come and cross-
examine this witness so you could have dealt with her 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 374 of 376 
 
evidence even on the basis of the 3.3 Notice. 
MR KOKO:  Certainly Chair.  I received 3.3 Notices Nhlanhla 
Kraai was – Mr Kraai was supposed to have testified and I 
received it.  I received well there is just too many and I – I 
have not responded on them because I need to sit with my 
counsel to do that and we are just not finding time to do that 
but I can tell you now my counsel and I will put up a 
supplementary affidavit to deal with all these affidavits that 
we have not dealt with.  There are issues of [00:04:07] who 
came here and misled you that I phoned him when my... 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let us not go into.. 
MR KOKO:  Ja those are the – you can take me to task that 
those are six months old I have not responded to them.  But 
they fall in the same category. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  I think we will – we will have to 
adjourn now.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Koko is coming back on the 11t h is that 
right? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  On the 11t h next if granted. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that – well I guess you will apply 
your mind to the question whether probably he should finish 
first the evidence relating to the suspensions before going 
into other matters so that we know we are done with these 
sections ja.  Okay alright we are going to adjourn now.  I 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 375 of 376 
 
take this opportunity to thank everybody for staying until this 
time.  Thank you Mr Koko, thank you Mr Barrie and your 
instructing attorneys.  Thank you Mr Seleka, thank you 
everybody – your team – the staff thank you very much for 
staying until this time.  We are trying to do as much as 
possible so that we finish the work of the commission within 
the time that we are given.  Thank you very much.  You have 
something to say Mr Barrie? 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Mr Chair I – very well for my learned 
friend to take the witness to task regarding the affidavit.  You 
10 
know we put together under time pressure from you and from 
the commission 148 pages of the document within a very 
short period of time.  My client was ill last week and we did 
not – we could not meet.  Now we are taken to task no but 
we should have said more and there are limits to what effect 
extent one can go into the detail in these circumstances.  So 
all I can say is well you know have a heart.  There is 
relevance about what can be put on paper.  But if you really 
want a thousand page affidavit then we can supply it to you 
but then we cannot do it by the 11 December. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:    Thank you very much. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  If you want – if we have to deal with 
every little point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  Then we can do so. 
03 DECEMBER 2020 – DAY 317 
 
Page 376 of 376 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  But I do not think we are going to endure 
ourselves to you Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well it is important issues and 
relevant issues.  Thank you very much to everybody we are 
going to adjourn for the day and then the – I will have a 
hearing tomorrow relating to what we were doing during the 
day – money flows in regard to Estina.  This is just for the 
benefit of the public.  We adjourn. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  And that is not – my client is not blamed 
10 
for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  We adjourn. 
ADV BARRIE SC:  I am surprised. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 4 DECEMBER 2020 
 
 
 
