 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 348 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 220 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 3 of 220 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 23 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Soni.  Good morning 
everybody. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we ready? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We are ready. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Let us start.  Good 
morning Ms Peters. 
MS PETERS:   Good morning DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  The oath you took yesterday will 
10 
continue to apply today. 
MS PETERS:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ELIZABETH DIPUO PETERS:  (s.u.o.) 
EXAMINATION 
BY 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC 
(RESUMES):   
Ms Peters, you will recall yesterday that we said if you 
have your mask on it gets muffled.  Sorry about that. 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, just to orientate you.  I 
am just going to ask you a few more questions about the 
20 
appointment of the CEO.  Then I am going to go on to the 
other two matters that I raised with you yesterday, namely 
the attempt by or the allegation by Mr Molefe that you 
attempted to stop Werksmans’ investigations and then the 
dismissal of the board by yourself. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 4 of 220 
 
 
Before I deal with those two topics though, let 
me just get back to the question of the appointment of the 
CEO.  We know that from the time Mr Montana left on the 
15 t h of July 2015 until the end of March 2017 when you 
relieved of the position there was no permanent CEO 
appointed.  That is correct, is it not? 
MS PETERS:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In the meantime there were acting 
CEO’s. 
MS PETERS:   That is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   One of the issues, forgetting the 
other matters you raised, that you said had in a way 
hindered the appointment of the CEO was the fact that you 
wanted to approach the President before the matter went 
to Cabinet or your recommendation went to Cabinet.  You 
remember that? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you had a recommendation 
prepared for Cabinet. 
MS PETERS:   It was not yet prepared Chair like I 
20 
indicated yesterday. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I ask you this?  Had you 
identified the three persons that you would recommend to 
the Cabinet or to the President before it went to Cabinet? 
MS PETERS:   The three persons that would be put into 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 5 of 220 
 
the Cabinet Memorandum would have been those that the 
board had recommended Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is the recommendation that was 
made around the end of 2015. 
MS PETERS:   I do not remember when it was the end of 
2015 or end 2016 Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay but it – you did not change 
those recommendations. 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
 
I 
was 
not 
going 
to 
change 
them.  
Chairperson, like I indicated yesterday, we had the bulk 
10 
from ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, we have been through that and I 
do not want to stop you Ms Peters. 
MS PETERS:   Oh, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We need to get your evidence.  You 
said to me before we started that you want to be in 
Parliament.  Can I guarantee you that you will get to your 
flight?  Now I am just trying to keep my promise to you. 
MS PETERS:   Thank you, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right.  So.  Now when Mr Montana 
20 
left, we know that Mr Zide was appointed as the...  Oh, 
sorry Mr Khena was appointed as the acting CEO. 
MS PETERS:   Correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Who appoints this – the acting CEO? 
MS PETERS:   The acting CEO was appointed by the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 6 of 220 
 
board. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no.  I am not asking in this 
case.  Ordinarily who would appoint the acting CEO? 
MS PETERS:   Ordinarily the acting CEO would be 
appointed by the board. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And without consulting you. 
MS PETERS:   They would – once the board had taken a 
decision would consult with the Minister as a shareholder 
responsible for this sector or for the industry. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So if the board recommended, will 
10 
say Mr Zide instead of Mr Zide Mr Khena, you would have 
said to the board:  No, I do not want Mr Zide.  I want 
somebody else.  And they would recommend Mr Khena.  Is 
that the position? 
MS PETERS:   Not necessarily Chair.  Unless there are 
factors in my knowledge that would really be presented to 
the board that says for these particular reasons, these are 
the reasons why this individual but in this instance, it 
never happened. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But you would have a veto power 
20 
over the board even in regard to the appointment of the 
acting CEO. 
MS PETERS:   I would not say it is a veto power 
Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Before the board appointed 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 7 of 220 
 
Mr Khena, they consulted you.  That was the process.  And 
with that – process was followed in this case. 
MS PETERS:   They appointed Mr Khena and informed me. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I am asking you a different 
question.  Before they appointed Mr Khena. 
MS PETERS:   There was a vacancy and the board, when 
they were trying to inform me of the departure – or 
actually, not the board, the chairperson when he came. 
 
He did not come, he called me to inform me of 
the departure of the then CEO, the Group CEO and that the 
10 
board had taken a decision to appoint.   
 
Obviously, they would not allow for a vacancy – I 
mean, a vacuum.  They appointed an acting.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you consult the President before 
you responded to Mr Molefe’s request or communication to 
you? 
MS PETERS:   In instances of acting, it is not part of the 
Cabinet protocols that allowed for that because it is an 
emergency.  It is a stopgap measure that you are putting in 
place.  So there is a process that would then unfold.   
20 
 
After that, I then informed the President that 
there has been this situation at PRASA and the board has 
appointed an acting.  And the process of the appointment 
of the CEO will then unfold. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Which did not happen though. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 8 of 220 
 
MS PETERS:   It did not happen immediately Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well, it did not happen at all.  We do 
not even – throughout the period you were there, there 
were no CEO and no attempt was made to take that matter 
to Cabinet. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, the consultation process is 
part of the attempt to get to Cabinet. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Okay I just want to pursue 
because you raised it.  Now you say the appointment of an 
acting CEO is a stopgap measure.  This was ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Soni.  I am sorry.  Please 
do not forget the question you want to put to Ms Peters. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the position, as I understand it from 
your evidence, is that by the time you left you had not even 
commenced with that consultation process, is it not? 
MS PETERS:   The matter had not as yet not arrived at 
Cabinet.  Chair, you would remember yesterday that I 
indicated that part of the consultation process, even with 
Cabinet 
colleagues, 
helps 
you 
to 
arrive 
at 
a 
point 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no.  I understand ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   ...strengthening your case towards Cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understand that part.  The reason why I 
am asking you this question is because Mr Soni said to 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 9 of 220 
 
you.  By the time you left as Minister of Transport the issue 
of the appointment of the CEO had not been taken forward.   
 
And I understood to be suggesting that the 
consultation 
had 
started 
and 
that 
is 
why 
I 
wanted 
clarification because my understanding is that.  In your 
mind you may have been planning to start the consultation 
but it actually had not started.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  So after 
10 
Mr Khena was appointed you informed the President about 
his appointment or that the board had appointed Mr Khena. 
MS PETERS:   I reported that as part of my reporting 
process that there is this particular situation that is 
prevailing at PRASA and the process, like I indicated to 
you Chair, was now we would be starting with the process 
of going towards appointing the full CEO. 
 
And for me Chairperson, it would – it was a 
principle that I believed in is correct to have a head of 
state that all these entities, all these departments actually 
20 
report to him. 
 
And it is important that he then know what is 
happening.  And I believed Chairperson, like I indicated 
yesterday, maybe my history and my experience in the 
previous positions that I had held informed me on this 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 10 of 220 
 
particular approach. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When Mr Khena left in July of 2016, 
Mr Letsoalo was appointed.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now did you inform the President 
about that? 
MS PETERS:   I wrote a report because at that particular 
time, there was a lot of activities or a lot of things that 
were happening in the country and so I wrote a report to 
the President. 
10 
 
And Chair, I think if I am not mistaken, that 
report is part of the package or documents that you might 
have received if I am not mistaken.  I will just check on it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So when Mr Khena was appointed 
you told the President.  When Mr Letsoalo was appointed 
you wrote a letter.  I am just trying to understand the 
differences in processes. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When Mr Letsoalo was then removed 
by yourself on the 3 r d of March – and I am going to come to 
20 
that in a moment – in 2017, Mr Zide was appointed.  Is that 
correct? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did the board not tell you that? 
MS PETERS:   At that particular time Chairperson, like I 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 11 of 220 
 
indicated, I had episodes of ill health.  So I would not 
necessarily have followed the actual sequence of what 
happened but I know that there was a stage where Mr Zide 
was acting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Mr Zide was the Company 
Secretary.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   How does a company secretary 
qualified to be appointed as a CEO albeit in an acting 
capacity of a major organisation like PRASA which is 
10 
incurring losses in the region of R10 billion to R 15 billion 
a year?  Not losses, sorry, which is incurred in irregular 
expenses.  We have been through that yesterday. 
MS PETERS:   I think Chairperson the best person to 
answer to that question would be Mr Molefe. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And I will tell you why you cannot 
avoid responsibility Ms Peters.  It is because there was no 
permanent CEO that all these acting appointments have to 
be made.  And it was you who, according to Mr Molefe, 
were the person who frustrated the board’s attempts to 
20 
appoint somebody as the permanent CEO. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, in my life and in my 
experience I have never frustrated a process.  And if you 
allow me Chairperson, I will just make a short example of a 
situation that prevailed in another entity in the Department 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 12 of 220 
 
of Transport where we were faced with an appointment 
process, which when it arrived at the platform of Cabinet, it 
was returned because one of the sister department’s 
ministers picked up that this particular individual was 
leaving this entity from that department because of serious 
irregularities and litigation ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Uhm ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   I am making that as example. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   A consultation process Chairperson always 
10 
helped us with regard to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  No, I just wanted to make 
sure that you appreciate that that example is not going to 
help you to answer this question ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...whether in this case you frustrated the 
process or not. 
MS PETERS:   I did not frustrate the process Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But certainly you did not expedite the 
20 
process. 
MS PETERS:   I was working on it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe Mr Molefe in his affidavit 
might not be specifying in the manner of saying what 
Ms Peters did to frustrate the process, were the following 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 13 of 220 
 
things. 
 
But it may well be that one of the things he has 
in mind as frustrating, as you frustrating the process, is 
when despite the fact that, on his evidence, they, that is 
the board, had undertaken a vigorous recruitment process 
and were ready with the candidate or candidates in 
August 2016.  You said to him PRASA is not ready for a 
new CEO.   
 
Why should that not be seen as an act on your 
part that may have frustrated that process? 
10 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, in my discussions with 
Mr Molefe we agreed that there are serious underlining 
challenges in PRASA that needed to be addressed.   
 
And that was as a result of the indications from 
him that the then acting CEO, Mr Khena, was not 
productive.  I do not want to use the word he used.  And 
that he does not seem to be able to be contributing to 
changing the scenario that he was supposed to have 
changed. 
 
And that is why he then felt he is useless and he 
20 
is not working together with them as the board.  He even 
went further to say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you talking about Mr Khena? 
MS PETERS:   Ja, that is Mr Khena now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 14 of 220 
 
MS PETERS:   He indicated at that particular time that it 
was his suspicion that Mr Khena might be drawing his 
mandates from elsewhere.  And based on that frustration, 
we went the next step. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not know whether – I cannot 
remember where Mr Molefe has furnished the Commission 
with an affidavit where he responds to what you may have 
to say about whether or not you frustrated the process. 
 
But it would be strange if he would agree that he 
agreed with you that PRASA was not ready for a new CEO 
10 
and in his affidavit say that you frustrated the process.   
 
And particularly when the board had done what 
he calls a vigorous recruitment process, one would have 
thought the board would have made up its mind that there 
is a need to appoint a Group CEO. 
 
What do you say to that? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I would not probably be 
responsible 
for 
their 
thoughts 
and 
the 
views 
of 
or 
impressions that Mr Molefe got but in my discussions with 
him as the chair and the Minister, we arrived at that 
20 
particular indications that there are serious problems. 
 
At that time Chairperson there was the issue of 
the AG report.  There was the issue of the Public 
Protector ’s report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think you mentioned those 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 15 of 220 
 
yesterday. 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not have to repeat, ja. 
MS PETERS:   We had a meeting Chairperson with him and 
the Chief Procurement Officer.  There were a lot of things.  
And all of them bordered on issues of finance in PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, but I thought that you and I 
agreed yesterday that it was not correct for you to say the 
CEO should not be appointed because was PRASA was not 
ready for it. 
10 
MS PETERS:   Ready. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We agreed on that.  And I take that to 
mean, you accept that there was no valid reason why in 
August 2016 when, according to Mr Molefe’s letter of 
August 2016, they were ready with a name or names.  I 
take it that you accepted that there was no valid reason 
why the appointment was not made then.  Do you accept 
that? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, at that point like I indicated, 
that was a time the board through Mr Molefe brought me 
20 
the information which the process then determines must be 
processed.  And one of those was like I have indicated 
Chair.   
 
And I must concede here that if the consultative 
processes that led up to the – I do not want – I - for a lack 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 16 of 220 
 
of a better word, I do not know what to say, but it gives the 
Minister the confidence to say this is what I can take to 
Cabinet and stand with it because I have done what would 
have been expected of me.   
 
I have checked with my sister colleagues.  I 
have even – the Chair of Cabinet, the indication on the 
matter that will be before Cabinet and therefore I do have 
a particular confidence.   
 
The experience of also working in that Cabinet 
has also provided me with an understanding that Cabinet is 
10 
not a rubberstamp.  You just do not go there and say this is 
what I am bringing and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry.  I am stopping 
you because you mentioned that yesterday as well. 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Look, I accept that when I say I take it 
you accept that there is no valid reason why the CEO was 
not appointed in August 2016.  I do not mean that the 
consultation process such as you may have wanted to do 
should not have happened.   
20 
 
So I am quite happy to say from August when 
you were given the information, maybe you were given it a 
little earlier than that, I am not sure but from August maybe 
another month or two maybe that process would have been 
enough.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 17 of 220 
 
 
So maybe I should reformulate my question and 
say.  I take it that you accept that there was no – there is 
no valid reason why by end of 2016 the new CEO had not 
been appointed.  Would you accept that? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, sitting here...  Let me take 
responsibility for the two years that it took. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS PETERS:   But Chairperson I would want to go further 
to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
10 
MS PETERS:   I can not further take a responsibility for the 
ensuing five years that PRASA ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  Obviously, obviously, 
obviously.  And I do want to say.  It is important that 
leaders take responsibility for where they may not have 
done what should have been done because if they do not 
acknowledge where they may not have done the right thing, 
then they cannot change, they cannot find the party or the 
solution because they are in denial, you know.   
 
So it is very important that where one sees that:  
20 
Look, here I did not do the way I should have done things.  
That there is an acceptance of responsibility.  And I accept 
that you accept that responsibility for the ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   For the two years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...before you left.  Ja, ja.  Okay.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 18 of 220 
 
Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Just to reinforce that though.  When 
Mr 
Molefe, 
whenever 
it 
was, 
said 
to 
you 
he 
had 
reservations about Mr Khena.   
MS PETERS:   Pardon? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I say when you – you for the first 
time have told us today that Mr Molefe expressed to you 
during the tenure of Mr Khena that he had reservations 
about the appropriateness of the choice for whatever 
reasons.  You have said that today.  You remember that? 
10 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I would have thought that would have 
been a spur to you to say:  We must get somebody whom 
we have vetted and we must sort this problem out once and 
for all.  Or am I wrong? 
MS PETERS:   You are not wrong Chairperson but with the 
– with knowledge and experience and understanding of the 
situation at that particular moment, you would have also 
been able to agree with me and the board Chairperson at 
that particular time. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, just repeat that.  I am not sure 
that I follow it. 
MS PETERS:   I am saying.  The question that is being 
asked now Chairperson.  I am saying that if you have the 
information and the knowledge of what was happening at 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 19 of 220 
 
that particular time, you would have agreed with me at that 
particular time that... 
 
Yes, we when we agreed that Mr Molefe and the 
board can release Mr Khena from the acting position, there 
was no way that the next morning we can appoint the – 
another – I mean, the Group CEO because the processed 
had not started in terms of the concluding part of that 
particular process Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  We are – I must say to you 
10 
Ms Peters, we are going in circles.  You have already 
conceded, 
as 
the 
Chairperson 
pointed 
out 
to 
you 
yesterday, that what – when you said there were good 
reasons not to appoint.  You conceded that you were 
wrong.  You said 2020 – I remember your words, 2020 is a 
perfect hindsight.  I mean, is a perfect science. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I said I conceded that it was 
wrong not to appoint in that period but without going into 
the details on why it was not done.  Yes, I still say.  2020, 
you realise that the two years that it took to appoint the 
20 
CEO was a long period Chairperson. 
 
But I am saying, if you were in my shoes at that 
particular 
time 
you 
would 
have 
arrived 
at 
another 
conclusion.  And I am saying I accept Chairperson and I 
cannot run from that fact that there was a period of two 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 20 of 220 
 
years where there was a vacancy of the Group CEO in 
PRASA. 
 
And 
I 
accept 
Chairperson 
that 
that 
period 
coincided with my presence in the Ministry of Transport.  
That one I accept.  Without going to the rationale and the 
reasons why we ended up in a situation where the 
appointment was not taken, was not made. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, out of your evidence it may well be 
that telling me about those things that prevented the 
appointment of a Group CEO, that might be the most 
10 
important evidence you give. 
MS PETERS:   Pardon Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am saying that, telling me about the 
rationale for not appointing the Group CEO for that two 
year period of two years or two and a half, I am not sure, 
before you left the ministry, might turn out to be the most 
important evidence coming out of you because I want to try 
– I want to understand but I cannot understand even now 
why PRASA stayed for – I do not know if it is five years 
without a Group CEO.  
20 
 
And of course, you can only talk for the time that 
you were Minister of Transport but maybe if you tell us 
exactly the rationale that might help us to understand why 
for five years or whatever the period such an important 
entity was allowed to have no permanent Group CEO. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 21 of 220 
 
 
It is just difficult to understand.  So I am saying 
to you, you might not have intended to tell me maybe 
because you say because of time but I am saying to you it 
is very important because when I write the report and still I 
have not been told anything that makes me understand, I 
may come hard on certain people and even on you. 
 
And you had the opportunity to explain to me to 
say:  Chairperson, this is why I did what I did.  This is why 
I did not do what I did not do.  Okay? 
 
So I am saying it is quite something important 
10 
because on the face of it, it appears as a dereliction of 
duty but it may that one suspect that there may be 
something sinister behind it.   
 
Why 
this 
entity 
that 
it 
was 
known 
by 
all 
concerned to being carrying a lot of irregular expenditure 
year in and year out and about which there was so many 
allegations of corruption in the public domain? 
 
Why was it allowed to have a situation where 
there was no permanent Group CEO?  Did it – was it 
convenient for certain people that it should just be acting 
20 
people?  What was going on? 
 
So those are the questions in my mind and if you 
can help me understand that that would be very helpful.  
And it is your own opportunity to say:  Well, I may have 
been Minister but here with constraints that I was working 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 22 of 220 
 
within.  Okay?   
MS PETERS:   Let me ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   If you want to tell me you can tell me. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, if I may?  I express a little bit.  
When I was appointed in July 2015 to Transport, I met one 
person – I mean, during that period people come and 
congratulate you and wish you well but there was one that 
stood out that today I remember.   
 
And that person did not just congratulate me, 
said congratulations and condolences.  And now there 
10 
would condolences really is more prominent in my situation 
with regard to why the word condolences. 
 
I 
never 
asked 
him 
why 
are 
you 
saying 
condolences.  I just left it and passed on.  No, passed on.  
And went ahead.   
 
And Chairperson, I would want to indicate that 
when the Group CEO left PRASA the board appointed Mr 
Khena and I like I indicated, in a few months the board 
chairperson came back and said...   
 
In fact, he said Mr Khena is useless and all 
20 
those types of things.  He is drawing mandates from the 
previous CEO and all those type of situations and he had 
the impression that even in the organisation that is still 
happening. 
 
Then we went on to engage with the board 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 23 of 220 
 
because according to them Mr Khena was useless and they 
said that – I mean, we met with the board and the board 
confirmed that the situation under Mr Khena deteriorated 
and that they wanted to replace him with immediate effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With whom? 
MS PETERS:   With immediate effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS PETERS:   And with immediate effect meant that they 
were 
going 
to 
appoint 
an 
acting. 
 
They 
made 
a 
recommendation on Mr Zide and I raised a concern with 
10 
regard to Mr Zide being the company secretary.   
 
And 
the 
board 
Chairperson 
made 
even 
a 
recommendation that one of my advises would be acting 
and I said that person would be outside the department, 
outside because of the public service and all that.  And we 
agreed.   
 
I even said to him:  Why do you know want to 
cripple my ministry?  And I raised that.  After discussion on 
the 30 t h, we had a – of June, we had a discussion with the 
board and after their consideration of all the factors that 
20 
showed that the matters under PRASA were actually 
financial matters... 
 
I even said to them:  You know, you – if these 
matters are more financial - and they also involved the 
department because it has a bearing on the ability of the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 24 of 220 
 
department for oversight. 
 
There were also allegations from the department 
on the non-responsiveness of the management of PRASA 
to the issues that the department wanted answers to.  
Equally so with the engagement that we have had with the 
AG as well as the investigation that the AG was supposed 
to have started. 
 
And then the report of the Public Protector 
Chairperson and all those particular things and at that 
particular time, both myself and Mr Molefe agreed that 
10 
PRASA is not ready because there are all these many 
problems. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me stop you there Ms Peters.  
What you have been telling me for the past few minutes is 
what happened after Mr Molefe had left ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and who was going to act and what, 
what, what, what.  A lot of that you did mention yesterday.  
I thought you were going to tell me when you said you did 
not go into the rationale why you – why the Group CEO 
20 
was not appointed for quite some time, I thought you were 
going to tell me something you have not told me, namely 
...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   I am talking ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...here are the things that made it 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 25 of 220 
 
difficult for me to ensure that the Group CEO was 
appointed without delay.  I thought that was what you were 
going to tell me. 
MS PETERS:   Mr Chairperson, in the discussions that – 
like I indicated earlier on if I have to backtrack, that the 
bulk of the issues that were a source of concern and 
problem in PRASA were financial. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but that would not make it difficult 
for you to get a CEO appointed.  That would be all the 
more reason why you should get a CEO appointed. 
10 
MS PETERS:   I agree Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   No, like I indicated Chairperson, with 
hindsight I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS PETERS:   But at that particular moment there were 
things that we were dealing with, with the chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   And I am very sorry and I feel aggrieved 
that the chairperson of PRASA after our engagements 
20 
throughout those processes...   
 
He came to the Commission to want to project 
that particular delay of appointing the CEO as the reason 
for him to believe that I was creating an environment for 
the company to be captured. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 26 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me leave out the question of 
whether he presented evidence that suggests that you did 
something to enable the company to be captured.  Let me 
leave that out for now. 
 
What we do know is that for about two years 
after Mr Montana had left, close to two years, that is from 
when he left to when you left the ministry yourself, that 
was close to two years. 
 
The Group CEO was not appointed.  That we 
know.  What we also know because you do not dispute, is 
10 
that the board, according to the letter that Mr Molefe sent 
to you in August 2016, had engaged in what they say was a 
vigorous 
recruitment 
process 
to 
have 
a 
Group 
CEO 
appointed and that they even had a name or had names, 
three names and they had given this to you. 
 
It was up to you to take that process forward.  
We know because you have given evidence to this effect 
that you did not take that process forward.  We know that 
you say in your mind, at least in 2017.   
 
Now we know that I think up to the end of 2016, 
20 
based on your evidence, you were still of the view that 
PRASA was not ready for a Group CEO.  That is my 
understanding of your evidence yesterday but I think you 
said early in 2017 you changed your mind. 
 
So based on that, who would you say prevented 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 27 of 220 
 
the 
appointed 
of 
a 
Group 
CEO 
at 
PRASA 
between 
August 2016 and the time when you left the ministry? 
MS PETERS:   If the Chairperson says who... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  I think ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   I think that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry. 
MS PETERS:   ...I indicated Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry Ms Peters.  I am 
saying prevented but that might not be the right word.  But 
the ball was placed in your court by the board.  And you 
10 
did not do what was necessary to be done in order for the 
Group CEO to be appointed.  Would you accept that? 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
 
Chairperson, 
even 
at 
the 
point 
of 
appointing, after Mr Khena, the CFO of the Department of 
Transport, Mr Collins Letsoalo into PRASA as the eh 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Indeed, was it convenient for certain 
people that it should just be acting people?  What was 
going on?  So those are the questions in my mind and if 
you can help me understand that, that will be very helpful 
20 
and it is your own opportunity to say well, I may have been 
minister but here were constraints that I was working 
within.  Okay?  If you want to tell me you can tell me. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, if I might digress a little bit.  
When I was appointed in July, July 2013 to Transport, I met 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 28 of 220 
 
one person – I mean, during that people come and 
congratulate you and wish you well.  There was one that 
stood out that today I remember and that person did not 
just 
congratulate 
me, 
said 
congratulations 
and 
condolences.  Now the word condolences really is more 
prominent in my situation with respect to why the word 
condolences and then I asked him why are you saying 
condolences.  I just laughed it and passed on, no, not 
passed on, and went ahead.  And Chairperson, I would 
want to indicate that when the Group CEO left PRASA the 
10 
board appointed Mr Khena and, like I indicated, in the few 
months the board Chairperson and said – in fact he said Mr 
Khena is useless and all those type of  things, he is 
drawing mandates from the previous CEO and all those 
type of situations and he had the impression that even in 
the organisation that is still happening.   
 
Then we went on to engage with the board because 
according to them Mr Khena was useless and they said that 
– I mean, back with the board and board confirmed that the 
situation under Mr Khena is terminated and then they 
20 
wanted to replace him with immediate effect.  
CHAIRPERSON:   With whom? 
MS PETERS:   With immediate effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
MS PETERS:   And with immediate effect meant that they 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 29 of 220 
 
were 
going 
to 
appoint 
an 
acting. 
 
They 
made 
a 
recommendation on Mr Zide and I raised a concern with 
regard to Zide being the company secretary and that 
Chairperson made even a recommendation that one of my 
advisers could be the acting and I said that person would 
be outside the department outside because of the public 
service and all that and we agreed.  And I even said why 
do you now want to cripple my ministry and I raised that.  
After discussion all of it, yes, of June, we had a discussion 
with the board and after their consideration of all the 
10 
factors that showed that the matters under PRASA was 
actually financial matters.  I even said to them, you know, 
if these matters are more financial and they also involve 
department because it would have a bearing on the ability 
of the department for oversight.  There are also allegations 
from the department on the non-responsiveness of the 
management of PRASA to the issues that the department 
wanted answers to.  If that is so we have engagement that 
we have had with the AG as well as the investigation that 
the AG was supposed to have started and then the report 
20 
of 
the 
Public 
Protector, 
Chairperson, 
and 
all 
those 
particular things. 
 
And at that particular time both myself and Mr 
Molefe agreed that PRASA is not ready because there’s all 
these many problems. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 30 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me stop you there, Ms Peters, 
what you have been telling me for the past few minutes is 
what happened after Mr Molefe had left …[intervenes] 
MS PETERS:   Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of who was going to act and 
what, what, what, what.  A lot of that you did mention 
yesterday.  I thought you were going to tell me when you 
said you did not go into the rationale of why you – why the 
Group CEO was not appointed for quite some time, I 
thought you were going to tell me something you have not 
10 
told me …[intervenes] 
MS PETERS:   I am coming to that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Namely where are the things that made 
it difficult for me to ensure that the Group CEO was 
appointed without delay.  I thought that is what you were 
going to tell me. 
MS PETERS:   Mr Chairperson, in the discussions that I 
indicated earlier on, if I have to backtrack, that the bulk of 
the issues that were a source of concern and problem in 
PRASA were financial. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but that would not make a difficult 
for you to get a CEO appointed.  That would be all the 
more reason why you should get a CEO appointed. 
MS PETERS:   I agree, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so …[intervenes] 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 31 of 220 
 
MS PETERS:   And as I indicated, Chairperson, with 
hindsight I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS PETERS:   But at that particular moment there were 
things that we were dealing with with the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   And I am very sorry and I feel aggrieved 
that the Chairperson of PRASA, after our engagements 
throughout those processes, he came to the Commission to 
project that particular delay of appointing the CEO as the 
10 
reason 
for 
them 
to 
believe 
that 
I 
was 
creating 
an 
environment for the company to be captured. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me leave out the question of 
whether he presented evidence that suggested you did 
something to enable the company to be captured.  Let me 
leave that out for now.  What we do now is that for about 
two years after Mr Montana had left, close to two years, 
that is from when he left to when you left the ministry 
yourself, that was close to two years.  The Group CEO was 
not appointed, that we know.  What we also know, because 
20 
you no dispute, is that the board according to the letter 
that Mr Molefe sent to you in August 2016, had engaged in 
what they say was a vigorous recruitment process to have 
a Group CEO appointed and that they even had a name or 
had names, three names and they had given this to you.  It 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 32 of 220 
 
was up to take that process forward.  We know because 
you have given evidence to this effect that you did not take 
that process forward.  We know that you say in your mind, 
at least in 2017 – now we know that I think up to the end of 
2016, based on your evidence, you were still of the view 
that PRASA was not ready for a Group CEO.  That is my 
understanding of your evidence yesterday but I think you 
said early in 2017 you changed your mind. 
 
So based on that, who would you say prevented the 
appointment of a group CEO at PRASA between August 
10 
2016 and the time when you left the ministry? 
MS PETERS:   If the Chairperson says who, I indicated 
Chairperson …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry, Ms Peters, I am 
saying prevented but that might not be the right word but 
the ball was placed in your court by the board and you did 
not do what was necessary to be done in order for the 
Group CEO to be appointed.  Would you accept that? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, even at the point of appointing 
after Mr Khena the CFO of the Department of Transport, Mr 
20 
Collins Letsoalo into PRASA as the Acting Group CEO, we 
continued engaging with regards to the fact that the 
direction to recruit – I mean, not to recruit, to get to the 
appointment of the CEO must continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 33 of 220 
 
MS PETERS:   And we were busy with it at that particular 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but …[intervenes] 
MS PETERS:   And Chairperson I did indicate that after 
receiving the bundle from Mr Molefe we were busy with the 
process to say this matter must then be processed into a 
cabinet process.  Whilst it is being processed, at the same 
time I am busy also engaging consultatively with the 
relevant stakeholders.  And in this instance the most 
important relevant stakeholder for me was the head of 
10 
state because he was the chair of cabinet and I needed to 
inform him that we have now arrived at the board having 
taken a decision to appoint and that particular slot we have 
not yet arrived at. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But why should it take seven months or 
so, that is now from August 2016 to March when you left, 
2017, for you to consult the head of state or your 
colleagues?  Why should it take so long?  
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, from around the 1 July up until 
sometime into 2016 you would remember in this country it 
20 
was local government election time and most politicians 
are involved in those particular processes and if that is so, 
my opportunity to sit down with the President would then 
have to be slotted into that particular process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, my recollection is that the local 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 34 of 220 
 
government elections happened before August 2016. 
MS PETERS:   It was on the 6 August 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it on the 6 August.  That was 18 
August. 
MS PETERS:   That was the day of the elections. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   And after the elections, as per political 
parties, there is protracted engagement that is involved 
and it involves the team leaders in the party as well as the 
President and other role-players.  So as …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That cannot justify taking seven months, 
can it? 
MS PETERS:   Pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:   That cannot justify taking seven months. 
MS PETERS:   It cannot be divided into seven months, 
Chairperson.  Earlier on I conceded that it took long but in 
between the role of engaging with regard to matters of 
PRASA, we are also engaging with regard to other matters 
of 
other 
equally 
important 
departments 
that 
equally 
contribute.  So it – I was not seized solely with the 
20 
responsibility of PRASA, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But …[intervenes] 
MS PETERS:   At this particular time, Chairperson, you 
would remember I was part of a panel where the Deputy 
President should deal with the challenges that were raised 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 35 of 220 
 
with regard to the – it was in Gauteng, the meeting that we 
had on a daily basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is – well, I do not necessarily 
remember that but the fact of the matter is the ball was 
placed in your court by the board by giving you the names, 
giving you the files and you did not take the matter or the 
names …[intervenes] 
MS PETERS:   To cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To cabinet. 
MS PETERS:   I agree, Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whatever explanations you have, that is 
where the whole thing got stuck. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Peters then 
just out of that, when the Chairperson needs to work out 
where accountability should lie or the non-appointment of 
the CEO you have told the Chairperson everything in your 
defence, you have set out everything you want to set out, 
there is nothing more that the Chairperson needs to take 
20 
into account, is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   That I indicated …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, it is a yes or no.  If there is 
anything more, tell us what it is. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I have said I indicated to the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 36 of 220 
 
Chairperson that I take responsibility for the two years of 
lack of appointment of the CEO of PRASA for reasons that 
I have laid before this Commission. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I want to get on with something else 
now.  Can I ask you to look at bundle D.  This is Mr 
Molefe’s affidavit at – it is SS6, Chairperson, page 25, 
paragraph 95.  Bundle D, page 25 on the right hand side, 
paragraph 95. 
MS PETERS:  25?  Paragraph?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   95, right on the top.  It says: 
10 
“Thereafter on the 12 August 2016...” 
Do you see that?  Do you see that, Ms Peters? 
MS PETERS:   I see that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    
“...where Ms Peters herself attempted to stop the 
investigations” 
this is the investigations being conducted by Werksmans, 
and in support of that allegation he annexes a letter you 
wrote to him.  Now letter is at page 154.  I want us just to 
briefly look at that letter.  Please go to page 154.  This 
20 
letter is dated the 12 August and I am just going to read to 
you just so that we can expedite this process, Ms Peters.  
You say: 
“As a shareholder, I hereby write to express my 
concern over the long and protracted investigation 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 37 of 220 
 
by Werksmans Attorneys into several irregularities 
identified in the AG’s report and the ever-rising 
costs there.” 
Then in paragraph 2 you say: 
“The situation...” 
This is in the middle of the – oh sorry, let me just read this 
first part. 
“Whilst efforts to clean up the organisation and 
enhanced 
with 
corporate 
governance 
are 
commendable, I am deeply concerned that this 
10 
investigation seems endless and without a clear 
scope with a specific end objective.” 
And you say: 
“The situation has resulted in excessive spending 
which is reported to be in the region R80 million.” 
Right in the last paragraph then you say: 
“I therefore ask that you close off this investigation 
process and consider the results or report thereon.  
Furthermore, the board is required to submit a 
detailed report indicating the progress and the 
20 
outcome of the investigation.” 
And then you say: 
“A 
determination 
of 
in 
further 
investigation 
anywhere forward will subsequently be made after 
studying the report in detail.” 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 38 of 220 
 
You confirm you wrote this letter? 
MS PETERS:   I confirm, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, I want you to please look at 
your affidavit.  Now your affidavit appears at bundle L and 
it is SS22 and I want you to look at page 13 on the left 
hand side. 
MS PETERS:   13? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, paragraph 10.2.  I am just going 
to read to you or read what you say there: 
“Where I refer to clause...” 
10 
And this is in response to now Mr Molefe’s allegation that 
you asked them to close off the – stop the investigation, 
you say: 
“Where I refer to clause and not the investigation I 
did not suggest that it be stopped immediately.  I 
predicated it upon receipt of a report first which had 
to be considered and then later a way forward be 
determined thereafter which is a far cry from 
terminating with impunity at the instance of those 
who might have been fingered in that report.  My 
20 
letter is self-explanatory.” 
And now you are referring to this letter that I have just 
read.  Well, Ms Peters, I do not want to debate this with 
you but your paragraph, the last paragraph is quite clear, 
close off this report.  If there is anything to be done 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 39 of 220 
 
thereafter, it will be done after we have considered that 
report.  I am just saying to you that that is what a proper 
reading of your – the last paragraph of your letter, yes, I 
am putting that to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The purpose if for you to, if you do not 
agree with his understanding of your letter, to indicate that 
you do not agree and indicate why you do not agree. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, thank you very much for that 
assistance.  I do not agree with the view that the evidence 
leader is placing before this meeting.  It might be a wrong 
10 
choice of words but honourable – no, Mr Molefe knows 
because prior to writing this letter we had an engagement. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So we do not agree.  Okay 
…[intervenes] 
MS PETERS:   It was not closed off.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chair, with respect, it is matter of 
interpretation. 
MS PETERS:   Ja, okay.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I do not want to debate the matter.  
For two reasons, one is, is of the essence but the other is, 
20 
it will be an ongoing issue.  I submit that the words here 
are quite clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, but – well, I do not know, you 
indicated that there was a discussion between yourself and 
Ms Peters, I assume with her counsel, what kind of time 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 40 of 220 
 
you had in mind? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is quarter to – we agreed that we 
would finish by quarter to twelve. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Quarter to twelve? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Well, it is an important 
aspect. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I do not want her not to appreciate 
the significance, so taking a few minutes on it might be 
10 
justified. 
MR MAJAVU:   Chair, just to be – good morning, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning.   
MR MAJAVU:  Just to give assistance to the Commission 
and I hope Chair does not mind addressing while I am 
sitting as I am using this mic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, that is fine.  Yes, that is fine. 
MR MAJAVU:   Thank you, Chair.  I think I am acutely 
aware of the importance thereof and we should not rush it 
along on account of my own commitments, I will make a 
20 
contingency 
plan 
so 
that 
we 
deal 
with 
this 
matter 
sufficiently. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MAJAVU:   And of course anticipatedly I was going to 
pick it up in reply. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 41 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAJAVU:    So timelines ought not to be of concern to 
the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAJAVU:   And I will make similar arrangements for my 
client’s flight. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, no, that is fine.  And, if need 
be, if we do not finish we can always arrange even for an 
evening session, sir.  She might not need to be here 
physically, we can do a video link as well as counsel.  So if 
10 
it is fine, they can come here, if it is convenient not to 
come, those arrangements can be made. 
MR MAJAVU:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it is just important that those 
important issues be dealt with properly. 
MR MAJAVU:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, but I understand why you 
were approaching it the way you were approaching. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, may I express my 
appreciation to my learned friend. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, can I just say the first 
sentence reads: 
“I therefore ask you to close off this investigation 
process and consider the results or report thereon.” 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 42 of 220 
 
That is what it is reads, is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I do not want to look at it in 
isolation because the law requires us to see everything in 
context.  You then go to indicate what is to happen.  You 
say: 
“Furthermore, the board is requested to submit a 
detailed report indicating the progress and the 
outcome of the investigation.” 
Now I take it when you are talking about the investigation 
10 
you are talking about the Werksmans’ investigation, is that 
correct? 
MS PETERS:   Alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So you have two processes now 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, please articulate your 
response otherwise it will not go into the record, you were 
saying yes to his question. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Now so you 
say close off the report and - close off the investigation, 
give me a report.  Then the next step was going to be the 
determination of any further investigation and a way 
forward will subsequently be made after studying the report 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 43 of 220 
 
in detail.  
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair, can I – Chairperson, you would 
understand that this letter was written at the time where we 
have had a discussion and an engagement with Mr Molefe 
and the Chief Procurement Officer with regard to the 
Derailed Report.  Mr Molefe was conscious of the fact that 
there was also the AG investigation, the auditor general  
then said his part of the investigation would then be 
collapsed into the one that will be dealt with by the office 
of the Chief Procurement Officer.  He even then said 
10 
because the levels that is being investigated even go lower 
to the threshold that I, as the AG, was working on because 
according to the Public Protector report, the officer of the 
Chief 
Procurement 
Officer 
was 
supposed 
to 
do 
investigations which is under National Treasury with effect 
from R10 million and above and for me, Chairperson, in 
dealing with that and in the discussion that we have had 
with Mr Molefe and the then Chief Procurement Officer, Mr 
Brown, we had in my office, where it was agreed on a 
consolidation of all these investigations and this report, 
20 
Chairperson, I will give you an example, Chairperson, and 
unfortunately I said to Advocate Soni earlier on that 
[indistinct] 26.38 were not given a chance to speak, I need 
to speak.  Chairperson, with all these investigations and 
also the wise words used by the late AG in terms of 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 44 of 220 
 
officials suffering lethargy in the investigations because it 
would be the same ones that goes to this investigation, the 
same ones go to the office of the Chief Procurement 
Officer, the same ones go to the AG’s – we agreed and 
therefore it was important that there be a report with 
regard to this because Werksmans – and I want to indicate, 
the beginning of the work of Werksmans, because it was 
almost like an emergency when these things came up in 
the report in the public space, Mr Molefe came to me and 
even said I have identified the company and I said okay, it 
10 
is fine.  That is why even in parliament I reported about 
this investigation.  But what Mr Molefe was supposed to do 
was to go back to the board, regularise this appointment 
and make sure that it is according to the prescripts of the 
law because it was then found to be irregular by the AG’s 
report.  And that some of those things that happened 
informs you when you have to make a decision and, 
Chairperson, the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Remember 
that 
the 
question 
…[intervenes] 
20 
MS PETERS:   The close off, I am coming …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, that.  I wanted to go back to that 
because that is the question of what is it that you can tell 
me that supports your interpretation? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, closing of the report was let 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 45 of 220 
 
us get - these people have been investigating.  Do you 
have a report that says this is what we now found so that if 
there is a need for continuing with the investigation we 
then say now follow – because let me make an example, 
Chairperson, 
if 
you 
give 
terms 
of 
reference 
to 
an 
investigator, they would come to you and say up to so far 
this is what we found but in the process of investigation we 
found new evidence that says there is need for further 
investigation and then you then go back and say continue 
with this investigation or we take a decision that says this 
10 
is a matter for the police or this is a matter that we will 
deal and it is that in that context that this particular issue 
was raised here to say can you conclude on this particular 
Werksmans investigation, it was not budgeted for, it was 
unforeseen and even next year because in the previous 
year it was unforeseen, Chairperson.  In the next financial 
year it cannot be unforeseen, it means we are already busy 
with the work, you either go to the board and say to the 
board there is an investigation, let us continue with it and 
there is a resolution of the board that said we have 
20 
continued with this company.  And for me, these were the 
things, this matter was also one of the things that were fed 
in a letter – no, it is not in a letter, in a report that I 
received from my PLO from parliament that there is a query 
raised about the irregularity of the appointment.  And my 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 46 of 220 
 
issue was, if you close it, you get a report, you bring it.  
We then agree and the other parameters, because I will 
make a very good example to you Chairperson about some 
of these investigations we were involved in.  I don’t 
...[indistinct] raising them here Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Indistinct] don’t let them go that far.  
You, you have made ...[indistinct] points you wanted to 
make namely, you wanted to obtain the reports, you were 
baring in mind that the chief procurement officer was going 
to do certain investigations.   
10 
And you are saying that after you had studied the 
report a decision could be taken on the way forward.  That 
is what you are saying. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am going to say to you Ms Peters 
that having regard to what the words you used say it’s not 
consistent with what you are trying to say this was implied.   
But I want to also say to you and I want to say it to 
the Chairperson, for present purposes it is irrelevant, 
20 
because I want to suggest that what is contained in this 
letter must be seen against further developments that took 
place in this, in, in as regards to this issue.   
I want to then take you and Chairperson it - I just 
don’t, there are times when anything rests on a particular 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 47 of 220 
 
issue and there are times when they don’t.  I submit this is 
one of those.  I want you to look at Mr Molefe’s reply now, 
which is PM8 to the letter, which is at page 157 of Bundle 
D, SS6.   
Right and you will see there he says, right at the 
top, I acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 12 t h.  That 
is the same letter.  But I want you to bear in mind one 
important factor Ms Peters.   
Look at the date of that letter.  It is the 24 t h of 
August.  So Ms Peters, are you, do you accept that the 
10 
letter is dated the 24 t h of August? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right.  Now he refers to meetings and 
then he changed his response to what you have asked him 
to do.  He complains that they can’t comply with your 
request, 
because 
they 
are 
obliged 
by 
the 
different 
provisions of the PFMA, to continue with those matters.  
But again for present purposes that’s irrelevant, because 
at page 160 he talks about this meeting in regard to the 
Public Protector ’s report.   
20 
You 
see 
the 
reasons 
for 
the 
referral 
of 
the 
investigations, part of the implementation, the Werksmans’ 
report, there is a realisation, there are similarities between 
the two investigations.  You see that? 
MS PETERS:  Which page? 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 48 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  This is at page 160. 
MS PETERS:  Which page Chairperson? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The first.  Where he says, Werksmans 
attorneys was the investigation part of the remedial action 
by the Public Protector.  Right at the top.  You see that? 
MS PETERS:  I see that Chairperson, but I don’t think that 
that statement was correct.  Because that ...[indistinct] 
started even before the release.  They work of Werksmans 
was increased as a relief of the Public Protector report.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I just ask this question?  And it goes 
10 
back to the question that about who, what meaning one 
should attach to your letter where you say the Werksmans, 
Werksmans investigation should be closed off.  You can’t 
hear me well?   
MS PETERS:  I couldn’t hear you well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is that so?  You must just tell me then 
I can raise my voice.  One of the points you made earlier 
on, was that you wanted the – you wanted Werksmans to 
submit a report.  That report would be studied and 
thereafter the way forward would be decided upon.  Is that 
20 
right? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what you said.  Now I see that the 
last sentence of Mr Molefe’s letter, response to your letter, 
his response being the letter that starts at page 157.  It 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 49 of 220 
 
does say: 
“The 
Minister 
directs 
us 
to 
close 
off 
the 
investigation and submit a detailed report to your 
office so that the Minister can make a determination 
as to whether there is a need for a further 
investigation.” 
It is the last sentence at page 157, that is in the –  
Mr Molefe’s letter, response to you.  That is in Bundle D, 
EXHIBIT SS6.  So but that is the letter that Mr Soni 
referred you to.  Have you got it?   
10 
The bundle that has got Mr Molefe’s affidavit.  If 
you go to page 157 on that bundle, at the red numbers this 
time, not the black numbers.  Can you see the letter? 
MS PETERS:  Can you ...[indistinct] Chairperson, can you 
...[indistinct] I am struggling to follow because your voice 
is a bit low. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.  You see I am used to people 
saying my voice too loud.  So it is not often that I’m 
accused of having a voice that is soft.  Okay, you 
remember Mr Soni read your letter to Mr Molefe?  You 
20 
remember your letter?   
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And thereafter he referred you to Mr 
Molefe’s response to your letter. 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 50 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You remember that?   
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – that’s the letter I’m talking about.  
Have you got it?  It appears at page 157. 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have got the letter? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  If you go to the last sentence of 
page 157, which is the first page of that letter.  This, that 
is the sentence I am talking about.  And I read it again: 
10 
“The 
Minister 
directs 
us 
to 
close 
off 
the 
investigation and submit a detailed report to your 
office so that the Minister can make a determination 
as 
to 
whether 
there 
is 
a 
need 
for 
further 
investigation.” 
 
You see that sentence?  You see the sentence, 
where – that’s what I want to know at this stage.   
MS PETERS:  I see that sentence Chairperson.  Like I 
indicated that ...[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Don’t indicate anything.  I just wanted 
20 
you to first … 
MS PETERS:  Oh I see the sentence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS PETERS:  I see the sentence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am saying to you, it would appear 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 51 of 220 
 
that Mr Molefe’s understanding of your letter was at least 
in this respect the same as yours, namely that after the 
report, after that Werksmans’ report had been studied 
there would be a determination of the way forward.   
And as he understood the – your letter, the 
determination of the way forward would be whether there 
was a need for further investigation.  So I am simply 
saying, this sentence may well support part of what you 
were saying.  You understand? 
MS PETERS:  I understand Chairperson.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But Mr Soni will see how he deals 
with that.  It suggests to me that it was not necessarily 
contemplated in your letter that there will be no further 
investigation. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That as to who would do such an 
investigation if there was to be an investigation, that was 
something to be dealt with later.   
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the impression I get.  But also 
20 
what is clear from your letter to Mr Molefe is that you are 
not saying, you were not saying let Werksmans stop for 
now, give us a report and then we will take it from there.   
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You, you don’t put it that way.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 52 of 220 
 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do not then say, let them suspend their 
investigation for now until we have studied their report.   
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are saying to the board close off this 
investigation.  And then of course you say the other things 
as well.  So I am just mentioning this to one, share with 
you my understanding of what this seems to say.  But to 
also enable Mr Soni to, to deal with the various features 
that I am raising.   
10 
MS PETERS:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is what your letter said that in 
fact there were three things that were to happen.  The 
investigation, there must be an investigation report from 
Werksmans.  That report, the board must send you their 
report on the Werksmans’ report. 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then the determination will be 
made.  That is what your, your letter said, is that correct? 
20 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right.  Now what though is important 
is and the Chairperson is right that it was not going to be 
the end of the matter forever.  Everything would depend on 
the developments.  Would that be correct?   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 53 of 220 
 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right.  Okay, now there are two things 
go about the letter, and I said to you in a sense, whatever 
interpretation one places on that there’s a – is for present 
purposes, not decisive.   
Now as part of this letter yesterday I read to you 
the issue at page 163, which was the issue of the 
...[indistinct], I am just saying that it’s part of the same 
letter.  I want to refer you to something else.  He says to 
you at page 160 in the last paragraph. 
10 
MS PETERS:  1? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Page 160.  In the last paragraph.  He 
says that, litigation has flowed from this investigation and 
it involves a lot of money.  And he says that one of the 
problems that has arisen is the very people against whom 
PRASA was litigating was seeking funds from PRASA to 
fund their, their fight or their litigation fight against 
PRASA.   
You see that?  For example, one of the companies 
he makes mentions is Siyangena.  Do you see that Ms 
20 
Peters. 
MS PETERS:  Yes I see it in the second paragraph, on this 
page. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Now what he is saying in the 
letter is that there are serious matters that arise from this.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 54 of 220 
 
And we can’t stop the investigation.  That is, that’s what he 
is effectively saying.  But would that be correct?  That’s 
how you understood it?  Now I want you then to look at 
page 161.   
In the middle – oh sorry.  Right at the top he says, 
Werksmans had advised the board that as a result of their 
investigations, the board is obliged to report the matter to 
the police or to the, the crime – the DPCI in terms of the 
prevention and combating of corrupt activities Act.  That is 
what he says there.  Right.   
10 
Then he says that PRASA is funding their forensic 
investigation.  But we will deal with that at a different time 
in these proceedings.  But I want to look at the last 
sentence of that.  He then says to you – sorry before the 
last sentence, he says, they’ve asked the DPCI for 
assistance.   
They are not aware of any instance where DPCI 
have begun taking statements or any other investigative 
action of significance.  Do you recall reading this in Mr 
Molefe’s letter? 
20 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then he says to you: 
“I therefore implore the Honourable Minister to 
intercede on PRASA’s behalf with the Minister of 
Safety and Security to expedite these matters which 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 55 of 220 
 
are of national importance.” 
 
You saw that?   
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Who was the National Minister?  Who 
was the Minister of Safety and Security at the time? 
MS PETERS:  I am sure, I am not sure whether it was still 
Minister Nhleko.  I would, I would have to recollect. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay. 
MS PETERS:  But it was either Minister Nathi Nhleko, but 
it was not Minister Nqakula.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Did you approach the Minister? 
MS PETERS:  I did approach the Minister.  And you see 
Chairperson, here it indicates that we should engage the 
Minister to and expedite this matters which were under now 
the DPCI.  The Minister at that time in fact to his credit, we 
were discussing it as we were seated in the house.   
So it was not a formal meeting.  I indicated to him 
that there is this particular request from, from PRASA and 
at that time it was not only PRASA.  There were matters of 
the STMC and many others.  And I said to him, if, if need 
20 
be we could have a meeting so that we have full 
presentation.   
And he even said, you know with regards to matters 
that have been referred to the police, they sometimes the 
an impression created that we politically influence some of 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 56 of 220 
 
these things.   
So we, we – at the end we have not had a meeting 
formally with the Minister with regard to this particular 
matter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But I am trying to understand your 
answer and tell me if I am wrong.  Mr Molefe asks you to 
intercede because there is no progress in these important 
investigations that involves perhaps billions of rands.   
You talk informally to the Minister whoever it was, 
but you don’t formally raise with him the concern that Mr 
10 
Molefe raised with you. 
MS PETERS:  We had not as yet arrived at the point where 
we – here we are in cabinet.  I have this particular letter 
and I say to the Minister, there is a meeting I request that 
we have with regards to matters that pertains to the 
matters referred to the police and all that.   
And he then said, no we will make the arrangement 
for a formal meeting, but I just want to indicate to you at 
times I am as a Minister, in fact I’m worried to involve in 
matters that are already under investigation because then 
20 
it may be misconstrued as political interference.   
Then he started the process to request for a 
meeting with, with the Minister.  I just want to, to respond 
to one aspect Chairperson.  I’m sorry not to look at you 
and address you with regard to that particular matter.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 57 of 220 
 
In this response of the 24 t h of August to my letter of 
the 12 t h of August Chairperson, this summary of the report, 
if I had received it prior I would not have written this 
particular letter.  I just wanted to put that on record.  
Because … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, just start afresh.  If you had 
received? 
MS PETERS:  This response on what has happened since 
they have employed Werksmans … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS PETERS:  Because Chairperson at the time that 
Werksmans was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I want you to complete the 
sentence.  You completed it earlier on.  If you had received 
this you would not have … 
MS PETERS:  Because this is a report.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PETERS:  On where exactly they are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PETERS:  With the process of the investigation.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PETERS:  Then they are the one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS PETERS:  And, and there would not have been a need 
for saying close off the report, because the report is 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 58 of 220 
 
reflected here on exactly where they are.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS PETERS:  But also Chairperson, in the report it does 
indicate that there has since been – you know in most 
investigations in my areas of diplomat, I have realised that 
investigations moves in a loop.   
Once you open it, it becomes when the loop is 
supposed to close, new evidence and new information 
comes in and then investigators go on.  So you need to be 
able to make sure at different intervals you engage with 
10 
this investigations.   
Every 
time 
in 
parliament 
Ministers 
are 
asked 
questions about this matters and if you are not conversant 
with what is happening, you won’t know.  And that 
particular time Chairperson there was already a decision 
that we had made with the Chairperson of the board, as 
well as the OCP, I mean the officer, the Chief Procurement 
Officer, that there is going to be a consolidation on this 
investigations.   
So in essence we were now at the stage where we 
20 
are supposed to now start getting reports from the Chief 
Procurement Officer that says, with regard to all these 
matters this is where exactly we are.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to make sure I have understood your 
evidence.  So you are saying when you look at Mr Molefe’s 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 59 of 220 
 
response to your letter, and you look at the content what 
he says about progress that had been made, had you, had 
you been aware of this progress at the time you wrote the 
letter to him which said, close off the investigation, you 
would not have said the investigation should be closed off.  
That’s what you are saying? 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
Yes 
Chairperson, 
because 
I’m 
the 
...[indistinct] progress reports.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Mr Soni. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  Chair.  Might I just interject?  Firstly 
10 
Chair I am going to seek guidance from the Chair purely to 
be of assistance to the proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  And this is where I come from and 
Chair will, will correct me if I am wrong.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  I am acutely aware that these 
proceedings are sui generis and holding what you have 
read over Ms Peters, comes with some constraints. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MAJABA SC:  On my part. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  Because I want the proceedings to 
flow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To go smoothly. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 60 of 220 
 
ADV MAJABA SC:  And I am not one to interject every now 
and then as if we are in adversarial proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  These are inquisitorial, the evidence 
leader is ...[indistinct] on mere facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  Good or bad against … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  The witness.  And that is why I have 
kept numb on a number of issues.  Now the clarity that the 
10 
Chair has now elicited from Ms Peters is what would have 
prompted me to say, but hang on, don’t put a witness in a 
position where she may be misunderstood because you are 
drawing correlations.   
We 
started 
off 
with 
the 
conclusion 
and 
the 
interpretation that my learned brother sought to put on a 
conclusion.  And as we were dealing with that, he started 
gravitating to the letter of the 24 t h of Mr Molefe.   
And the point that I wanted to make or that I would 
have made was, if we are going to put a submission to a 
20 
witness to say, I submit or I put it to you that this is the 
interpretation.   
One tends to enter into a usual terrain with a none 
legal witness, let the hawk alight where the eagle spat.  
Because if you look at that letter, the very opening salvo 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 61 of 220 
 
talks about what animated her concerns.   
Her concerns were an irregularity that of neglect 
and the exorbitant amount of money that may have been 
paid at the time.  So she is following through.   
So I left it at that because I thought it may well be 
that when we make submissions we will have a look at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  And the Chair then summarised it in a 
manner 
that 
the 
witness 
said, 
I 
agree 
with 
the 
interpretation Chair.  And even with this matter of the 24 t h, 
10 
she – it is clear because we have read the affidavits.   
But a person watching this proceedings from home 
does not understand. And it is because of the Chair ’s 
intervention that she was able to say, actually the letter of 
the 24 t h is a sequel to mine of the 22 n d.   
So if I had received a summary of the progress 
report, which I do now two days later, it would have been 
nonsensical 
for 
me 
to 
write 
a 
letter 
about 
this 
interpretation we are quibbling.   
And I am simply trying to say, if Chair I am right in 
20 
saying, I have the right to come back not necessary ala re-
examination, but where a witness can give clarity to Chair 
every time.   
It has not happened so that we do not interrupt the 
floor.  Otherwise if I use it too late, it may well be that an 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 62 of 220 
 
opportunity may be squandered for the Commission.  Not 
for me, not for the witness to understand.  So I am placing 
my dilemma on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV MAJABA SC:  Ordinarily if we were in a criminal trial 
I will be up on my feet and raising objections. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  And it is not my style. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  I understand.  I think that 
my, my understanding of how you represent your clients 
10 
gives me comfort that if you were to ask for an opportunity 
to interrupt, it would really be because it is something 
quite serious.   
My understanding you are not appearing for the first 
time here.  My understanding is that you are really 
constructive, you want the Commission’s proceedings to go 
smoothly, but obviously you are looking after your client’s 
interest in the process.   
So I, I would say as far as possible keep your notes 
for – because I will give you a chance to re-exam and 
20 
during that time obviously where you think she might have 
given an answer that was based on a misunderstanding of 
the question, there can be clarification.   
I accept that there may be situations where it’s 
necessary to come in and not wait for later.  But I think 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 63 of 220 
 
those would not, those would be rare.  So, so I am sure 
that we can, we can handle the situation.   
ADV MAJABA SC:  And Chair in so saying I was not 
suggesting in any form or shape that Mr Soni was being 
unfair to the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  I think as long as we know where we 
are going … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  To ...[indistinct] nonetheless may be … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  Unnecessary.  But … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJABA SC:  Thank you Chair I will leave at that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine.  Thank you.  Mr 
Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And again it’s not a reflection on my 
learned friend or the witness.  I have read the response of 
the witness’ affidavit to what Mr Molefe said.  She has 
given a whole affidavit, including Annexure 7 and 8.   
20 
She responded to Annexure 7 in 10.4 – 10.2 which 
is what I had read to her.  Is why the issue had arisen.  
And she in her affidavit said, but look I am sorry had I 
received Annexure PNT, PN8 I, I would not have even 
written Annexure PM7.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 64 of 220 
 
So you must read Annexure PM7 together with PM8.  
But that, that’s what she had said today.  But that is not 
what she said in her affidavit, which is why the question 
had took place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, I think I am satisfied that we 
can go, go on.  Mr Majaba has a full understanding and … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He will be noting areas that might need 
clarification for later.  Ja.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Absolutely and he must be entitled to 
10 
do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no.  That’s fine.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now Ms Peters, this is what I want to 
ask you next, did you respond to Mr Molefe’s letter, when 
you have told the Court, I mean you have told the 
Commission today that look had I received or had this what 
is set out in this letter been sent to me, I would have 
understood what it is.   
I would not have asked for their report.  Did you 
respond to this letter from Mr Molefe?  The letter of the 
20 
24 t h of August? 
MS PETERS:  Chairperson I don’t remember full whether I 
ever responded to that letter.  Except to say that there was 
a meeting some time ...[indistinct], so I don’t know whether 
I responded in writing.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 65 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay, because I tell you why I ask 
this.  If you look at that letter in the very last paragraph of 
the letter at page 166, Mr Molefe says, hadn’t set out what 
the position of the board is.  He says: 
“I trust that this clarifies the board’s stance in this 
regard with showing correspondence to follow by 
the end of August provide you a detailed report of 
the forensic investigation undertaken by Werksmans 
Attorneys on the board’s instructions.” 
Now two questions; did you receive such a report from the 
10 
Board? 
MS PETERS:   I do not remember receiving it because at 
that time we were preparing already towards the AGM of 
the company, so I would need to go back and find out, I do 
not remember Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But I also understood you to say that 
you had talked, then is it possible in that talk you had said 
to him, but do not worry about the report because what you 
have said to me, satisfies me that these investigations 
should not continue.   I am just asking, because you have 
20 
not complained about the fact that there was no report.  
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, in talking to Mr Molefe the 
only thing that I said to him is, when are you going to make 
sure that this issue of the appointment of Werksmans get 
regularised because we go now into the third or fourth year 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 66 of 220 
 
of this, it was actually the 30 t h of this investigation, and in 
terms of the PFMA, it cannot be at all times, unforeseen, 
an unplanned Chairperson.  
And my concern was can the Board regularise this 
then create an avenue where again it becomes an audit 
finding because that was the issue Chairperson, that this 
investigation - can you okay now we have got this report 
that you promised that by the end of August, you will 
present to me because we then said, they are going to do a 
consolidated report, they will present the report. 
10 
But I then said over and above the consolidated 
report - again I am speaking to Comrade Popo Molefe a 
leader in this environment to say get your Board to 
regularise this appointment so that we do not end up again 
– Chairperson no two wrongs makes a right.  You are 
chasing, and I will make an example, you are chasing like 
you use to say I am chasing the thieves, I said you are 
chasing the thieves but you going about chasing the 
thieves in the wrong way where you end up being found at 
fault for violating the procedures.  
20 
 
I even said to him [speaking in vernacular], if you find 
your house burning down you see that Dipuo is responsible 
for burning down your house, you know it is that Dipuo.  Do 
you know choose people instead of putting out the fire and 
then get the relevant agencies to chase Dipuo because you 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 67 of 220 
 
have seen Dipuo has burned down, your house.  And I was 
saying to him in an idiomatic expression you need to focus 
on the key other issues that are related to PRASA as a 
company which are related to the performance of the 
company that trains the finances and all those, whereas 
the investigation is ongoing in my mind, I was satisfied 
with the meeting that we had held in my office where they 
have a clear indication that we are going to consolidate all 
this investigation.  
 
And we even said we did acknowledge that these 
10 
investigations have got a tendency of running for years and 
now that they are under National Treasury, you need not 
even have the fear of the budget and all those because it 
would have to be in their budget to be able to do that work.  
And in that way – and it is taking me back to advice that I 
once got from one of our leaders who passed away 
Ambassador Maseko.  He used to say and that time he was 
an Ambassador in Namibia.  One thing - and he was giving 
good advice as a leader and a father.  In the way in which 
you do your work do it in such a nature that you do not 
20 
have challenges later because of either things – in fact he 
told me that because either or, he said if it is a matter of 
not doing your work because of some limitations of a 
training 
whatever 
you 
can 
be 
trained. 
[speaking 
in 
vernacular]. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 68 of 220 
 
So in my doing of my work…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remember to give us a translation as 
well, because not all your response would be understood 
by everybody. 
MS PETERS:   I have this advice from a leader and the 
advice from this leader was to the effect that, in the way in 
the way in which you do your work, you must do it 
effectively, you must do it to the best of your ability, but 
one 
of 
the 
challenges 
of 
working 
in 
a 
government 
environment he said is that rather be found for your 
10 
inability to do some work as opposed to being a thief, for a 
lack of a better word.  And I always carried that in the back 
of my mind because I really because he said it clearly that, 
a 
thief 
cannot 
be 
trained 
differently 
[speaking 
in 
vernacular].   
But if you have got limitations in terms of the ability 
to do work you can be trained, you can be re-skilled and if 
it was wrong for me not to write to Mr Popo Molefe in terms 
of this method that you had written that showed that they 
do have a report.  Remember in his affidavit he says they 
20 
were going to, at the end of that month of August present 
me 
with 
a 
consolidated 
report 
with 
regard 
to 
this 
Werksmans report and that is what we were waiting for. 
And I want to put it on record in the beginning when 
the investigation was with – what is this, Werksmans there 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 69 of 220 
 
were not an issue that needed to be investigated in 
PRASA. I agreed with Dada Molefe to say there are those 
things that truly need the organisation to follow, which is 
those that worked 350, the payments and the advance 
payments, because there were allegations from the AG’s 
report that service providers were paid to be able to do 
work so that they get paid before they do it. 
That is wrong that is where they were irregular and 
then Chairperson there was also investigations, one of the 
things that were cited, in this report of the AG was the 
10 
issue related to the rolling stock and to the signatories and 
whatever and I said to Dada Molefe me and you growing up 
in South Africa knowing the challenges Chairperson of the 
passenger rail system and they that are putting in the 
system you know that we have to save especially the 
hoodwinks[?] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, okay, okay. 
MS PETERS:   That is why this podium does not give one 
chance to explain some of even the challenges the ones 
had to experience. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I think you - what emerges from 
your answer is either that you did not respond in writing to 
Mr Popo Molefe’s letter, or you cannot remember whether 
you did respond, but you say that there was a meeting that 
the two of you had, after his response to your letter, ja, 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 70 of 220 
 
that much you saying, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, you might recall that I said to 
you, Mr Molefe’s letter is that the 24 t h of August 2016.  On 
the 25 t h of August 2015 or 2016.  Mr Molefe know in an 
affidavit which had major repercussions or his standing in 
the ANC, certainly according to what appears to have 
happened in Parliament.  
MS PETERS:   Come again? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What I am saying to you, on the 25 t h 
of August, Mr Molefe an affidavit in this refundable matter, 
10 
which according to what appears to have happened in 
Parliament, had a major impact on the Parliamentarians, 
the ANC Parliamentarians approach to him and I am come 
back to that in a moment, but I want to first deal with the 
allegations he made on the 25 t h of August 2016.  There 
contained in his replying affidavit, parts of which appear at 
page 259 of bundle D. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   259, Chairperson that is the first 
page and the because the allegations appears…[intervene] 
20 
MS PETERS:   259 of? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   259 of bundle D, that is Mr Molefe’s 
replying affidavit.  Now, I do not want to go through the 
whole 
thing, 
but 
this 
is 
a 
replying 
affidavit 
in 
the 
refundable matter, that is the R3.5billion contract that we 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 71 of 220 
 
talked about yesterday, and this is what he says if you go 
to page 262 he talks about what he was told by a Mr 
Auswell Mashaba. 
Mr Mashaba told us…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry; I am sorry what I have at 
page 259 is the first page of Mr Molefe’s entire affidavit 
but the next page relates to Mr Mamobolo’s affidavit.  I do 
not have the other pages of Mr Molefe’s affidavit that starts 
at page 259.  So from 259, my bundle skips to 277.  I do 
not know whether I may have taken out the affidavit myself 
10 
to read it and then did not replace it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What somebody did I tell you why 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When Mr Molefe gave the affidavit we 
went as evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We went through this affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, is there a spare one by any chance 
and then arrangements can just be made for replacement 
20 
pages.  I see that we have gone past quarter past 11 but 
since Ms Peters has to leave by quarter to…[intervene] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought we would take the tea break a 
little later. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 72 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, as you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that she can take leave and then 
arrangements would be made for when we can continue, 
okay alright.  Thank you, so you said we must go to page 
261, yes I am there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   262, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   262? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well, he says that: 
10 
“Mr Mashaba told him that he was aware that this 
refundable agenda was under investigation.” 
And then on the next page he says: 
“Mr Mashaba told him in addition that through his 
involvement that Mr Mashaba is involved with Mr 
Mabinde he had been in contact with a Maria 
Gomez 
who 
had 
initially 
contacted 
him 
telephonically.” 
Then Mr Molefe says: 
“Mr Mashaba explained that he met with Ms Gomez, 
20 
Ms Gomez told him that Mr Mashaba, that she 
wanted money for the movement.” 
Ms Gomez also told him: 
“That she need the bid to supply locomotives to 
PRASA with values and she could not understand 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 73 of 220 
 
why 10% of the value of the debt could not be paid 
to the African National Congress.  Ms Gomez was 
insistent 
that 
the 
money 
should 
go 
to 
the 
movement.” 
In paragraph 9.11: 
“Mr Mashaba explained further that Mr Mabinda had 
instructed him to pay some of the money received 
from PRASA into specific accounts without Mr 
Mashaba knowing who has been paid, or the reason 
for the payment.  Mr Mashaba was insistent that he 
10 
did not know the identity of the beneficiaries and he 
was merely informed that the money would be 
benefit of benefit for the movement.” 
Now, 
when 
did 
you 
first 
become 
aware 
of 
these 
allegations?  
MS PETERS:   I became aware of these allegations in – 
through the – first it was in the public space based on the 
submission of Mr Molefe to the courts.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, what was your reaction to it?  
MS PETERS:   I asked him, Mr Molefe about this and then 
20 
he explained that there was this matter and he is following 
up with the investigation, and we left it as such. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Is that the total reaction?  
MS PETERS:   Not the discussions between him and 
Mashaba just that there was Swifambo and there was 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 74 of 220 
 
allegations that certain amount of money from Swifambo 
flew in back into the African National Congress, that is 
what I read. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Were you concerned about, firstly, 
the allegations being made? 
MS PETERS:   I was concerned definitely Chairperson, and 
I think there was even an interview that I did with the 
Sunday Times newspaper, after I had also called on Mr 
Molefe to verify these stories in the papers, and he 
confirmed to me that that is part of the investigation, and it 
10 
is going to help PRASA to recoup the money. 
And Chairperson earlier on when you stopped me, I 
was coming to these two points about this investigation, 
the one of Swifambo and the one of the new modernisation 
trains to say….[intervene] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Siyangena  ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   No, not Siyangena, Siyangena is the 
signalling and other things, there was this issue of - there 
was a finding related to the trains to be built. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
20 
MS PETERS:   And I said to him, they must ensure that the 
urgently deal with these matters and respond to it so that 
they can release.  Remember Chairperson, there was going 
to be about R53billion investment into the country for the 
new trains, the factory to be build, to do the supplying 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 75 of 220 
 
components, and also the training of our young people with 
technology, 
I 
mean 
techniques 
and 
skills 
that 
are 
necessary for the rail industry.  
So it was lots of investment that I said to him, we 
need to make sure that this one is dealt with so that the 
work can start.  Our people are unemployed, it is affecting 
the data, we need to make sure that that one is unfolded.  
We agreed and then these others like those Swifambo and 
Siyangena and other others, that you are investigating, go 
ahead and investigate this particular matter.  There was 
10 
no, never a time when we did not agree on the need for 
investigating this particular issues. 
When the story about the money that flow through 
the ANC came, it was not a discussion, it was not well 
submitted in the court papers, and I even said now that 
this matter is an investigation, and I said, and I am still 
believing it what I said to the journalist at the Sunday 
Times. If I was the Treasurer General of the African 
National 
Congress, 
I 
would 
also 
oversight 
of 
the 
investigation of the element and its entity with regards to 
20 
this procurement.   
Investigate these people who are said to have 
received money in the name of the African National 
Congress, because for me as a member of the ANC, it was 
not good that people go around doing whatever they do 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 76 of 220 
 
and later on it is said that the money sneaked to the ANC.   
So the ANC had to investigate that, whether he 
investigated I do not know because I made a public 
statement that was in the Sunday Times to say, I said go 
ahead and investigate on your side as the ANC because if 
there are people who are going around making money for 
themselves and their families in the name of the ANC it is 
not, it is also incorrect because the name of the ANC is 
always brought into these procurements unnecessarily so 
because certain people will do one random things, and 
10 
then say I did it for the ANC, which is not true. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni I proposed that we should stop 
with Ms Peters evidence at half past it is in five minutes’ 
time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then I take the tea break then she is 
released.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I know she is available up to quarter to, 
20 
but we take a tea break at half past because in any event, 
we are not going to finish with her evidence.  So I am just 
mentioning so that in terms of what is left. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, can I – Chairperson it may take 
a couple of minutes more than five, is that going to be?  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 77 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, can I then ask you to look 
at Parliamentary bundle 3, page 382 on the left hand side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I take it that a couple is more than five 
minutes but not ten. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That I do not think so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I am thinking about seven or so. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   The bundle? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Bundle 3, page 382.  
10 
MS PETERS:   Eight? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   382.   
MS PETERS:   382, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Remember, Mr Molefe’s affidavit is 
dated the 26 t h of August, as you have said it was widely 
reported in the newspapers.  Now on the 21 s t of August 
2016 this matter came up before the Portfolio Committee 
and this is what Mr De Freitas says about, he says: 
“At the meeting held on the 21 s t of August - this is 
of the Portfolio Committee - the acting CEO Mr 
20 
Collins 
Letsoalo 
explains 
that 
PRASA 
had 
a 
dysfunctional administrative system.  He explained 
that only 20 executives were required as opposed to 
the current 65.  He claimed that it appeared that 
PRASA Board members were telling themselves 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 78 of 220 
 
additional unauthorised remuneration, Mr Sibanda 
expressed concern that the Board members retain 
themselves.”  
Now, I just want to deal with the first issue first, the one 
about 20 executives, as opposed is 65.  Have you been 
made aware of that before Mr Letsoalo raised it in 
Parliament? 
MS PETERS:   This matter Chair, like I indicated was going 
to be probably, be the subject of the meeting of the AGM 
because the AGM was coming.  We were working towards 
10 
the AGM; I have not as yet received a report with regard to 
these details.  But one thing that I knew from the history of 
engagement with PRASA was that it has a blow back 
structure, and the executives would be just moved willy 
nilly from across irrespective of their competencies and 
whatever. 
And 
I 
had 
requested 
the 
Board, 
remember 
Chairperson, I indicated yesterday that I had requested the 
Board to do a skills and competency and qualifications 
audit, so that they could then do a better matching and 
20 
placing within the organisation because there was just too 
many people who you did not know what they were doing, 
and others were all over.  
And there were a lot of labour related disputes of 
others who were dismissed, and the Board Chairperson at 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 79 of 220 
 
times took a decision to say some of those who were 
dismissed must just be brought back and it would have 
needed a particular review or an organisational design type 
of study to be able to get to that particular point.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then the next point that Mr De 
Freitas makes in this summary he says: 
“Mr Ramatlakane stated that recently, there have 
been an extraordinary Board meeting where a 
resolution had been taken to dismiss Mr Letsoalo.  
He 
requested 
PRASA 
and 
the 
Chairperson 
to 
10 
appraise the Portfolio Committee developments in 
this 
regard, 
and 
that 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
received a copy of the Board minutes.” 
Now, this is Mr De Freitas’s comment on this: 
“I got the distinct impression that this had been 
discussed by the ANC and there was an agenda of 
sorts to protect Mr Letsoalo.” 
You were not present at this meeting, is that correct?  
MS PETERS:   No Chair, I was not at the meeting.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, then Mr Molefe asks the 
20 
meeting if they could discuss the matter in committee, and 
that was refused.  Now I am raising all of this in the 
context of what I read to you in Mr Molefe’s affidavit 
because if you look at the next page, page 383 on the 
fourth paragraph this is what is reported Mr Ramatlakane 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 80 of 220 
 
stated: 
“That Popo Molefe had insinuated that the ANC had 
received R80million from PRASA.” 
And then he says this was a reference to articles that had 
been appeared in the newspapers and he gives the whole 
thing.  Then he says: 
“Molefe denied that he had made such a statement 
stating that he had heard allegations that PRASA 
had paid the ANC R80million.  He explained that 
PRASA never gave the ANC money and he had 
10 
never made such claims.  He indicated what the 
media had reported were records before the court.” 
Then this is the response from Mr Ramatlakane he says: 
“He had a concern that PRASA’s spent R93million 
on private legal firm for services.” 
Now this is Mr De Freitas’s comment: 
“This was the ANC’s attempt at deflecting from the 
true issue of corruption by deflecting from the real 
problem, it was very clear that the ANC was 
positioning Molefe as the enemy or the bad guy in 
20 
this saga.” 
Now this is a commentator who is in Parliament, of course, 
he is in the opposition and one would expect him to say 
things that do not reflect well on the ANC.  But when you 
look at the two things that appears here, the first thing is 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 81 of 220 
 
that there is this story about corruption relating to this 
Swifambo contract from which a political party allegedly 
received R80million, and then R93million is spent in an 
investigations.  
Now, 
does 
it 
make 
sense 
that 
you 
would 
concentrate on the cost of the investigations, as opposed 
to allegations of corruption in an R3.5billion contract? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson I cannot answer for the 
Portfolio Committee, because I do not know the context of 
them arriving at this point, because usually what happens 
10 
is that the department and the Board would come and make 
their presentations, and then the questions and statements 
would flow from that. 
So I was not there, and I cannot make a case for 
what happened in the Portfolio Committee.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just want to read to you though, the 
second last line on…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have just gone to ten minutes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ja, can I just finish this Chairperson 
and I undertake that it will be my last point I want to make. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Gadebe, the ANC member on the 
committee suggested: 
“That the committee had to approach the South 
African Police Service to investigate investments, 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 82 of 220 
 
political and business links.” 
I am putting this in context and I know you are right; you 
cannot answer for them.  I am only making the point that 
that is what the fallout was, from what Mr Molefe disclosed 
and what Werksmans investigations have been, as he said 
it was probably procedurally flawed but there are two 
issues here.  Do you agree with that? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I am unable to relate to what 
Honourable De Freitas is referring to here with regards to 
the matters in the committee.  Usually after the committee, 
10 
the committee report would be tabled in Parliament, and 
what will be tabled in Parliament would be the decisions 
that the committee have made not the debates in the 
committee.  So Chairperson this is a reflection on the 
debates in the committee and like I indicated I was not 
probably part of that particular meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay Chairperson we will have to 
stop here.  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja, 
we 
will 
have 
to 
stop 
here, 
arrangements will be made for the Commission to hear the 
20 
balance of your evidence, and everything will be done to 
try and make sure that that happens as soon as possible.  
And if there is a need to have your evidence via video link 
or zoom in order to expedite that that can be done.  So, I 
will stop here.  Thank you very much and thank you to Mr 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 83 of 220 
 
Majava. 
MR MAJAVU:   Mr Majavu. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Majavu, I am sorry. 
MR MAJAVU:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is the second time…[intervene] 
MR MAJAVU:   Actually the third time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I have not done that before it is just 
today, ja.  Okay we will stop here.  Thank you very much, 
Ms Peters.  There was one question I wanted to ask just 
for clarity because I saw in some newspapers this morning, 
10 
they seem to portray your evidence in a manner that I 
thought was not correct.  But maybe let me ask, with 
regard to Mr Molefe’s evidence that at the meeting of the 
20 t h of August.  His, I think he says, one of the things that 
he says is that President Zuma said, Mr Montana's talent 
should not be lost to the country that is one, and two, he 
says he got the impression or it was clear to him.  He says 
one either one of the two that Mr Zuma wanted Mr Montana 
to be taken back at PRASA.  And your evidence with regard 
to the statement that Mr Zuma said Mr Montana's talents 
20 
should not be lost to the country.  What do you say, do you 
remember it, do you not remember it, do you say it never 
happened? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, remember that I indicated that 
every time the Board Chairperson came to inform me of the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 84 of 220 
 
fact that Mr Montana’s contract will be coming to an end 
and what they had discussed with him.  In fact, even him 
Mr Molefe was of the same mind with me at the time that 
this is something that we need to elaborate on, about how 
do we as a country, not PRASA utilise the knowledge 
institutional memory and the expertise must…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But remember because you have to 
catch a flight…[intervene] 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
This 
is 
to 
whether 
your 
10 
recollection…[intervene] 
MS PETERS:   Yes, I went to President Zuma and said to 
him that there are still CEO’s whose contracts are going to 
end, and I said they started with transport in 1994 we 
cannot lose them Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I remember that all I need is 
whether you have a recollection that Mr Zuma did say that 
at the meeting or you have no recollection, or you say he 
did not say it at the meeting? 
MS PETERS:   At the meeting I do not remember what 
20 
President 
Zuma 
had 
said 
that 
is 
why 
Chairperson 
remember I said there is a possibility that in there 
informal, it might have been raised but at the meeting, the 
President 
actually 
got 
exhausted 
before 
the 
meeting 
finalised.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 85 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   They could not conclude that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Now of course, when I 
was putting certain questions to you yesterday, you did say 
and you must tell me if I misunderstood you, that you 
understood the proposition that President Zuma must have 
said something that made Mr Molefe invite him to come to 
the Board and address it so as to understand the rationale 
of the Board's decision not to or to release, Mr Montana.  I 
think you said you can understand the logic that he must 
10 
have said something, is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson but also knowing that Mr 
Montana's was lobbying and I want to just put it on record 
here that probably Mr Montana’s attitude towards me is 
based on the fact that when he lobbied me I said it is a no 
and there he goes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes and I think I did say yesterday 
make the proposition that on the face of it, it seems that, it 
seems logical that Mr Zuma must have said something that 
suggested that he did not understand the rationale of the 
20 
Board's decision to release Mr Montana, you had no 
quarrel with that, is that right? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson the only thing I think you 
remember Mr Zuma said Mr Molefe and Mr Montana and 
myself are ANC members, [speaking in vernacular] 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 86 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, why are you fighting. 
MS PETERS:   Why are you fighting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright I will release you now.  I 
will take the tea break and we will resume at 12 o'clock 
and then we will start with the next witness.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are excused. 
MR 
MAJAVU: 
 
 
Chair 
might 
I 
also 
be 
excused, 
Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR MAJAVU:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
MS PETERS:    Thank you.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready?  Just put on your – ja.  
Okay.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chairperson the 
next issue we are going to deal with is the matters raised 
about 
the 
appointment 
…[indistinct] 
to 
do 
with 
the 
20 
investigation.  And as you would have realised it’s 
something that has appeared on an off our radar screen 
from the time Mr Molefe gave evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What we intend doing Chairperson is 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 87 of 220 
 
Ms Ngoye has prepared a report with the Chairperson of 
the new board, which is a fairly recent report, prepared at 
the end of last year.   
And she has made that report available to us and 
she will talk to that report which sets out all the facts 
certainly as presented by her.  We have then Ms Manase, 
an affidavit from Ms Manase.  We have an affidavit from Mr 
Hobbs from Birkmans(?) and effectively as you said 
yesterday Chairperson, the facts, the essential facts are 
not in dispute.   
10 
There may be issues here and there where there is 
a difference, but the question really would be, have the 
provisions of Section 217 in compliance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat that.  That question would 
be? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Have the provisions of Section 217 
been complied with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  217(1) Of the Constitution.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well to the extent that that’s the 
20 
question, really one does need to spend a lot of time for on 
the issue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because once the facts are undisputed, 
it’s a question of applying the law to the facts and even 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 88 of 220 
 
answer to that question. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if, if there is no suggestion by 
anybody that to the extent that there may, there might not 
have been compliance with Section 217 and whatever other 
provisions of the law, if there is nobody who suggests that, 
that none compliance was deliberate in a sense that 
somebody knew it was wrong and did it.  Or some ulterior 
motive, then, then really one does not need to spend too 
much time on the issue. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Absolutely Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Except may I make this point here 
Chairperson, the one of the reasons that just necessary to 
air this issue is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I agree.  I agree.  I agree.  No I 
agree that it should be aired.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Publicly.  It is just that there might be no 
need to spend too much time on it. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Absolutely, absolutely.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Good morning Ms Ngoye.   
MS NGOYE:  Good morning Chair.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 89 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are back? 
MS NGOYE:  I am back Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. Thank you for coming 
back. 
MS NGOYE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  May the witness be sworn in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Registrar please administer the oath of 
the nation.   
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
10 
MS NGOYE:  Onica Martha Ngoye. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS NGOYE:  No I don’t. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth?  If so please raise your right hand and say, 
20 
so help me God. 
MS NGOYE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, you may proceed Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Ms Ngoye 
you have given evidence before this … 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 90 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you can just announce for the, the 
Court which bundle we are … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh yes, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Using now.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson there would be two 
bundles we will be looking at while Ms Ngoye is giving 
evidence.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  E2, which is her affidavit in relation to 
this matter. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then there will be a reference to 
what mister, Ms Manase says in her affidavit and what Mr 
Hobbs says in his affidavit.  And those appear at Bundle M.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye as the Chairperson 
indicated you have been here before.  Is that correct? 
MS NGOYE:  It is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you’ve given evidence here 
before? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  Yes I have Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now I just want to place on record, 
because you have asked me to do this that you on the 
previous occasions you came, you dealt in general with 
matters relating to corruption at PRASA, the manner in 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 91 of 220 
 
which the former CEO Mr Montana ran PRASA.   
But in particular you dealt with the problems that 
were found with the appointment or the award of a, several 
contracts to Siyangena with about 2,8 billion rand, is that 
correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And of course there were other 
matters like the Siyaya matters and so on. But well let’s 
leave that out for the time being.  Today you are being 
called on to deal with an entirely different matter and that 
10 
is 
the 
appointment 
of 
Werksmans 
to 
conduct 
the 
investigation.  But before you, before I go on, I understand 
you want to address the Chair on something. 
MS NGOYE:  Chair if I may please, may I be given an 
opportunity to address you? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And in fact I have put my thoughts in writing 
Chair so that I am not all over the show.  If you will also 
allow me, because it is quite emotive for me … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  To go through this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MS NGOYE:  This is about you know the mixed emotions 
Chair that I had coming back to the Commission this time.  
In light of what has transpired.  And you will note in my 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 92 of 220 
 
affidavit I do state that I am no longer employed at PRASA.    
And I just penned some notes down Chair so that 
you, I think it is important for us as whistleblowers to 
express this frustration that we have had to deal with.  
And, and with your permission Chair if may please … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine. 
MS NGOYE:  Read what I have written.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  You know I start off by saying from the 
inception of the Commission, Chair you made an impatient 
10 
call to people who are aware of instances of State Capture 
to come to the Commission, to share the information with 
the Commission.   
The people who will have direct evidence of State 
Capture, are people that witnessed it closely.  These 
people fall in a number of categories, and I list those 
categories.  These are the proponents of State Capture 
who directly benefitted from the Capture, I say these are 
the main actors.   
I talk to person who assisted the actors, knowingly 
20 
and benefitted indirectly by being appointed to positions 
that they did not deserve.  Earning salaries that they did 
not deserve.  Or being afforded privileges that they did not 
deserve.  Like coal and overseas trips, local and overseas 
trips and the purporting act.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 93 of 220 
 
I talked to persons who watched the State Capture 
unfold before their eyes and did nothing about it.  Or 
looked the other way and also, also persons who steps to 
fight the State Capture.   
And I call those the villains to the Capture.  And I 
do regard myself as one of those.  Now the only people in 
my view that has come and can come to the Commission 
are those that are regarded as villains.   
Right, by the main actors and the supporting acts, 
the overwhelming majority of these people are people who 
10 
were pushed out of their jobs and have been rendered 
lepers by the stance that they took against Capture.   
Because Capture is collusion between the public 
sector and the private sector, both sectors regard these 
people as dangerous and refuse to touch them.  It is a 
reality Chair.  It’s been there, we know, we know about it.   
So when I first came to the Commission, I was 
regarded as a villain.  I was still employed at PRASA so I 
came into the Commission being an employee of an 
organisation I was giving evidence about.   
20 
At the time, after a number of attempts to push me 
out of PRASA for spurious reasons Chair, they failed, 
obviously.  I still was employed at PRASA and protecting 
the interests of PRASA, from enemies of PRASA, both 
inside and outside.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 94 of 220 
 
Now what happened to me Chair is that on the 29 t h 
of January, this year, the board of PRASA and I must state 
the current board is only three, three, four months at 
PRASA.  And the Acting Group CEO of PRASA file another 
spurious and unlawful reason to push me out of PRASA.   
The approach that they took was simply to write a 
dismissal letter on the 21 s t of – the 29 t h of January this 
year, so that I then can be forced to use my resources, 
which they have blocked anyway you know to fight against 
this injustice.   
10 
Whilst …[indistinct] the State resources you know 
are to maintain their unlawful act.  And I say this is, this is 
very critical for me Chair, it goes really to the heart of, of 
what one is experiencing right now.   
I say further, nothing prevented the board from 
affording me a hearing before taking this drastic decision.  
However, affording me a hearing had an inherent risk in 
placing a spotlight on the unlawfulness of their action.   
They could not afford that.  So the easy way was to 
conduct 
a 
review 
of 
my 
contract 
of 
employment 
20 
themselves, and find a clause and a policy that is nowhere 
in my contract and of a policy that does not exist in PRASA 
to dismiss me with immediate effect, on the basis that my 
contract had expired.   
In fact what they said is that it expired in 2019.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 95 of 220 
 
The day after my unlawful dismissal, what they did Chair is 
that they reduced PRASA to an organisation which in my 
view suffered from an inexplicable bout of bitterness 
against me.  They launched a smear campaign against me.   
They issued media release that said, that my 
contract had lapsed a few years ago, I was aware of this 
and I did not advise PRASA accordingly.  Chair, I mean I 
am a legal person you know, you know.  I do not have to 
say much on that.   
In my position I was expected that in my position as 
10 
the Head of Legal, I was to tell the organisation that my 
contract had expired.  And I had not done so.  Therefore 
you know there were issues of distrust.   
Then they go further Chair and they accuse me of 
having unlawfully approved a transaction of an amount, a 
payment in fact they say of 58 million rand to a company 
called SA Fence and Gate.   
Mr Montana talks to this thing in his affidavit.  I 
have dealt with it, unfortunately we have not had an 
opportunity to deal with that.  And also what they say, is 
20 
that my suspension by Mr Montana was lawful.   
Now you will recall Chair I dealt with this.  You 
know and I am not going to go through it.  And I say to you 
Chair, that the above are all not true.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry, did you say, the current board. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 96 of 220 
 
MS NGOYE:  The current board Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which you say is, has been at PRASA 
four months? 
MS NGOYE:  It’s about – ja it’s four months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are saying your suspension by Mr 
Montana was … 
MS NGOYE:  Was lawful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A number of years ago. 
MS NGOYE:  Was lawful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was lawful. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Why did they have to go, go to that, go 
back that issue of you … 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Understand or do you not understand. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja, I don’t know.  And this is why I am saying 
you know the bitterness invoked this thing, they couldn’t 
hide within them and therefore they felt that they even 
needed to go back to you know all those issues.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And they were not there at the time? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  And they were not there at the time.  They 
were not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They don’t know the facts.   
MS NGOYE:  Ja, they don’t know the facts.  They have 
never asked me, they have never engaged me.  My view 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 97 of 220 
 
Chair and it’s a strong view that I have and I believe that I 
have, is that they have been engaging with Mr Montana.   
Because all these issues are issues that are arising 
out of the affidavit of Mr Montana, to which I have 
responded.  You know.  And they have never bothered to 
ask me or communicate with me in any respect.  But they 
went to the public and my view is that the issues that they 
were raising in any event at the time were not in the public 
interest.   
They terminate my contract you know and they say, 
10 
I have overstayed my welcome at PRASA.  As I am not sure 
why that is, is of public interest.  Because what then 
happened is that the first opportunity that the media had, 
as a breaking story, this was reported to say the Head of 
Legal, PRASA, you know and all this things.   
It’s out there in the media.  And they defamed my 
character when they did that.  Now the reality Chair is that 
you know when an, when an organisation like PRASA sends 
a statement like this to the media, they will latch onto it 
you know.   
20 
And this is exactly what happened.  So it was 
breaking news on the Saturday of, of the 29 t h, 30 t h of 
January.  Now I do say at the time they released this thing, 
the board had been there for three months.  Right.  They 
had interacted with me.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 98 of 220 
 
See, I was a member of some of the subcommittees 
of the Chair.  There – also of the board.  They also invited 
me in my capacity as the Group Executive of Legal Risk 
and Compliance into the board meetings.  So I sat there.   
And what I also did is that as part of the reporting 
to the board, I, I would report on litigation matters which I 
dealt with.  Fence and Gate was one of them.  The one that 
they are accusing me of, of having paid or advanced 
payment for.   
So for me that media statement clearly reflected 
10 
that they hadn’t even bothered to read the reports that I 
had sent to them.  But be that as it may Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, just one second.  Mr Soni, we have 
got to see how this should be handled.  Because I think, 
while it is quite fine that Ms Ngoye can talk to the 
Commission 
about 
the 
challenges, 
that 
whistleblower 
space, because … 
MS NGOYE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is a very important … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Letter. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Part.  But to the extent that … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry Chairperson can I, I have been 
asked … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can’t hear me? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 99 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  To the extent or maybe let me 
start so that they can hear.  I was saying we need to look 
at how to handle this, because while it is important that the 
Commission 
gets 
to 
know 
whatever 
challenges 
whistleblowers you know face, because maybe some of the 
things that the Commission is looking into might not have 
happened 
if 
there 
was 
a 
proper 
environment 
for 
whistleblowers … 
MS NGOYE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And proper protection.  And it may be 
10 
that the Commission will need to make recommendations 
with regard to the protection of whistleblowers, to the 
extent 
that 
her 
statement 
might 
be 
making 
certain 
accusations against certain people.  The question would be 
whether we have notified them.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see so … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It may be that it is something that we 
should hear, but after, after that be notified that she would 
20 
be, she will be here on a certain date and she will talk 
about the challenges.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That whistleblowers face and in the 
course of addressing that issue, she will implicate them in 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 100 of 220 
 
certain things. 
MS NGOYE:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, so, so maybe we should … 
MS NGOYE:  Wrap it up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To put it that way, so you, you ought to 
get another opportunity.  But after this due process.  What 
do you think Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes Chairperson, I would with respect 
we had not thought about it.  I didn’t understand that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Persons would be implicated.  I 
thought it was going to be a general statement.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Hadn’t seen the statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But, but with respect Chairperson you 
are absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We don’t want to be accused … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of the same thing that they have been 
accused of.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is being unprocedural – being 
procedurally unfair to them.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 101 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja, so, so basically we are 
interested in hearing those challenges Ms Ngoye, but just 
to do the due process … 
MS NGOYE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so arrangements will be made for 
you to, to add this properly. 
MS NGOYE:  I understand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MS NGOYE:  And thanks for the opportunity.  I think it is 
important because … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no. 
MS NGOYE:  It is what it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are directly involved. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So sometimes it’s when you are directly 
involved it is not the same as when you are a distance 
away from … 
MS NGOYE:  Sure, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From the situation. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MS NGOYE:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson then the process as far 
as this issue goes will be, we will get a copy of Ms Ngoye’s 
statement and serve it in terms of Rule 33 … 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 102 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  On the different implicated persons. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, no that is fine.   
MS NGOYE:  Thank you Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye, may I just to finish that 
though, your matter came up before the Labour Court as an 
urgent application, is that correct? 
MS 
NGOYE: 
 That’s 
correct 
Chair, 
this 
is 
unlawful 
dismissal. We brought an urgent application, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you haven’t, all that’s happening, 
10 
all that’s awaited now is the judgment of …[indistinct]. 
MS NGOYE:  That’s correct Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright Ms Ngoye then, then in regard 
and let me apologise that these matters are, these things 
are happening to you, it won’t be fair for me to say that 
they are attributed to your being here, because I would be 
prejudging your situation.  But I, I just express a concern 
that it is happening to somebody like you. 
MS NGOYE:  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I ask you then … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do remember to speak up a bit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry, sorry.  Sorry sir.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I couldn’t hear some of the words. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 103 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I just, I was person to person I was 
saying to Ms Ngoye that I was sorry that somebody like her 
is facing this with, without saying that there is a link 
between, the fact that she gave evidence and what is 
happening because that still is a matter that would need to 
be heard.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now Ms Ngoye in regard to the matter 
you are going to testify today, you have made an affidavit 
and that appears at Bundle E2, starting at page 656 and 
10 
ending at page 657.  Is that correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That’s correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that affidavit has an annexure 
which is a memorandum which contains the much of the 
contents of the evidence you are about to give today.  
MS NGOYE:  That’s correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh, now in regard to the affidavit, do 
you confirm that what is contained in the affidavit is true 
and correct? 
MS NGOYE:  I do Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in regard to the memorandum 
itself, do you confirm that what’s contained in there is true 
and correct? 
MS NGOYE:  I do Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then may I ask, ask leave for Ms 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 104 of 220 
 
Ngoye’s affidavit to be admitted as SES7 and it will be 
placed in Bundle E2.   
CHAIRPERSON:  The, the affidavit of Ms Onica Martha 
Ngoye, starting at page 656, red numbers, as admitted 
together with its annexures as EXHIBIT SS7. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As, as you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now Ms Ngoye can I just ask, can I 
just ask that, so that it is properly identified you’ve made 
four other affidavits before the Commission, am I right? 
10 
MS NGOYE:  That’s correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, just to distinguish it, 
instead of simply saying it is SS7, we call it SS7E, 
because there are the previous ones.  I am told now that 
those … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are they SS7A, B, C, D?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In terms of the new index we have 
been given, that’s how it is.  And I think that index is in 
your bundle as well Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but were they admitted and given 
20 
that label? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No.  That’s why I didn’t want to, to 
introduce something that was not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, because it could cause confusion. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Absolutely Chairperson. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 105 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, do you know whether there is 
SS7.1?  Because if there isn’t maybe we can make this 
SS7.1. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  There isn’t an SS7.1 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, shouldn’t we do that? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  That, that would be pref … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then, then we will refer to SS7.1. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the affidavit of Ms Onica Martha 
Ngoye, which starts at page 656 of PRASA bundle. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  E2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  E2.  Is admitted as EXHIBIT SS7.1.  I am 
correcting the previous exhibit number.  I said earlier it 
would be EXHIBIT SS7, but I am now amending that it will 
be EXIBIT SS7.1. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now Ms Ngoye can I just ask, as you 
regard the memorandum which is Annexure 1 to your 
affidavit, can you briefly tell the Chairperson how it came 
20 
about that that memorandum was compiled? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair, one of the issues that the board, the 
current board as I indicate it’s a new board at PRASA, 
wanted 
to 
understand 
and 
get 
clarity 
on, 
was 
the 
appointment of Werksmans.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 106 of 220 
 
In 
fact 
who 
had 
appointed 
Werksmans, 
what 
processes were followed when Werksmans was appointed 
and what the involvement of the legal department were or 
was in the, in the appointment of Werksmans.   
The understanding that was, that is I got from the 
questions that were raised by the board, was that perhaps 
also the legal department had played a role in the 
appointment of Werksmans.   
And we sought to clarify that.  And, and indicate our 
involvement as the legal department, you know, in the 
10 
investigations and how it came about that we as the legal 
department of PRASA became involved in the, in the 
investigations themselves.   
In fact Chair if I may say, we’ve done this report for 
all the other previous boards in fact, that is one of the first 
things a lot of the boards have come in and have said, we 
want to know, give us the Werksmans report and their 
appointment thereof.   
So this is the basis of, of this report where the 
board said put it down in writing and tell us what has 
20 
transpired.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in, in the memorandum and the 
memorandum is dated the 21 s t of December 2020, is that 
correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That’s correct Chair. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 107 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Who compiled the memorandum? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair I compiled this memorandum together 
with Mr Fani Dingiswayo who was the General Manager of 
Legal at the time.  He has since left the organisation.   
So because we have been dealing with this matter, 
the both of us throughout, so we compiled it together and 
sent it to the board.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now Mr Dingiswayo has given 
evidence before this Commission as well. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair he has. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is he still employed at PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair, in fact he left on the 29 t h of – the 
end of, at the end of January. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright.  Now in paragraph 2 of the 
memorandum, 
you 
point 
out 
that 
as 
regards 
the 
appointment of Werksmans, there were two – sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni, we just have to be consistent 
whether we call it a report or we call it a memorandum. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Otherwise whoever reads … 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of things you are referring to, some … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And other documents.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, sure. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 108 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is headed memorandum, so perhaps 
we 
should 
stick 
to 
that 
Chairperson. 
 
So 
in 
this 
memorandum in paragraph 2, you refer to two other 
investigations regarding the appointment of Werksmans.   
As you would have heard the Chairperson say, the 
facts are not in dispute.  We needn’t go into details.  But 
were those two appointments, those two investigations? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair the first investigation was done by the 
Auditor General.  There would be an audit and the second 
10 
investigation in fact was commissioned.  It is not so long 
ago.  It was done by the SIU where I think it was part of 
the proclamation that was issued by the President to have 
Werksmans appointment also investigated in there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in paragraph 2.2 you say that 
the AG had found that the – Auditor General had found that 
the appointment contravened Section 214 ... (indistinct) 
the Constitution. 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct.  That was the finding that 
was made by the Auditor General. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I am just placing on record that 
in his affidavit Mr Hotz disputes that.  That is of course a 
legal ... (indistinct), I am just placing it on record because 
he may not get a chance to come before the commission or 
he may chose not to come. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 109 of 220 
 
MS NGOYE:   I read Mr Hotz affidavit, yes I am aware of it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay and do you know what has 
happened to the SIU investigation? 
MS NGOYE:   I do not Chair in fact.  I mean we were also 
investigated by the SIU.  You know in terms of our 
involvement and so we gave our evidence to the SIU and 
we have not heard since as to you know where the matter 
is.  So I am not sure if it has been completed or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When did the SIU start its investigation 
or when did they interview PRASA ... (indistinct). 
10 
MS NGOYE:   Ja it started in 2020 Chair.  This was when 
the administrator was at PRASA and the momentum I 
suppose of the particular investigations took place and that 
is when they started interviewing us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you then set out in paragraph 
3.1 
how 
it 
came 
about 
that 
Werksmans 
had 
been 
appointed. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is the history. 
20 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just again in terms of context.  
At the time Werksmans were appointed must I understand 
that you and Mr Dingiswayo were on suspension? 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 110 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So that information that you are 
giving, you set out at paragraph 3.1 and 3.2, is based on 
what you have been told by a different persons? 
MS NGOYE:   Well some of it is Chair and some of it is 
what I know because we came back from suspension.  I 
think I came back on the 27 t h July and Werksmans letter of 
engagement was signed on the 6 t h August.  So I am aware 
of you know that process.  But in terms of what had 
transpired before I had been told to say this is what the 
board had decided and this is what happened. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did they start their investigation before 
the letter of engagement or ... (intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   No, no, no ... (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:   ... they only started after. 
MS NGOYE:   They started after Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We in Annexure BBH9 – perhaps I 
should just place this on record.  Mr Hotz has filed an 
affidavit which is with the commission or it is one of the 
documents before the commission that has not been 
20 
admitted yet.  It is Exhibit SS25 and it appears in bundle 
M. 
Now Mr Hotz in paragraph or sorry in Annexure 
BBH19 through his affidavit sets out how that came about.  
How the appointment came about.  If I could just briefly tell 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 111 of 220 
 
you what I understand the version to be.  That in fact it is 
correct that Ngubane was earmarked first to do the 
investigation.  But certain developments took place which 
resulted in the fact that Werksmans were appoint. 
Now I am just asking you in terms of your – you 
have looked at that.  Does that fit in with what you 
understand the facts to be? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So you accept the correctness of 
what is contained in BBH19? 
10 
MS NGOYE:   Yes I do Chair.  Insofar obviously as it 
relates to the timeframe you know that I was involved.  I do 
accept that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You see there is one important issue 
and I do not – I just say it is important as Mr Hotz wants to 
stress that there was never such a thing as the Ngubane 
consortium.  He is saying that their appointment effectively 
replaced the appointment of Ngubae in the circumstances 
described in his affidavit. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair that is what he says. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I do not want to be unfair to 
anybody.  But when I read Mr Hotz affidavit – I do not know 
whether somebody else’s affidavit.  It kind of gave the 
impression that Ngubane and then they have been aimed to 
be appointed for the project but Werksmans came into the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 112 of 220 
 
picture and kind of pushed them aside.  And then they were 
appointed.  It might be unfair. 
I am just saying when I was reading it looked like 
this whole idea of attorney client privilege may have been 
used ... (intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   Ja Chair I ... (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   I may be unfair to them. 
MS NGOYE:   So my understanding and I gave – counsel 
was asking about the Ngubane consortium.  I think we had 
referred to their being an Ngubane consortium – I think in 
10 
our speak.  Because we have understood that the entire 
team initially started as part of the Ngubane consortium 
because the initial letter that was signed for this particular 
investigation was with Ngubane. 
And what we understood was Ngubane would then 
bring in other sub-contractors and Werksmans would be 
one of them.  But obviously we were then told, no that was 
not the case.  In fact Ngubane was appointed first.  I think 
round about the 24 t h of July in 2015.  And then you know 
with further discussions that happened Werksmans was 
20 
introduced into the team. 
And because of that – the legal privilege as you say 
– attorney and client privilege the – they were not 
necessarily kicked out.  They remained as part of the team.  
But the lead was then taken by Werksmans. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 113 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now they became a sub-contractor. 
MS NGOYE:   That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja it is – it certainly came across to me 
when I was reading as if the attorney client privilege may 
have been used to make sure that Werksmans became the 
leader.  But as I say I may be unfair to them. 
MS NGOYE:   Ja ... (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Right or wrong that is the impression 
that I got and it may well be that there is a lot of work that 
should be attached to attorney and client privilege in these 
10 
investigations.  But I am not sure.  But it is – I was just 
saying that is the impression I got.  It may be a wrong 
impression. 
But it just came across as there is an accounting 
firm or a firm that was going to be given the work and to 
lead and then there was this big white law firm that came 
in.  Initially maybe it was not going – it was going to be 
sub-contractor.  And then the issue of attorney client 
privilege came in.  Became prominent and they ended up 
being the leader. 
20 
MS NGOYE:   Ja Chair let me explain perhaps just to give 
a bit of context as well.  When – or at least what we were 
told is that Regulation 16A of the treasury regulations was 
used to appoint Ngubane by the board.  But just through 
speaking to the company secretary as he was giving us 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 114 of 220 
 
feedback on what had transpired.  So we then indicated 
that Regulation 16A does not apply to PRASA. 
 
You know and the process that the board would 
have followed in appointing Ngubane would not have been 
correct.  And then – I think at the time that we got it we – 
Werksmans and the other sub-contractors were already you 
know part of the discussions.  And the question and I do 
allude to this in the report. 
 
To say the questions that then came back to us from 
the board was whether Werksmans was on the panel of 
10 
PRASA’s legal attorneys.  And we confirmed it because 
Werksmans had been doing work with PRASA at the time.  
So that is how effectively – I think perhaps maybe.  I do 
not know I am just also you know saying this is how I 
understand it happening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please.  Certainly from the 
letter Mr Hotz wrote and that letter which is BBH19 is 
addressed to the SIU following the meeting between 
Werksmans and the SIU relating to this very issue. 
20 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And he makes the point you made, 
namely that 16A did not apply – regulation – treasury 
regulation 16A did not apply and therefore the appointment 
of Ngubane would have been invalid.  But I am just saying 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 115 of 220 
 
that it is also contained in this letter. 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair, that is what the letter 
is saying. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright so that the appointment ... 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am just going to go back to 
this – the issue of attorney client.  We do not need to 
spend too much time on it.  And I know that you will – well 
you are testifying as somebody who was head of legal.  
And I guess that you would have experience of other 
10 
investigations being conducted at PRASA by other entities 
at some stage or another. 
MS NGOYE:   No this is the first one Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh was it the first one? 
MS NGOYE:   Ja this was the first investigation that I had 
to be involved or that I experienced with PRASA.  The 
other ones I was not ... (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I am just wondering at what stage 
the issue of – I mean now you investigate matters of 
corruption.  If you find that there is prima face evidence of 
20 
certain people having been involved ... (indistinct) that is 
going to be handed over to the law enforcement – police – 
law enforcement agency.  So why is attorney client 
privilege important? 
MS NGOYE:   What I guess you know from – the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 116 of 220 
 
understanding that I have Chair is that obviously when you 
deal with – and I understand what you saying in relation to 
law enforcement agencies.  That would have been ... 
(indistinct) anyway in terms of the law.  To say if you find 
anything unlawful you have to report it. 
 
But in relation to other matters perhaps that were 
confidential and that the board might not necessarily have 
wanted to be communicated or expressed out in the public  
before finalisation.  And I am assuming Chair this is the 
scenario.  That the attorney client privilege you know 
10 
would work and I think you know a client finds comfort ... 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Work against whom? 
MS NGOYE:   Sorry Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I know I am not cross-examining you ... 
(indistinct).  I am just trying to understand because if you 
are asked to investigate allegations of corruption you are 
going to interview with ... (indistinct).  You are going to 
interview implicated persons and you will prepare a report 
on the basis of that. 
20 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the idea is that if there are – and 
this is a public entity.  It is not a private company. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a public entity.  If there is money 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 117 of 220 
 
that has been ... (indistinct) taxpayers’ money. 
MS NGOYE:   That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you are going to take your report, 
give it to the board but as far as you are concerned, 
whatever is in your report about acts of corruption should 
go to the law enforcement agencies.  So who is going to 
invoke attorney client privilege?  Or whose benefit is 
attorney and client privilege in that case? 
Because the board should be wanting that your 
report should be handed over to law enforcement agencies 
10 
and the statements or affidavits that you got – you 
collected from people and exhibits and so on. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes.  Chair the way I understood, I mean as 
part of it and also from a client perspective you know 
clients, I guess they do find comfort with the fact that they 
do have that protection from attorneys.  But also the 
investigation 
involved 
obviously 
employees 
being 
investigated.  The names of people in the reports and so 
on. 
 
And what I had understood is that at some point you 
20 
know some of those employees were not necessarily 
advised for instance – let’s say of their names going to be 
communicated elsewhere.  And for that protection as well – 
in terms of that information until all the i’s were dotted and 
the t’s were crossed in relation to the investigation. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 118 of 220 
 
 
Now this happened because there was a time when 
the board I think had to present to Parliament and the 
names of the people that were in the reports could not be 
released because you know the investigations had not 
been completed.  And the board did advise that you know, 
they were not able to do so. 
 
You 
know 
the 
attorneys 
obviously 
advised 
accordingly as well until the rights of everybody was 
protected. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Alright maybe at some stage you 
10 
know one will have proper – one would have clarification.  
But it is fine let’s proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases.  Then in paragraph 4 
of your report you deal with the involvement of the legal 
department or that is the limited involvement of the legal 
department.  Will you briefly summarise what your involve 
– the legal department’s involvement was. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair.  When we got back from 
suspension as I indicated, you know the ... (indistinct) in 
relation to the decision to conduct a forensic investigation 
20 
by the board.  So effectively what we were asked was to 
look at the terms of engagement of the respective parties 
who were going to be part of the relationship. 
 
And that is where we came in as the legal 
department.  In fact I think at one point we had met with 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 119 of 220 
 
Ngubane to try and see if we can assist finalising, not 
aware that there was already a letter of engagement that 
was signed.  But when we came in we were – you know told 
that Ngubane is going to obviously be the lead and there 
was going to be a letter of engagement with Ngubane. 
 
So we – you know we were coming in and we still 
trying to find ourselves as to what was happening.  But it 
so turned out that no, a letter had already been signed.  
You know by the CEO at the time.  And we then were now, 
you know engaging with – we were then instructed in fact 
10 
by the board to say this particular transaction is going to 
happen and we have letter of engagement that needs to be 
finalised with Werksmans taking the lead and we need you 
guys to review as the legal department that letter. 
 
And 
that 
was 
basically 
you 
know, 
was 
our 
involvement in looking at the terms of that letter of 
engagement and trying to negotiate you know the terms.  
Because what we understood as the legal department is 
that if you have a project as big as the one that was 
basically going to be given by Werksmans you approach it 
20 
differently in terms of you know the fee structure and so 
on. 
 
Because it is not just a simple transaction where 
you give one instruction to an attorney and you know they 
charge you accordingly.  So that was the mind frame that 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 120 of 220 
 
we had.  To say we will look at this letter of engagement, 
go in on that basis and that is effectively what we did. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Ngoye at paragraph 4.2 and I just 
ask this for clarification sake so that when Ms Manase 
gives evidence we know that we readily are talking about 
the same occasion.  At 4.2 you say a subsequent meeting 
was arranged with Ngubane and that meeting included the 
different people. 
 
Now in her affidavit at paragraph 9 Ms Manase says 
– ... (indistinct).  Ms Manase says there was a meeting on 
10 
the 27 t h July, is that the meeting you are talking about at 
paragraph 4.2? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes it could be the meeting, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well I would like you to check so that 
when Ms Manase – you see she is ... (intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   Okay Chair can I asked to be taken to 
exactly what Ms Manase is saying so that I know ... 
(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Says: 
 
“On the 27 t h July the chairman of the board and 
20 
myself 
met 
with 
the 
forensic 
team 
led 
by 
Ngubane.  The purpose of the meeting was to 
discuss the scope of the investigation and so on 
and then he says in this meeting one of the 
forensic 
team 
members 
introduced 
us 
to 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 121 of 220 
 
Werksmans.  I attach a document, Annexure 2, 
which is a letter from Werksmans to Mike Kikuya 
of the SIU.” 
And that is the letter I just read to you. 
MS NGOYE:   It was at the same meeting Chair.  So when 
we had the meeting with Ngubane the chairperson of the 
board as well as Ms Manase – I do not recall them having 
been part of the meeting.  So that would be a separate 
meeting that we had.  Because the 27 t h July, the day that 
we came back and – back to the office and so we were not 
10 
involved in any meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So you were not present? 
MS NGOYE:   No. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Because that is her point. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So that is a separate meeting. 
MS NGOYE:   It is a separate meeting Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright sorry then what was the 
outcome of the involved or how did the legal department at 
PRASA become involved? 
20 
MS NGOYE:   Well as I indicated Chair, you know we were 
meeting this team for the first time, trying to make sense of 
who is who and what is happening in terms of this 
particular transaction.  Because also the basis of our 
involvement was really around, you know being able to 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 122 of 220 
 
settle the engagement letter because we understood at 
that time in any event that there was an identified person 
within PRASA who would be working on the investigations. 
 
And it was not necessarily the legal department.  So 
our role effectively was just to try and understand the 
terms of this particular team.  Who was who in the team 
and you know how everybody – what role each party would 
play. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then at paragraph 4.5 you say that in 
regard to the amount we charged for fees, Ms Manase said 
10 
that if you want quality work you do not negotiate fees. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair she said that to us. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry come again? 
MS NGOYE:   No she did say that to us.  In fact we had 
started the negotiations at the time with Werksmans.  And I 
guess as part of the report back to her we then said look, 
one of the things that we negotiating with Werksmans is 
the fees.  And she turned around and she said no, you 
guys cannot negotiate the fee. 
 
And the amount – you cannot expect to receive 
20 
quality advise if you are not going to pay, you know what 
the fees are supposed to be.  So you know we kind of like 
thought okay, suppose it is what it is. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I ask you this.  Well let me put 
her version and I am summarising.  She says when the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 123 of 220 
 
question of fees came up she said to you that she is aware 
of fees that accountants found and you as a lawyer would 
be familiar with the fees this lawyer ’s charged.  And you – 
it is for you to determine whether those fees were ... 
(indistinct).  But she just ... (indistinct). 
MS NGOYE:   No I do not agree with her Chair.  I am very 
clear and I do remember and we repeated this point every 
so often to say no, that is not what you said to us.  You 
know yes you did speak about the fees relating to the 
auditors because it is for regulated amounts.  But when it 
10 
came to us saying this is what we going to – we are doing 
as well as part of the negotiations.  You know she basically 
told us not to deal with the fee element. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I ask you though, you were 
asked not to deal with the fee element? 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair that is what she had 
said to us. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now but you were aware of what fees 
had been agreed.  Those fees you say were between Ms 
Manase and Mr Molefe and Werksmans. 
20 
MS NGOYE:   Well effectively Chair in terms of the 
engagement letter we got to see the fees.  And I do not 
think you know there was a change because one of the 
things that we had identified – we looked obviously at the 
categories and what each partner for instance would 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 124 of 220 
 
charge and so on. 
 
And there was a point where I think Werksmans had 
minuted their directorship to 10 years experience.  And I 
think they had a further amount – a number of years.  So 
we requested them to actually you know combine those 
number of years to charge – even if it is a 15 year director, 
to charge the same fees.  You know and not necessarily 
increase their fees because of the number of years. 
 
So that discussion had happened you know at the 
time that we had spoken to Director Manase.  So I guess in 
10 
engagement letter it remained as such and you know we 
just continued. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you saying that discussion had 
happened in a different context ... (intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   In a different ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With Werksmans? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes.  So, so, so ... (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you say that whatever they had 
agreed with you on that occasion, you do not think it had 
changed when this happened. 
20 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were comfortable with the 
earlier arranged rates? 
MS NGOYE:   What we had agreed with them yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 125 of 220 
 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you say ultimately when you saw the 
letter of engagement with regard to this investigation ... 
(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   Had not changed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ... appear to be the same. 
MS NGOYE:   It had not changed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It had not changed. 
MS 
NGOYE: 
 
 
Well 
it 
had 
taken 
our 
comment 
... 
(intervenes). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja into account. 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so that although Ms Manase might 
have made ... (intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   That comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the end you did not have a problem 
with ... (intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   No we did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ... the rates. 
MS NGOYE:   No we did not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And in addition to not having a 
problem with the rates was it your view that the rates were 
reasonable or would you if you had negotiated, negotiated 
differently? 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 126 of 220 
 
MS NGOYE:   Well Chair in light of you know what – as I 
indicated 
before 
our 
approach 
and 
this 
is 
what 
we 
discussed with Werksmans.  Our approach was you know 
when you work with attorneys in transactions of huge 
nature and we took it that this is one of them. 
 
You would negotiate reduced fees.  You know to say 
look guys, you getting a lot of work and really you cannot 
expect us to be paying the same fees that you would 
normally charge a client.  And I stand to be corrected.  I 
think that some of the rates were changed but I cannot 
10 
remember which ones.  But the Werksmans team took that 
into account because we pushed very hard on that. 
 
You know and they took it into account in relation to 
you know charging us also for some of the things that were 
there.  So what we then ultimately received for us was a 
better rate that it was before – you know the letter was 
finalised. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And it is a rate you were comfortable 
with. 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright so you – it is the legal ... 
(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   It is the legal department that is right Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in regard to the reporting from 
Werksmans, how did that work?  Because you address that 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 127 of 220 
 
in paragraphs 4.7 ... (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Soni, we are at 13:02. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes I am sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So let’s take the lunch break and then 
we will resume at 2 o’clock. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Ms 
10 
Ngoye, you were saying to the Chairperson that the legal 
team at PRASA, the legal department at PRASA, had 
limited engagement in regard to these investigations. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that changed after some time.  
Can you tell the Chairperson how that happened? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair, I think from our perspective as the 
legal team of PRASA, we felt that we were not utilised 
properly you know, in the investigations as well as having 
an appreciation that it is a law firm you know that is 
20 
conducting the investigations and we would be better 
placed 
as 
lawyers 
to 
understand 
how 
other 
lawyers 
function.  So we engaged with the Chair, Dr Bopo Molefe 
and said to him you know, I think the organisation must 
decide whether they want us to really be involved or not, 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 128 of 220 
 
because what we were basically doing at the time was just 
getting information.  You know, we said to the Chair we 
cannot just be golfers, you know.  We have got skills.  
Utilise 
the 
skills. 
 
Even 
though 
we 
appreciate 
the 
confidentiality of the matters perhaps that would have been 
dealt with, but we are not utilised properly you know in 
relation to the investigations and he listened to us you 
know, conceded but obviously even then we were given you 
know, limited access to the actual details of what is in the 
investigations because it was confined to the Board.  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And to the extent that Werksmans 
produced reports, how were they ... to what extent were 
they made available to the legal team, now forgetting the 
Board? 
MS NGOYE:  The arrangement that was then made Chair, 
where we were concerned as the legal department, this is 
after we spoke to the Chairperson.  He then suggested that 
we can only have access to the reports at Werksmans 
offices and read them there obviously and not take them 
out, and that is basically how we could see obviously what 
20 
was in the investigation reports.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am wondering how much do I need to 
hear 
about 
Werksmans 
and 
their 
investigation 
in 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 129 of 220 
 
circumstances where the only issue really was whether 
their appointment was legal. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know, I am not sure. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja because it seems to me that really 
the important thing is just to confirm the facts that seem to 
be uncontroversial. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And well, Ms Ngoye being head of legal, I 
10 
guess she can express her view on whether it was legal or 
not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Whether the appointment was legal or 
not.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It may be that she may, I am not sure.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But she probably should express her 
view. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Because 
her 
job 
involves 
advising 
...[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  What is legal and what is not legal for 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 130 of 220 
 
PRASA to do. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  She might not have been there when the 
whole discussion started about Werksmans, but she came 
at a certain stage and she may have taken a certain view 
and she may be having a certain view. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And I know that Werksmans express in 
one of their affidavits a certain view.  I think that is the 
part that really ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, as you please Chairperson.  Ms 
Ngoye, can I just ask and just to finalise this, in your 
memorandum you attach a number of documents in which 
you set out what the outcomes and so on were.  You 
confirm the correctness of what is set out in each of those 
annexures? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, I do Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now the nub of the issue before the 
Commission is the reference I take it, perhaps even the 
propriety of the appointment of Werksmans.  Now is that a 
20 
matter that you, well you must have a view on it, and would 
you take this opportunity expressing to the Chairperson 
what your view is? 
MS NGOYE:  Ja.  Chair, we as the legal function in fact 
considered, the question has come up if I may say, I mean 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 131 of 220 
 
we have had these discussions also with the AG in terms of 
their audit investigations and so on and even amongst 
ourselves, when you know this particular issue around 
Werksmans became a hot potato so to speak, but at the 
time 
as 
I 
indicated 
Chair, 
we 
were 
asked 
whether 
Werksmans was on the panel of the legal function and we 
said yes, and they were on the panel because they had 
been doing work for PRASA for a while, and when we 
looked at it you know, we thought that there was nothing 
untoward 
with 
the 
appointment, 
because 
how 
we 
10 
understood the panel to be utilised, there would be 
instances where we approach instructions on the basis of 
horses for courses.  So if a particular law firm has got 
better skills than the other, we would then suggest that 
that particular law firm be used.  So in this particular 
regard, we you know we accepted the fact that it would be 
one of those where the Board had decided that this is what 
they wanted to do and this is the skill set that sits within 
Werksmans.  So we accepted it on that basis that that is 
the case, and that is what we communicated also to the AG 
20 
in trying to explain why we did not believe that there ought 
to 
have 
been 
a 
separate 
tender 
process 
for 
the 
appointment of Werksmans.  Now we also explained that 
the way the panel work, is allocated for instance we did not 
in all respects go out to tender or go out and asked for 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 132 of 220 
 
quotes in relation to matters that we asked lawyers to do, 
to conduct for us, because we had a panel that had already 
gone through the process and was appointed you know, 
based on their strengths.  We then, if we had a particular 
instruction with them instruct the law firm concerned and 
we would continue, and one of the examples that we would 
make, we made with the AG for instance was we said we 
find it difficult to have this understanding, because when 
you get an urgent instruction it is not going to be possible 
to actually go out and get quotes and in certain instances 
10 
you will also not be able to specify the amount of money  
that would be required to be spent you know on a 
particular transaction and we debated that, to say how 
would we then have to deal with instances where the fees 
perhaps that they would have quoted for were above, 
because the matter is not finalised and those were the 
discussions that we had and as the legal function we 
understood that you know, on the basis on horses for 
courses and the fact that there had been, for them to have 
been on the panel of PRASA, they would have gone 
20 
through a tender process and they would have been 
selected accordingly.  So we looked at it from that 
perspective and we did not see anything untoward, and 
that is what we had said, but also I must say Chair, one of 
the things that we then said to the AG at the time when this 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 133 of 220 
 
issue was raised, we said to the AG we want to do this 
right.  You know, tell us because we are not just defending 
this thing but it has got to make sense and we asked the 
AG then to also establish from other parastatal how they 
do it.  I was at Transnet and I could speak to how Transnet 
did it, and I did not understand to be a situation where you 
go out every time and ask for an RFQ.  So that was the 
understanding that we had, but also one other thing that 
we said Chair, to the AG, was look if we are going to find 
that this appointment is irregular, let us look at the entire 
10 
panel of PRASA’s legal firms.  It had been in existence for 
a long time.  That we conceded Chair, and it needed to 
have been changed, but it had not been changed and we 
then explained as well that from a legal perspective, our 
side 2014 in fact when Dingiswayo came in to, he started 
the process of wanting to put a new panel in place, but the 
procurement process was not finalised properly so we were 
not able to do so.  So we then said to the AG look at the 
entire panel of PRASA because if you then say the 
appointment of Werksmans is illegal, what about all the 
20 
others because they too are in the same panel that 
Werksmans was in.  So if we do this, we need to do it 
properly.  So we had quite extensive engagements Chair, 
with the AG around this and obviously from a Board 
perspective you know, we believe that if the Board had 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 134 of 220 
 
also you know, taken that particular decision, they were 
within their rights because this was a forensic investigation 
and we understood also at the time that Mr Montana for 
instance, as this Group CEO had the authority I think in 
terms of the delegations to appoint forensic investigators.  
So you know, and understanding obviously how from a 
legal succession act as to who has got the powers and the 
Board obviously delegates the powers to everybody else, 
but the ultimate powers basically sit with the Board and 
that is how we explained it to the AG and we said look, we 
10 
do not find anything untoward, but you know obviously the 
AG had then come back and said they do not agree with us 
and found it to be irregular, but what we also found 
interesting Chair, is that when the AC makes the finding 
they do not come back to the legal department for 
comment.  They went to the Company Secretariat for 
comment and he conceded that yes, it was irregular and 
therefore a different process you know would have been, 
should have been adopted.  So there was that conflict 
really in terms of what we said as the legal department in 
20 
engaging with them, trying to understand exactly what we 
are 
dealing 
with 
and 
ultimately 
what 
the 
Company 
Secretary responded to the query that was raised by the 
AG. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Let me ask you, there are two issues 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 135 of 220 
 
that we have.  One is whether the appointment of 
Werksmans was in terms of PRASA’s SCM policy.  Now Mr 
Kgotse says it was quoting what you have said, but this is 
the proposition and sorry, before I go into the issues that 
arise from what we have seen, what was the AG’s stance 
on having paying for legal advice? 
MS NGOYE:  The AG’s stance Chair, was that every time 
there is an instruction we should go out on an RFQ and 
that is where we really differed with the AG and we said it 
is not possible and that is why we made the example of 
10 
urgency to say what do we then do.  You know, these legal 
matters prolong and once there is an amount obviously you 
are regulated as well.  Treasury tells you that if the amount 
you are going to spend is more that 15% or 10%, then it 
you cannot just do a variation.  You know, you have got to 
get the necessary approvals.  So we then said our 
understanding was that once a panel has been selected, 
this is how it works but they believed that for every 
instruction we needed to go out and we did not agree with 
it.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, if one is talking about normal 
matters, legal matters it might ... there might be some 
challenges, but I do not know whether there are challenges 
when you talk about the big investigation that needs to be 
done.  otherwise, if you are talking about matters where, I 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 136 of 220 
 
do not know how often, maybe every month you have two 
weekly decisions to make about which law firm to use and 
so on and so on, but maybe when one is talking about a 
big investigation that is going to take place sometime, 
maybe one sense is that maybe there should be a normal 
process of procurement, you know.  Tender.  But when one 
talks about normal legal matters, it may well be that strictly 
speaking the law still requires the same thing you know, 
but it might be difficult to do and a tender for normal 
matters but of course even with tenders as I understand it 
10 
there is always the idea that if it is below a certain amount, 
you just need quotations.  
MS NGOYE:  Yes, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And I guess if certain quotations are 
made and unforeseen circumstances occur which push the 
amount later to more, they must be aware of handling that 
but if at the beginning it was not contemplated that the 
cost could go beyond the threshold and you had to get 
quotations I guess it is just a question of getting those 
quotations, 
but 
the 
difficult 
thing 
about 
you 
know 
20 
quotations and legal matters, I guess is that very often it is 
not just a question of fees, but it is also the question of the 
identity of the person of the lawyers you, that can handle 
the matter.  If you, they have a certain reputation or if you 
have used them before that is that.  I do not know to what 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 137 of 220 
 
extent that would apply to other jobs.  I guess if you 
wanted to go to a doctor for medical attention, also you 
might in regard to certain matters want to go to somebody 
you have used before.  Maybe there might be cases where 
you do not mind that somebody you do not know, as long 
as the information you have got about them suggest that 
they are credible and reasonable.  So but I am just saying 
that maybe when it comes to a big investigation, maybe the 
case for going out on tender is more understandable than 
when you talk about just daily legal matters.  What do you 
10 
say? 
MS NGOYE:  Well, as far as that is concerned Chair, I still 
have a bit of a challenge and my challenge once again 
would be around you know, when you go out you set out 
the scope.  You say, you know in fact you budget.  A 
budget was obviously one of the issues that was at play 
here, and because you have to have those.  Price becomes 
important as part of the procurement process, and you 
know in a case like this where you would not actually also 
know what it is that you are dealing with, you might be 
20 
found wanting as far as that is concerned, when the 
matters prolong and you exceed the price that you would 
have quoted at the end.  So the challenge is still there 
Chair, and that is why I guess the approach of looking at 
horses for courses who can do what better in relation to 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 138 of 220 
 
whatever it is that we want to do, was the approach that we 
had adopted because we thought we would run into these 
difficulties, but also from a confidentiality perspective, we 
thought about it.  I mean at the time although you know, 
now we got to know what the scope was, we did not know 
what the Board was would have looked at when they took 
this decision, and perhaps from that perspective as well, 
they might have thought look, we do not want this thing to 
go out into the open, we want to deal with it confinely you 
know, in terms of the process and I think the SCM policy 
10 
provided for a confinement process, where you could just 
confine a particular matter to you know, a particular 
supplier depending obviously on the circumstances.  So 
you know, and those were the issues that we had debated 
at the time and I guess even now Chair, I cannot say I 
have got an answer that says yes, it must go out.  if it is 
like forensic, one would expect that there would be you 
know, quite a lot of confidentiality that is involved and do 
you want it out in the public, do you want to know people 
to know exactly what you are doing when you are trying to 
20 
deal with I guess the ill that you are trying to deal with 
that.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, in terms of legal cases, you can 
never be definite about what it will cost.  
MS NGOYE:  Cost, ja. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 139 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That, you can never be definite, but you 
can in most cases you would be able to have an estimate 
that it will not be less than a certain amount and not above 
a certain amount.  I think for most cases you might be able 
to do that and of course, also when you make an 
assessment that whether it will reach a certain amount, you 
might have to have in mind questions such as will I be 
using experts in this branch of the law.  Will I be using 
senior counsel or will I be using attorneys and I guess it 
might depend also where about in the country, even in 
10 
Joburg it cannot be the same as if you are in some outlying 
area, small town in terms of this.  So I guess, I guess that 
from your point of view as the entity that needs an 
investigation to be done, I would imagine that you ought to 
put aside a certain amount to say this investigation we do 
not want to go beyond a certain amount and maybe that is 
what should guide you.  
MS NGOYE:  Ja, but this was not done in this particular 
instance Chair.  You know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
20 
MS NGOYE:  If you recall from the evidence, I do not know 
if it has been given already to say that there was not a 
budget that was even allocated for the investigations.  So 
and I hear what you are saying Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 140 of 220 
 
MS NGOYE:  In relation to when you have planned that this 
is what you want to do ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS NGOYE:  You would naturally say this is what we would 
like to spend in relation to this particular project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, and I ... it seems to me you could 
have a situation where even though you do not know how 
far the investigation will end up going, you do not have 
unlimited resources.  Therefore you have got to put some 
curb.  So you say well, we are putting aside an amount of 
10 
so much for this investigation.  Therefore, because this is 
the amount that we think should be enough for this 
investigation, we work on the basis of that amount.  It may 
be that already at that time you have taken the view that 
we will not allocate more.  If the investigation is not done 
within this budget, then hard luck will just have to do deal 
with whatever report we will get.  Then there could be 
situations 
where 
you 
leave 
room 
for 
allowing 
the 
investigation to go further and allocating more money for it 
and then maybe those are things that could be taken into 
20 
account, and it may well be that the prescripts would allow 
you after you have given the job to a particular firm to do 
within what you regard as your budget or the investigation, 
but if what they earn persuades you that you must let, 
there must be more investigation, it may well be that the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 141 of 220 
 
regulations would either allow you to extend their mandate 
or to go out to tender, but they would come with the 
advantage that they have done the first part. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you will still be able to let others 
compete. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So when they were appointed, it was 
lawful because the investigation was not going to exceed a 
certain amount, so it was lawful but once you see that now 
10 
it is going to go beyond, you allow others to compete, but 
they do come with the advantage of having the uncertain 
part. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Or it might be a disadvantage if they 
have not done a good job.  So, but you have that but you 
might end up being able to comply both in regard to the 
initial, the first stage and the second stage.  
MS NGOYE:  Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just thinking aloud. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair, and I understand what you are 
saying, and I guess we need to take obviously the lessons 
that we have learnt in relation to this particular approach 
that was taken.  Also Chair, if you recall that the initial 
instruction for Werksmans was to do I think 33 matters 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 142 of 220 
 
arising from the AG’s report and following derailed, it move 
to 141 matters that they had to deal with.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS NGOYE:  So naturally it had increased the scope.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS NGOYE:  So all those variations I guess going forward, 
I mean this is a lesson that we cannot say we just need to 
put by the way side, but we need to take those factors into 
consideration I guess going forward.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  
10 
MS NGOYE:  And deal with things properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, I am going to raise the 
matters, because I have given some anxious consideration 
to this issue having been asked to deal with this part of the 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am going to put some questions to 
Ms Ngoye.  If Chairperson you think they are not helpful, I 
am more than happy to stop. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But I just want to vote on some of the 
matters you have raised.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You will see Ms Ngoye, you have read 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 143 of 220 
 
Mr Hotz’s affidavit? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, I have Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now he correctly says that in terms of 
the SCM policy, this appeared to be permissible and in 
paragraph 22 Chairperson, that is if you want to have a 
look at it, Bundle M page ... sorry.  SS25, page 8.   
CHAIRPERSON:  M for Mary or N for Nelly? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  M, yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Bundle M for Mary? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, on what page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is page 8, sorry page 157. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So this is what she says and I am not 
in principle disagreeing with her, but if these are the 
nuances that may assist the Chairperson when he draws up 
his 
report 
regarding 
the 
appropriateness 
of 
certain 
mechanisms to secure services, that would be helpful.  
Now Mr Hotz says that the PRASA’s SCM policy, as at 
paragraph 22, is single source / confinement.  This occurs 
20 
when the need for needs of the business preclude the use 
of the competitive bidding process, and for practical 
reasons only one bidder is approached to quote for goods 
and services.  Then it says: 
“This method can only be used for: 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 144 of 220 
 
A. The appointment of professional services such as 
legal, financial, technical contracts and security 
where unique expertise and or security are 
required and  
B. If it is an emergency as defined in Clause 11.3.6.  
The decision to use a single source shall be 
motivated for approval and ratification by the 
CEO.” 
Now is there not a difference, because the point 
you made is correct.  That we are faced with an urgent 
10 
application to interdict something that PRASA is doing, 
when you do not have time to do that or you are faced with 
a particulars of claim to which you have to respond quite 
quickly.  Now that is what the panel is intended for.  That is 
the normal legal services and that is the point you were 
making Chairperson, that one would understand that that is 
why you have a panel.  You do not run around, you also 
know as you call them horses for courses, who would fit 
this bill.  But there is another principle in regard to 
procurement and that is with the organ of state to identify 
20 
the services that are required and identify the services not 
meaning that forensic services are required, but forensic 
services to investigate matter A or B or C or D or matters 
A, B, C and D.  Would you accept that? 
MS NGOYE:  I agree, yes Chair.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 145 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now is the problem with the way this 
was handled, not and whoever it is that is responsible 
irrelevant, that instead of saying we have a problem 
because the attorney, the Auditor General has identified, 
lists the matter and say how do we comply with Section 
217 but also comply with the instructions of the Auditor 
General.  That would say that we may require five service 
providers or ten service providers, but you did not need 
one single service provider, but I am just trying to say 
because there is, the Auditor General is quite correct.  
10 
Section 217 when applied generally with the identification 
of services as I have indicated, would be applied properly, 
would avoid the criticisms that has been labelled. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Would you agree with me? 
MS NGOYE:  I cannot say I disagree fully, but I guess 
Chair the circumstances of each case needs to be looked 
at and as we say you know, as lawyers we like saying that 
and 
you 
know, 
one 
does 
not 
know 
obviously 
the 
deliberations that happened at the Board for this particular 
20 
decision to have been taken, as I indicated one was not 
there, but yes one understands that when you leave aside 
the normal legal instructions, because there I think you 
know, we have expressed the view that it would be difficult 
to go out every time, but in relation to you know other 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 146 of 220 
 
matters, we know nothing trumps you know the provisions 
of Section 217 in relation to you know, tendering and 
having to do processes properly, especially where state 
organs are concerned.  So and again it is a difficult 
question here counsel, because the reality is you are 
dealing with as I say the forensic investigation.  I do not 
know what the concerns were, so it becomes difficult for 
me to have an appreciation in relation to this specific one 
and maybe that is why you know, there is this concern to 
say that there were a whole lot of matters that were given 
10 
to Werksmans.  Could you not have split it up to various 
other organs of state for them to conduct the investigations 
and the rational for effectively going there was solely 
based on the issue of the panel.  Maybe Chair, one other 
thing I need to perhaps highlight, was when the initial 
concern was raised for instance by the AG, it moved from 
the fact that there was not a panel, because we could not 
produce the document. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The attorney, the Auditor General has 
identified and lists the matters and say how do we comply 
20 
with Section 217 but also comply with the instructions of 
the Auditor General.  That we say that we may require five 
service providers, ten service providers but you did not 
need one single service provider and I am just trying to say 
because the Auditor General is quite correct.  Section 217 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 147 of 220 
 
when applied generally with the identification of services 
as I have indicated, applied properly would avoid the 
criticisms that have been labelled.  
MS NGOYE:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Would you agree with me? 
MS NGOYE:  I cannot say I disagree fully, but I guess 
Chair the circumstances of each case needs to be looked 
at, and as we say you know, as lawyers we like saying 
that, and you know, one does not know obviously the 
deliberations that happened at the Board for this particular 
10 
decision to be taken.  As I indicated one was not there, but 
yes one understands that when you leave aside the normal 
legal instructions, because there I think you know we have 
expressed the view that it would be difficult to bar it every 
time, but in relation to you know other matters, we know 
nothing trumps you know the provisions of Section 217 in 
relation to you know, tendering and having to do processes 
properly, especially where state organs are concerned, and 
again it is a difficult question here counsel, because the 
reality is you are dealing with, as I said the forensic 
20 
investigation I do not know what the concerns were, so it 
becomes difficult for me to have an appreciation in relation 
to this specific one, and maybe that is why you know, there 
is this concern to say there were a whole lot of matters 
that were given to Werksmans, could you not have split it 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 148 of 220 
 
up to various other organs of state for them to conduct the 
investigations, and the rational for effectively going there, 
was solely based on the issue of the panel.  Maybe Chair, 
one other thing I need to perhaps highlight was when the 
initial concern was raised for instance by the AG, it moved 
from the fact that there was not a panel, because we could 
not produce the documentation that showed that this panel 
was properly constituted.  You know, so the question of 
217 came in at a particular time to say look, you guys 
cannot even give us documentation to show that yes, 
10 
indeed Werksmans was part of the panel.  So you know, it 
moved from that into then specifics as we were debating 
the issues you know with the AG around the appointment of 
Werksmans.  We could not produce those documents and I 
guess it moved then to that, and that is why one was 
saying with the discussions that we had, what we then 
asked the AG to say is you know, tell us how we should do 
it, because we want to get it right and not necessarily just 
argue for the sake of arguing, but on this case we thought 
Werksmans is on the panel and there is a specific 
20 
expertise that is required here, forensic expertise.  They 
had it and therefore being on the panel we can proceed 
with them, and that was the basis of you know, with this 
thing.  But I hear what counsel is saying in relation to I 
guess other matters that are different and maybe a 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 149 of 220 
 
forensic, I am not a specialist in forensic investigation and 
there were a lot of nitty gritties and other subcontractors 
that were there, that required to be part of this team, 
because Werksmans would not have been able to do other 
things.  They tried to get some subcontractors.  So it is 
just one of those things where you have to look at it 
holistically and say what is it that you are looking at.  I 
cannot disagree with counsel altogether and say no, you 
know you have to do it this particular way and I will stress 
the point that that is why at the time we thought this is the 
10 
approach, because 217 was already done.  But we could 
not produce evidence on the 217.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye, let me tell you what I think 
is the fundamental flaw in the approach you suggest.  Any 
time an organ of state is required to make a decision, this 
decision to appoint a service provider as administrator, it 
must act reasonably and it must act procedurally fair.  So 
the first question that that organ of state must ask itself, is 
how do you we appoint somebody procedurally fairly and 
Section 217(1) of the Constitution provides the answer.  It 
20 
says you must have the following criteria.  There must be a 
fair procedure.  It must be transparent, it must be open, 
cost effective.  All of those criteria set out in Section 217, 
it is not helpful to say we do not know what the Board will 
get.  What the Board must do, is the Board must say we 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 150 of 220 
 
considered our obligations in terms of Section 217 and this 
is the procedure we adopted and unless that is shown, that 
procedure is fatally flawed. 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chair, I go back to the panel itself and I 
say in relation to the panel, my understanding is that 217 
was followed.  Right at the onset.  In relation to putting 
these law firms in place.  So from that perspective, that is 
how I see it.  to say you put a legal panel in place, you 
must follow the procedure as stipulated in terms of Section 
217 of the Constitution and when the list was then 
10 
ultimately decided, then it means that you know, the 
organisation was comfortable with what the law firms would 
charge, what you know services they would be getting from 
the law firms and I guess it makes it something that and I 
must say Chair, I do not know what discussions happened 
at the Board.  I really do not and I cannot surmise in 
relation to that, whether they have thought that was the 
case. 
 The 
question 
that 
only 
came 
to 
us was 
is 
Werksmans on the panel and we said yes.  as to what other 
issues were considered, I do not know but one would then 
20 
say you know, it is not like you dealt with an environment 
where 217 was never followed at all.  The criticism are 
there Chair.  They have always been there to say why have 
you know Werksmans been appointed alone, in light of the 
fees that they have been paid and you know, everybody 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 151 of 220 
 
being concerned about the amount of money that PRASA 
was paying and also the fact that it was not budgeted for at 
the time.  You know, those were the concerns that were 
raised.  I cannot say that 217 was never followed 
altogether.  I concede that at the time that the AG had 
asked for proof, we did not have it, because from SACRCC 
times to PRASA quite a lot of movements happened within 
the organisation and one was not there to also vouch that 
yes, this is what had happened.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I have told you what my view is 
10 
...[intervenes]  
MS NGOYE:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye, and I have got to say to 
you it is insufficient for injustification for what happened, 
to say I do not know what happened.  
MS NGOYE:  Well Chair, the reality is I do not know what 
happened.  I was not there, you know and I unfortunately I 
am not going to take the responsibility of the Board when I 
was not part of it.  They must come and then say exactly 
how it is that they came to that specific decision.  
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I just want to make this point that one 
should not use this as a basis to say every Board can make 
its own decisions, otherwise Section 217 will never be 
objectively determined.  In other words, there must be a 
mechanism like one has in terms of the SCM provision that 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 152 of 220 
 
Mr Hotz ...[intervenes]  
MS NGOYE:  I agree. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the question is whether that 
procedure should be applied to this and those are the 
nuances 
that 
need 
to 
be 
taken 
into 
account 
when 
determining whether Section 217 has been complied with.  
May I make this point?  As far as the interchanges are, it is 
quite clear half set out what view is of the Commission’s 
legal team.  I understand what Ms Ngoye says, and I have 
indicated that objectively speaking I do not believe Section 
10 
217 
was complied with and not because there was 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Soni.  Can somebody 
lower down the air con please?  I think somebody must 
fasten your, the level at which they put it where I do not 
complain.  They can always, so that I do not have to ask 
every day that it should be lowered.  Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I just make the point again 
Chairperson.  One looks at everything and says it did not 
seem to be an intent to favour, it did not seem anything 
20 
untoward if I can put it.  That is a different question from 
objectively asking as a prescript that the writers of the 
constitution put into the constitution has it been complied 
and that is the question that would be 
among the 
recommendations.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 153 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no it appears that nobody is a, to the 
extent that there was non-compliance.  It was deliberate 
because there was some agenda to favour anybody.  The 
question was simply whether the legal prospects were 
complied with.  Ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, may I make one other 
point?  One of the reasons that 217 is such a valuable tool 
in the allocation of government work in South Africa, that 
any person agreeing by a decision or a decision that was 
taken or to be taken, and approach the Courts and say that 
10 
process is unfair because it obviously is state resources 
being allocated and I am not saying it in a nasty way but 
allocated to certain service providers, and there must be a 
fair process.  Now what we have got to do Chairperson, is 
to look at if another law firm had after Werksmans had 
been appointed, in these particular circumstances, do that 
scope of work.  If they had approached a court to say no, 
that cannot be wrong, what would the Court have said, 
because otherwise 217(1) becomes a really [indistinct 
00:12:51]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, and of course if ultimately the 
position is that Werksmans appointment was not lawful, 
that might not detract from the work that they did.  They 
seem 
to 
have 
done 
quite 
a 
good 
job 
in 
terms 
of 
investigations, such as those relating to Siyangene and 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 154 of 220 
 
Ivambo, and ...[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the legal proceedings they 
brought ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, and a lot of tax payers money may 
have been saved because of the work they did. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is important to separate the two, to 
say there is the question whether their appointment was 
legal or not legal, and then there is the question whether 
PRASA and the public benefitted from the investigation 
10 
they did.  Those were maybe two separate issues, and I 
think you made the point Ms Ngoye that to the extent that 
it might be said that their appointment might not have been 
lawful, that might not be the case with them only.  That 
might be the case with any other law firm that you might 
have appointed, for one thing or another because there 
was no understanding that there was something wrong with 
how it was done at the time.   
MS NGOYE:  Ja, maybe perhaps Chair if I can say, this 
issue did come up.  You know, I do recall when the whole 
20 
you know, it was news that Werksmans appointment was 
on, that perhaps the Board needs to then request a 
deviation 
to 
be 
approved 
by 
national 
treasury. 
 
A 
condonation rather than a deviation to the process so that 
you know, you regularise ...[intervenes] 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 155 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Regularise. 
MS NGOYE:  Then even after the fact, because obviously 
you would then have to show in terms of the condonation 
process, that the PRASA did not lose any monies, there 
was no fraud and there was benefit to the organisation in 
relation to what was done.  Perhaps if that was done by the 
Board ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS NGOYE:  You know, we would have closed that loop. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
10 
MS NGOYE:  But unfortunately it never got there.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS NGOYE:  And this is something that we take as well we 
should take.  The organisation should take, I am not there 
anymore.  The organisation should take going forward 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS NGOYE:  Going forward in relation to matters of this 
nature, because it is very clear that there was not any 
fraud that was perpetuated.  There was not, you know 
20 
those requirements that are stipulated for condonation to 
be successful, I think this would meet those requirements 
and it would have been condoned properly by national 
treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, yes. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 156 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Those are the submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  My submissions and questioning 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In regard to the lawfulness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, thank you Ms Ngoye.   
MS NGOYE:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Thank 
you 
very 
much 
for 
availing 
yourself again.  I have a suspicion that we might see you 
10 
again. 
MS NGOYE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Based on our earlier discussion. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, Chair.  Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, no thank you very much for 
availing yourself.  Mr Soni, are you ready to call your next 
witness? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can we just have five minutes 
Chairperson.  I think Mr Molefe may be ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  We will adjourn. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Molefe. 
DR MOLEFE:   Good afternoon Chairperson. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 157 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Welcome back. 
DR MOLEFE:   Thank you.  I think I should submit an 
invoice at the end of the session. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
DR MOLEFE:   I have been here just too many times. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because we have called you back too 
many times.  [laughs]   
DR MOLEFE:   Ja.  I might still be asked to come again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughs]  No but thank you for 
availing yourself once again.  Please administer the oath 
10 
or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   My name is Popo Simon Molefe. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
20 
you will give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth?  If so, please raise up your right hand and 
say, so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  (d.s.s.) 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 158 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  You may be seated. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, the ostensible reason 
that we called Mr Molefe and I say ostensible because to a 
large extent any of the issues as a progress had been 
confined to the legal issue concerning of the appointment 
of Werksmans to do the investigations. 
 
Now Mr Molefe was originally called for that but 
we thought we would use his presence today to clear up 
some matters that arose when Ms Dipuo Peters gave 
evidence over the last two days. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now can I just say Chairperson and I 
must apologise for this.  Mr Molefe had prepared a wider 
affidavit during the other matters as well but in three pages 
of 
this 
affidavit 
it 
deals 
with 
the 
question 
of 
the 
appointment of Werksmans.  I am just going to ask him to 
confirm that what he had said is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I hand this to you without an 
exhibit number for the time being? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Because we may just want to 
separate the affidavit relating to his evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  Is this is affidavit plus 
annexures or is just the affidavit? 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 159 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  No, his affidavit plus annexures 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is, as you will see, it deals with 
more issues that are before us today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But at page 8 of this affidavit, 
starting at paragraph 5, he deals with ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am just thinking if we are 
not admitting it as yet, how we will refer to it. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And for purposes of the transcript. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   For the record, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or for the record. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, at this stage you have not 
identified from what page to what page the matters are that 
are not necessary for our purposes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Unfortunately, for our purposes it is 
only three pages in between Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That we need? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, in the affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And we do not need any annexures? 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 160 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  Well, in that event...  Well, if that is 
what we need...  Why do we not...  And the other matters 
that we do not need, are really not for us? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  It would work if we effectively took 
out the three pages from the affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it will be recorded that they are part 
of an affidavit dated whatever, whatever. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we do not need the other pages. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it would work like that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And those pages get submitted as 
exhibits. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As the exhibit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Maybe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So we could basically use those and 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 161 of 220 
 
only.  So later on you take them out. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And they would be put into the bundle as 
exhibit whatever. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It will then be Exhibit SS-6.1 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Double S, six, one? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And it will be in Bundle D. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay what page numbers are the ones 
that we need in the affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It will then be from page 359 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   59? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Three, five, nine.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   359.  No, no.  I am sorry.  I mean from 
the affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which three pages do we use? 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are going to need? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well, 8, 9 and...  Sorry, 8, 9, 10 and 
11.  It is four pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:   8, 9, 10 and 11.  Okay.  Well, I think 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 162 of 220 
 
what you would then do is that Mr Molefe to confirm that 
these pages 8, 9, 10 and 11 are from his affidavit that he 
deposed to on whatever date and whatever the place was. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And once he confirms them then we can 
– I can admit them. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And later on, you or your team will put 
10 
them in the right place in the bundles. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will just mark them here and they can 
be taken out.  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Molefe, you have the document in 
front of you.  It is an affidavit by yourself.  Is that correct? 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.  Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And it has been done just for 
formality sake Mr Molefe.  The affidavit that is in front of 
us at the moment is an affidavit you made on the 
20 
22 n d of February 2021.  That is yesterday.  Is that correct? 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now that affidavit deals with other 
matters than the Werksmans issue. 
DR MOLEFE:   It is so Chairperson. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 163 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And...  Sorry, and including the 
Werksmans issue. 
DR MOLEFE:   It is so Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now if you look at page 8.  Is that 
where you start off this affidavit?  Is that where you deal 
with the Werksmans issue? 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And it continues until the end of page 
11, the Werksmans issue. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Now can I ask you.  Well, I 
would imagine that what is contained in the whole affidavit 
and for present purposes is what is contained on page 8 to 
11 inclusive true and correct? 
DR MOLEFE:   That is so Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And it is part of the affidavit you 
made on the 22 n d of December. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, I then ask that to be 
admitted as Exhibit SS-6.1. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I note that when I page through after 
page 11, I see it deals with matters that seem to me to 
relate to matters that we are looking at.  So I am 
wondering why you were saying those other pages do not 
concern us.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 164 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see at page 12, it is the relationship 
with Minister Dipuo Peters.  And I think there is a property 
report.  Now I do remember that in his evidence when he 
came to give evidence for the first time there was 
reference to a property report.  And I see there is 
reference to Montana and R 30 million elsewhere.  I may 
be wrong. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But some of the matters sound familiar 
10 
to me. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  They arise from Mr Montana’s 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So you will remember that in 
Mr Montana’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Oh, is that where they... 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Because there is uncertainty 
about the status of that affidavit. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why you were saying...  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine then.  So we said 8, 
9, 10 and 11? 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 165 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, that is... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  What could be done is that when the 
four pages get put into the bundle, maybe there could be a 
cover page that explains that these come from such and 
such an affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  So that is – and you said it 
should be Exhibit S6... 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Six point one Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Six point one.  Pages 8, 9, 10 and 11 of 
10 
the 
affidavit 
deposed 
to 
by 
Mr 
Molefe 
on 
the 
22 n d of February 2021 will be admitted here then as Exhibit 
SS-6.1. 
THE 
AFFIDAVIT 
BY 
DR 
POPO 
SIMON 
MOLEFE 
IS 
ADMITTED AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT SS-6.1 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry Mr Molefe.  I understand that 
you wanted to say something before I start by leading you. 
DR MOLEFE:   No, it is okay counsel.  Chairperson, the 
20 
matter was corrected by counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
DR MOLEFE:   I wanted to talk about four pages instead of 
three. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay alright.  Okay. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 166 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Molefe, you were asked at the 
time you deposed to this affidavit or before you or before 
you deposed to it.  You deal with the appointment of 
Werksmans.   
 
Now I do not know if you heard the evidence on 
that matter.  I am just going to try and confine your 
evidence to the matters that are still live before the 
Commission...  There are matters that have been... relating 
to... 
 
The first question I want to ask you is.  Is it 
10 
correct that it was the board that made the appointment? 
DR MOLEFE:   It is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   No, no.  Not appointment.  It is the board 
that took the decision that there was a need for the 
investigation.  The actual appointment was made by the 
acting Group Chief Executive Officer. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So in other words, he signed the 
contract? 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja, ja.  He signed the scope of work and 
20 
the ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But the choice of Werksmans as the 
service provider was from the board. 
DR MOLEFE:   I do think so.  Yes, it was from the board. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And to a large extent, 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 167 of 220 
 
Ms Ngoye gave this evidence, you and Ms Manase who was 
the chairperson of the Audit and Risk Committee of the 
board, were overseeing the process. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And on account of confidentiality you 
confined the reporting process to yourself, Ms Manase and 
a little later on the head of legal at PRASA.  Is that 
correct? 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.  That would also include the 
acting Group CEO. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, of course.  Of course. 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And payments were then 
approved by Ms Manase. 
DR MOLEFE:   No, no.  Payments were not approved by 
Ms Manase. 
 
Payments 
were 
being 
approved 
by 
management because as it were, we never discussed the 
rates that Werksmans were going to charge but is a matter 
that was discussed with the acting Group CEO and of 
course later our legal department. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me just make sure I understood.  I 
am not sure I understood your answer to an earlier 
question.  You said the board made a decision that there 
was a need for an investigation. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 168 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is one point.  But in terms of which 
service provider will conduct the investigation, the board 
was or was not involved in that decision? 
DR MOLEFE:   Well, ultimately the board approved that 
decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ultimately they ...[intervenes]  
DR MOLEFE:   I may have to talk ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine because we – you 
sometimes answering yes or no. 
DR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja. 
 
So 
feel 
free 
because 
the 
...[intervenes]  
DR MOLEFE:   No, in the end the board approved the 
specific service provider, Werksmans. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Approved.  Yes, yes.  Would it have 
approved it on the basis that there was a recommendation 
or somebody had made a decision but for whatever reason 
the board felt it needed to approve or is that something 
you cannot ...[intervenes]  
DR MOLEFE:   There was a recommendation arising from 
20 
the work by the Audit and Risk Committee had done and 
also informed by the Legal Advisory Board on whether 
Regulation 16(a)(6)(6) was applicable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MOLEFE:   Because at that time already the acting 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 169 of 220 
 
Group CEO already had appointed Ngubane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MOLEFE:   The situation changed only when we were 
advised that Regulation 16(a)(6)(6) would not be applicable 
to Schedule 3(b) entities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it please Chair.  And the reports 
of the board...  I mean, the reports in respect of the 
investigation were shared only with the board and the 
Minister and of course the CEO. 
10 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the purpose for that was what? 
DR MOLEFE:   The purpose for that was to maintain 
confidentiality.  If the Chairperson will allow me, I would 
like to tell a little bit about the context. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, that is fine. 
DR MOLEFE:   Werksmans were appointed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   In my earlier evidence before this 
Commission. 
 I 
cannot 
remember. 
 
Probably 
around 
20 
June/July.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   I gave evidence demonstrating that right 
from the beginning, earlier in his office - in his term in 
office, the board was subjected to misinformation.  The 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 170 of 220 
 
first instance was the what we called the Braamfontein 
depot modernisation rails and turnout tenders estimated at 
the amount of R 2.4 billion. 
 
And we were misled at the time by the Group 
Chief Executive, Mr Montana but they have been probed to 
conduct it which later turned out that it was not conducted. 
 
I mean, I do not want to go into the details of 
what it was but the second instance – I am painting this 
picture to show why confidentiality was critical.  
 
The second instance was when we saw in the 
10 
media that the Public Protector had actually released a 
preliminary 
report 
to 
PRASA 
and 
asked 
for 
certain 
questions to be answered by PRASA.  PRASA did not do. 
 
And the Group Chief Executive of the time did 
not report that to the board.  And when I raised these 
things pertinently and inquiry whether there was perhaps a 
– any mistrust existing between him myself or him and the 
board. 
 
At that point he then decided that he was going 
to leave the company early.  Of course, he had advised us 
20 
previously as soon as the board came into office. 
 
Now I am giving this to show how difficult it was 
for the board to manage.  The second ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You...  Have you not left out the time 
when – I think it is what you said on your first occasion 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 171 of 220 
 
when you came to give evidence, when you said you asked 
him, that is Mr Montana, to give the board or give you all 
the contracts that were in existence. 
DR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you said he did not give you those 
...[intervenes]  
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MOLEFE:   I can maybe make one more point.  I can go 
on and on but I think I have established ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR MOLEFE:   ...the fact that there were difficulties. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MOLEFE:   They did not stop there.  They interfered 
with the information in the company, stealing documents, 
making it impossible for us to access information.   
 
Even appointing the internal computer experts to 
interfere 
with 
information 
to 
deprive 
the 
board 
of 
information that would have been necessary for decision 
making.   
20 
 
So it was clearly sensitive, you know which 
meant that if you allow too many people to have access in 
the investigations.  So it was already clear to us.   
 
You 
have 
that 
Braamfontein 
depot 
thing, 
R 2.4 billion.  You had R 500 million irregular expenditure.  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 172 of 220 
 
And we were beginning to see other things in the company. 
 
So if we had just said:  No, let it just go to 
management.  Then management who were actually the 
subordinator of Mr Montana at the time, it would have 
meant that the objective for finding the truth was going to 
be defeated. 
 
And that is why you have this abnormal situation 
where the board that is not operational found itself having 
to be extraordinarily hands on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Soni.  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just in terms of timeframes.  
About when was it decided that the investigations should 
be...  In other words, in relation to Mr Montana’s leaving.  
We know Mr Montana left on the 15 t h of July.  When were – 
when was it decided by the board that this – or resolved by 
the 
board 
or 
endorsed 
by 
the 
board 
that 
these 
investigations were to take place? 
DR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, my recollection is that on or 
about June/July the Audit Committee having considered the 
draft management report of the Auditor-General made 
20 
recommendations that there be investigations as required 
by 
the 
Public 
Finance 
Management 
Act 
and 
they 
recommended that to the board, to me and to the board but 
the actual appointment would have happened at the 
beginning of August, the first week of August.   
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 173 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now then mean it to contradict 
anything you say but that was after Mr Montana left? 
DR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He left on the 15 t h of ...[intervenes]  
DR MOLEFE:   No, when we took the decision that we are 
going to investigate he had not yet left.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I see. 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja.  I think we would probably have taken 
that decision in a board, in committee. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am missing a slightly different 
10 
issue.  You see, you raised the question of confidentiality 
in relation to Mr Montana but you have also made the point 
that people who were still in senior management positions 
in PRASA were loyal to Mr Montana.  I am just trying to 
establish that even after the 15 t h of July the need for 
confidentiality still existed.  That is all I am trying to 
establish. 
DR MOLEFE:   It existed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the reason is that it was not only 
Mr Montana but people who were, who the board thought 
20 
were still loyal to him. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in relation to the investigation 
by Werksmans the results that they produced, and there 
will be evidence that will emanate in regard to that or 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 174 of 220 
 
certainly parts of the investigations. 
 
May I just ask you this?  Were you satisfied with 
the work that they did, the quality of the work and the 
results they produced?   
DR MOLEFE:   We were very satisfied with the quality of 
the work and the results.   Apart from the briefings that we 
were given regularly to myself and Ms Manase, we also 
had regular briefings with the board and to the Minister.   
 
So we were satisfied with the work.  We knew 
what was coming out.  That is why you probably would 
10 
think that very early on we were already placing complaints 
with the Hawks in terms of the... 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now the results of the Werksmans’ 
investigation led to two major court applications by PRASA 
to review decisions of multi-billion rand contracts it had 
concluded with different service providers. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The one was the Swifambo Contract.  
Is that correct? 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.   
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And that was R 3.5 billion.   
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And that contract...  No, I mean the 
validity of the decision of the high court reviewing and 
setting aside the award of the contract was confirmed by 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 175 of 220 
 
the Supreme Court of Appeal and the Constitutional Court 
refused Swifambo leave to appeal. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In regard to the other contract – the 
other 
major 
application 
you 
brought, 
it 
was 
against 
Siyangena.   
DR MOLEFE:   That is so Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And since you gave evidence the last 
time, the high court set aside that contract as well, the full 
bench of the high court even in ...[intervenes]  
10 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So that is the result of their 
investigation. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.  That is the value of the 
investigations. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   It was used for the company and the South 
African public. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Soni, for the sake of 
completeness since in relation to Swifambo, you mentioned 
20 
the figure.  You should mention the figure as well in regard 
to Siyangena. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, absolutely.  Sorry Chair.  There 
was not a single contract with Swifambo that was set 
aside.  It was a series of contracts especially one that had 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 176 of 220 
 
been concluded three months as in deemed and three 
months after the main contract was concluded.  Is that 
correct?  That is the R 800 million contract. 
DR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I can tell you that because that is 
what the court paper say. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is so but I think they tried the force of 
this as well which were rejected. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So I just want to get the facts.  So 
we do not need the details Mr Molefe. 
10 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   May I ask you?  That contract 
...[intervenes]  
DR MOLEFE:   May I just say that the fact I said earlier, 
the prejudgment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, sure. 
DR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
And 
my 
founding 
affidavit 
in 
that 
application. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe what you might recall – maybe 
20 
what Mr Molefe might recall is here Mr Soni.  Is the overall 
figure that is associated with Swifambo and the overall 
figure that is associated with Siyangena. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   With Siyangena, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe if ...[intervenes]  
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 177 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ja, I am going ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But that is about R 2.8 billion, the 
Siyangena contracts that were set aside by the high court. 
DR MOLEFE:   Sorry? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I say the Siyangena contracts were 
valued at about R 2.8 billion, those that were set aside by 
the high court. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So we know now that the Werksmans 
10 
investigation led to the setting aside of contracts worth 
more than R6 billion. 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now I do not need to deal with the 
further matters relating to the Werksmans’ contract.  I want 
to use your presence here today, Mr Molefe, for a slightly 
different reason and to get some clarity with regard to 
certain matters that were raised with Ms Dipuo Peters 
when she gave evidence yesterday and earlier today.  
Okay?  Now one of the issues – and it is a major issue in 
20 
the evidence or in the matters that she was questioned on 
was the failure to appoint a permanent CEO from time Mr 
Montana left in July 2015.  I am just putting that to you, 
that was an issue. 
DR MOLEFE:   I am listening, Chairperson. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 178 of 220 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  One of the things she said was that 
you and she had discussed whether PRASA, if I could just 
put it crudely, ripe for the appointment of a permanent 
CEO.  In other words, as she put it, the environment in 
PRASA was not conducive to the appointment of a 
permanent CEO.  Those are the words she used in 
parliament and she used similar words in her affidavit.  I 
would like you to respond to that in regard to your view 
and the view of the board.   
DR MOLEFE:   For lack of a better description I would say 
10 
that that assertion by the former minister is ingenuous and 
it is false.  The board has always been of the view that we 
needed a Group CEO from the time when Mr Montana – in 
fact before Mr Montana left.  I gave evidence here 
previously to say that we had agreed with Mr Montana that 
during this period of six months notice that he had 
requested he would work with the board, assist the board 
to identify a successor to his position.  By January 2016 
we had already gone out – we even had given him the 
responsibility of helping to identify recruitment agencies 
20 
for that purpose. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said January 2016.  Did you mean 
2016 or 2015? 
DR MOLEFE:   We took a decision in 2015 with him before 
he left to say that that six months from March – he gave us 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 179 of 220 
 
the letter of notice that he is leaving in March, I do not 
know, I cannot remember the exact date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m I think the end of March. 
DR MOLEFE:   And we said from March then to I think 
November or beginning of December he would be working 
with the board to identify a successor to him and he would 
help us identify talent search companies.  For some reason 
by the time he left he had not identified any company.   
But by January 2016 the board had identified a 
company to do the search for the CEO.  Just this morning I 
10 
was actually looking at an email that the leader of that 
company sent to my secretary at the time asking for the 
name of the [indistinct] 04.31, so began the progress early, 
we considered the appointment of the Group CEO very 
critically because the organisation had no captain of the 
ship, had no leader, so I could not have said to the 
minister 
were 
are 
not 
ready 
and 
that 
exercise 
was 
undertaken pretty fast or expeditiously and shortly after it 
was done we gave a list of three names with the specific 
recommendation 
that 
detailed 
the 
abilities 
of 
– 
20 
qualifications and abilities of each one of the three 
candidates and then we gave her a file of the CVs of each 
one of those individuals in case she might have wanted to 
make any reference to it.  I listened to Mrs Peters, seeming 
to suggest that she was just given the whole room full of 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 180 of 220 
 
files and she was unable to go through them.  That is false.  
I think she was scraping the bottom of the barrel, really, to 
find reasons for not doing what she was supposed to do. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe – sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, let me understand something 
that I keep thinking I do not understand.  Mr Montana, as I 
understand it, was he meant to leave at the end of – at 
some stage in March 2015 but the board asked him to stay 
for an additional six months or was the position that his 
contract was going to end somewhere towards the end of 
10 
2015 but he wanted to leave earlier or did he say I am 
leaving towards the end of the year so I am giving you 
notice of six months?  What exactly was the position?  
When was his contract meant to end? 
DR MOLEFE:   My recollection, Chairperson, is that his 
contract was meant to end at the end of November. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2015? 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja but then he said to the board – I think 
we can refer to my earlier evidence and the record, but he 
said to the board I will not wait for that time, I give you my 
20 
resignation now, I am not going to wait for that time but I 
am actually giving you notice that I want to leave but 
because my contract requires me to serve notice of six 
months, I will stay for six months to work with you whilst 
you identify my successor.  So he was then going to stay 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 181 of 220 
 
on until I think around the end of November, beginning 
December. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
So 
is 
the 
position 
that 
– 
my 
understanding that it was the board which asked him to 
stay six months more was incorrect, he is the one who 
actually said I am giving you six months notice.  So is the 
understanding I had that it was the board which asked him 
to stay six additional months, an additional six months 
incorrect? 
DR MOLEFE:   He offered to stay six months more and we 
10 
agreed with him but I think we can refer to the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   We thought that it was reasonable to have 
him there for six months whilst we are working on 
replacement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Because it had to do with his contract 
coming to an end. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You know, that is important 
because I may have wanted to criticise you and your board 
20 
for starting to look for his replacement late if the position 
was that his contract was going to come to an end in March 
and you started later – would have expected you to start 
earlier, but if his contract was going to end towards the 
end of the year that might change the situation.  You 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 182 of 220 
 
understand why I want to find out when was his contract 
actually going to end? 
DR MOLEFE:   I may need to make some kind of reference 
to establish the exact date, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   But remember, Chairperson, we started off 
actually trying to persuade him to stay on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, during the first half of 2015? 
DR MOLEFE:   Yes, we say we are new – no, no, even – 
we would have been willing to extend his contract. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Because at that time we did not even know 
about the malfeasance 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Which were committed under his watch and 
where he played a key role.  So we were working on the 
basis that here is a leader of this organisation, we are 
new, we are beginning with the modernisation programme 
of the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
DR MOLEFE:   So we need stability and of course he said 
no, he wanted to go.  But what accelerated him wanting to 
even leave and ignore our request for him to stay on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Is when he realised that we were beginning 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 183 of 220 
 
to look at issues of governance which had been flouted 
during his period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well I know there is his letter of 
resignation somewhere and that might clarify. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is PM4 at bundle D page 147, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, does it throw light on any of these 
issues? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It does, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What is says, is that Mr Montana had 
offered – the letter is written on the 1 April by Mr Molefe, it 
says: 
“You 
have 
offered 
six 
months, 
if 
we 
find 
a 
replacement earlier, we will ask you to leave early.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is the essence of the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, because the other complicating 
factor was the moment there is the notion of a resignation 
because if his contract was going to expire towards the 
20 
end of the year one would not expect him to resign, one 
would expect him maybe to just notify you that in case you 
were thinking of extending, I will not be available, so I am 
leaving at the end of my contract, rather than resigning.  
So that is another part that causes confusion for me. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 184 of 220 
 
DR MOLEFE:   Well, Chairperson, that is the correct way, 
that is how it should have been said but the letters were 
written in the manner in which they were written, they do 
not necessarily reflect the reality. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Save that the essence was that he was 
going to leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay, okay.  And you got to 
know about this intention to leave sometime just end of 
2014? 
10 
DR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
I 
beg 
your 
pardon, 
Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you get to know about his intention 
to leave sometime towards the end of 2014? 
DR MOLEFE:   No, no, that becomes clear – firmly 
confirmed in March in 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In 2015, in March.  So whatever he 
might have said earlier was the fact he was now firm. 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja.  It turns out that Mr Montana had played 
that game before.  He said to the previous board I am 
leaving and the previous board said no, no, no, please do 
20 
not leave.  And then he says to him I have got an offer, a 
better offer and then the board would sign a new contract 
and an increase, remuneration as well.  He probably 
expected that from the new board and it did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  I think that gives me a 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 185 of 220 
 
better picture.  So his contract was going to end towards 
the end of the year, maybe November or October or 
thereabout and in March he formally said he was going to 
leave but he offered to stay for six months. 
DR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson, but I think we should 
confirm the exact date from the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the actual month, ja.  No, that is 
fine.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So what the letter says, Chairperson, 
is – Mr Molefe’s letter, is: 
10 
“I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 15 
March 2015 and note  that you wish to serve a six 
month notice period with effect from the 1 June.” 
So he wanted to leave effectively at the end of November 
as his contract was going to expire at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but if the six months period was with 
effect from June then the end of six months would be end 
of December, is it not?  Oh, no, no, end of November. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  End of November, yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   End of November, ja.  No, I am wrong.  
20 
Ja, end of November.  Okay, alright.  So at least now we 
know. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now, Mr Molefe, this is a matter on 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 186 of 220 
 
which I pressed the minister and I am going to press you 
on.  You see, the PRASA Act places the responsibility to 
appoint a CEO on the board but of course it needs to 
consult with the minister.  Do you agree? 
DR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right.  So you knew in April – say 
you, I am talking about the board knew in April. 
DR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That Mr Montana is to leave soon.  I 
understand you to say that that process only began at the 
10 
beginning of 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And ’16? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry, January 2016, yes.   
DR MOLEFE:   The decision to work on the search should 
have meant identifying individuals started in 2015.  I think 
the biggest mistake that we regret is that we asked Mr 
Montana who was the party to drive that process because 
he was still there as the Group CEO to assist in that regard 
and of course at that stage we would not have imagined 
that he would deliberately act in a manner that delays that 
20 
process.  And it is true in hindsight that we should have 
once two months passed and we did not see concrete work 
we should have then begun to plan differently. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, Mr Molefe, this is the position, he 
tells you in April or in March I am going to leave in six 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 187 of 220 
 
months. 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You had prior to that said to him you 
must leave.  He then on the 15 July you confirm that that is 
his last day at work. 
DR MOLEFE:   No, no, we did not tell him prior to that that 
he must leave, the board tells him to leave on the 15 July. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay, he leaves on the 15 July. 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you could not be under any 
10 
misapprehension about what Mr Montana was doing at 
PRASA because he was not at PRASA from the 15 July 
until January.  So there is now a six month period when the 
board knew nothing was being done about the appointment 
of a new CEO. 
DR MOLEFE:  Ja, that is correct and I am not suggesting 
that we were under any misapprehension of what he was 
doing in PRASA at the time, he was away.  The question 
that we may have to deal with, Chairperson, is – which we 
must be criticised for, is that we did not move fast enough 
20 
on getting a person to replace him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to …[intervenes] 
DR MOLEFE:   In fact, I think I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry. 
DR MOLEFE:   I think I am actually probably making a 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 188 of 220 
 
mistake by even suggesting that the process starts only in 
2016.  We may have to go to the records. I think in 2016, 
the beginning of 2016, we are talking about the panel 
which means work had already progressed, now we need to 
interview the candidates, the company called – I think it 
was called Talent Search, now says who is going to be on 
the panel.  They would not have asked for who is going to 
be on the panel in January 2016 if the process of 
recruitment had not started. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the first question is to the extent 
10 
that the board had decided that it would need the services 
of a company that would do the recruitment or search for 
talent, to the extent that the board had decided it would 
need the services of such a company for purposes of 
identifying the right candidate.  The board ought to have 
come to that decision probably before Mr Montana left 
because he told you in March or at the beginning of April in 
November I will be leaving, therefore – but I will help you 
while you are looking for somebody.  So obviously the 
immediate question there is okay, we must decide how we 
20 
are going to go about finding the right candidate, are we 
going 
to 
just 
advertise 
and 
we 
conduct 
the 
whole 
recruitment process ourselves or are we going to look for 
somebody, a service provider  who will do that, and if we 
look for somebody, that is the first thing we must take a 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 189 of 220 
 
decision on.  Now if he told you in March, you have got 
April, May, June, there is no reason why by June actually 
you would not have made that decision, is it not?  That is 
three months.  And then allowing that service provider to 
run with the process, obviously you, as the board, would 
need to put some deadlines to say look, this person is 
needed urgently, we do not have all the time so complete 
the process by such and such a date.  Would you agree 
that more or less that should have happened? 
DR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
The 
decision 
– 
Chairperson, 
may 
10 
Chairperson repeat the question, so that my answer should 
be yes or no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, that is right. 
DR MOLEFE:   Maybe it should be just yes or no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am putting the proposition to you that 
as soon as Mr Montana had told you or the board in March 
or early April 2015 that he was going to be leaving at the 
end of November, at the end of the six month period, that 
he talked about, there was a duty on your board to make 
up its mind whether in order to find his replacement it 
20 
would do without a service provider who would assist it to 
recruit or it would conduct the search itself but that 
decision needed to have been made, there is no reason 
why that decision could not have been made by June, that 
is the proposition I am making. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 190 of 220 
 
DR MOLEFE:   I do think, Chairperson, that decision was 
made by that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was made by that time. 
DR MOLEFE:   It was made by that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   And I have to check when did we advertise, 
it would have been there around 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   A service provider role would be twofold. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
DR MOLEFE:   To collate all the applications. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Analyse them on behalf of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Search for further talent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   That might not be in the applications 
available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Combine all of that, produce a shortlist and 
20 
then when ready, begin the process.  There was a 
committee of the board that was overseeing that process.  
I think it was led by our human capital committee working 
together with the chair – I think she also belong to that 
committee, Ms Matlala, and Alan Vichy(?) of the audit 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 191 of 220 
 
committee was also assisting in that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So would you go – would you accept that 
the recruitment process should ordinarily not have taken 
longer 
than 
three 
months 
starting 
from 
the date 
of 
advertisement or are you saying that is too short for this 
high profile appointment? 
DR MOLEFE:   I would not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would not know. 
DR MOLEFE:   I do not want to surmise on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
10 
DR MOLEFE:   Because, I mean, you are guided also by 
HR policies of the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Responses. 
DR MOLEFE:   How long do you advertise in what 
newspapers and then the process of – I mean, short listing, 
you know, hundreds of CVs would take time.  Ja, so one 
could have said we wish it to end quickly but if you have a 
professional company doing the work you have got to make 
sure that you give them enough room to do their job 
properly. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the only reason why I am asking 
these questions is because I want to see to what extent 
your board may share blame for the delay.  When Ms 
Peters was giving evidence here I did tell her that it seems 
to me that from her side, she failed to do certain things in 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 192 of 220 
 
terms of ensuring that the Group CEO was appointed as 
soon as possible but I want to see whether there is also 
some blame on the part of the board because maybe it 
started too late with the process or it allowed it to go on 
for too long.  So that is why I am asking these questions 
because I do not want to blame the board unjustifiably. 
DR MOLEFE:   Well, I would like to go back to the records 
and find the date. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And check.  
DR MOLEFE:   What the policy says.  I hope I can find 
10 
some. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   And when exactly did we start. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR MOLEFE:   At what point did we get the shortlist. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Because, by the way, also – yes, I would 
like to do that and then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine. 
DR MOLEFE:   So that we come back and when blame is 
20 
apportioned, is based on facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is correct, ja. 
DR MOLEFE:   That had been determined, I do not... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is correct, ja. 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 193 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because it may well be that it is no one 
person 
who 
is 
responsible 
for 
this, 
maybe 
it 
is 
a 
combination of various factors and maybe different people 
in terms of their different roles and it is only fair that one 
should look at everybody to see what happened.   
DR MOLEFE:   Ja, but Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The point you make about wishing to 
have 
an 
opportunity 
to 
check 
information, 
check 
correspondence documents is a fair point.  That you will 
do. 
10 
DR MOLEFE:   And Chairperson, I do not have to come and 
sit in the Commission, I can submit a …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can submit an affidavit. 
DR MOLEFE:   A supplementary affidavit in that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.  No, that is fine, ja. 
DR MOLEFE:   But whatever the minister says, she cannot 
justify leaving office in 2017 without having appointed a 
Group CEO.  In May  - in May 2016 and that was not the 
first letter.  It is just that I do not have my correspondence, 
I may have to search for it.  In May 2016 I write to her and 
20 
say the appointment of the Group CEO is an urgent matter, 
please expedite this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, to her credit, I can say that she 
said here, that is Ms Peters, that she takes responsibility 
for the non-appointment of the Group CEO for the two 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 194 of 220 
 
years or the period after Mr Montana had left up to the 
time that she left the ministry herself.  She said that.  So – 
but nevertheless, one is just looking whether – exactly 
what happened. 
DR MOLEFE:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe, the issue about the delay 
and who is responsible is quite critical in this matter for a 
few reasons.  One is, since Mr Montana has left until I 
think earlier this year there has been no CEO, that is 
period of [indistinct – dropping voice].  This is a major 
10 
multi-billion rand organisation which incurs, according to 
the 
auditor 
general 
report, 
irregular 
expenses 
that 
ballooned from R100 million to R24 billion (indistinct – 
recording distorted).   
Secondly, the auditor general says in his report that 
part of the problem is the instability in the organisation and 
that is partly, if not mainly, due to the fact that it does not 
have a CEO. 
The third issue is this, that nobody can simply make 
an 
appointment, 
the Act 
and 
the 
internal 
regulatory 
20 
measures relating to PRASA determines who has the 
power.   I just want to read to you what the powers are, 
and this is in terms of the Board Charter. 
 
It says in 15.5: 
“Amongst the reserved powers of the Board are 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 195 of 220 
 
recommending to the Executive authority [that is 
obviously the Minister] the appointment and removal 
of the Chief Executive Officer.” 
Now when Ms Peters was here I pressed her quite firmly as 
to why she did it and as the Chairperson has rightly 
pointed out, she said, yes I accept responsibility but when 
powers are shared, so must responsibility. I’m going to 
come to you again, you know in- at latest when Mr Montana 
leaves, 15 t h of July that this needs to be – this position 
needs 
to 
be 
filled 
but 
on 
your 
version 
the 
first 
10 
recommendation to her is in early…[indistinct – dropped 
voice], surely a six month period must be an excessive 
period, then your Board has the power to make the 
recommendation surely? 
DR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, I can’t bleed this stone 
anymore.  I did say that I would have to return to look at 
the records, to look at the facts, when the process started, 
how the short listing began and when it began and then we 
come to the recommendations because there will be a link 
between the point at which the recommendation is made 
20 
and the time at which the process began.  Appointing a 
Group CEO also means careful selection of the individual 
required, so, I’m sure there would have been reasons why 
there were delays and I accept that we could have done it 
in a shorter period than that, but I’d like to look at the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 196 of 220 
 
factors that impacted on our ability to move faster – sorry 
Chairperson, I should have been looking at you.  On our 
ability to deal, faster with the problem. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Anyway, we’ll wait for that but I want 
to, when you give your – I’m going to request, Dr Molefe, 
when you give the information, that it is not sufficient to 
say that we made the recommendation on this day it must – 
to ensure that there is no criticism of the Board or the 
criticism is limited to say, we started the process at this 
time, we were told it will take so long and this the period it 
10 
took because if you know that a period is – of nine months 
is required it doesn’t help you start the process three 
months after the need arises, it must start six months 
before the need arises. 
DR MOLEFE:   I will do as requested, Chairperson, we will 
deal with the processes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   There’s just one point I wanted to raise, 
because for the public listening out there, if counsel says 
there was no CEO for five years as a result of which 
20 
there’s been an escalation of irregular expenditure, the 
Auditor General reported this and that.  I think we have to 
separate the period of this, the Board that I was Chairman 
of from that five…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 197 of 220 
 
DR MOLEFE:   And also, recognise the fact that, that 
Board did make a recommendation that goes through a 
tedious process of the political party structures, they 
probably 
have 
no4 
spending 
in 
terms 
of 
appointing 
constitutional but those are the rules that, that party has 
designed and for its Ministers that they have to go that 
particular route of going to the deployment committee that 
deployment committee doesn’t meet and …[indistinct – 
drops voice] does not get discussed and in the end, as the 
Minister told us, that she herself never took it to the 
10 
Cabinet.  So, I will deal with that in the response that I’m 
going to give but I think I want to absolve this Board for 
the ballooning irregular expenditure.  In fact, give credit to 
my Board because part of that ballooning in irregular 
expenditure 
was 
a 
result 
of 
the 
investigations 
that 
Werksmans conducted.  I think at some point we gave the 
Auditor General a report that shows that we had uncovered 
R15billion of irregular expenditure and the Auditor General 
used our reports to produce his own report so we 
contributed to that and how does that irregular expenditure 
20 
occur.  You have contracts which PRASA has signed with 
service providers, various contracts.  PRASA cannot stop 
paying the service providers until such a time that the 
Board set aside the contract as unlawful – determines that 
the contracts are unlawful and then set them aside.  So 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 198 of 220 
 
PRASA continued to pay but those contract, the Auditor 
General had determined that they were irregular and it was 
not only about Swifambo by the way Chairperson, there 
were also irregularities pertaining to a contract called 
Gibela which was manufacturing the trains and the Minister 
spoke, …[indistinct – drops voice] our people needed jobs, 
we needed the trains moving, that project – I told the 
Board that, that project should go on.  It is the Board, with 
advice from the attorneys of record that determined that, 
although the Auditor General says that the Gibela contract 
10 
is irregular.  When you look at the materiality of that 
irregularity, was of a major – it was of a major that should 
not lead to the cancellation of the contract and on that 
basis, we then asked the Minister, condone this and we 
apply to National Treasury to condonation but until such 
time that those contacts were condoned, all the monies 
spent there were considered to be irregular. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I would like to say this, that 
leaving aside anything else that your Board may or may not 
be criticised for, these speakers that we get from the Late 
20 
Auditor General’s affidavit – answering affidavit about the 
irregular expenditure that seem to be ballooning from the 
2013/2014 financial year and your Board wasn’t there 
during that financial year, you Board came, I think, in 
August 2014 and left in 2017 but when you look at, I think, 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 199 of 220 
 
if I recall correctly during the 2013/2014 financial year, the 
figure put up by the Auditor General is that it was about 
R100million 
irregular 
expenditure 
during 
that 
year, 
financial year. From 2014 to 2015, and I guess if your 
Board needed to be blamed it might only need to be 
blamed for half of that financial year because it seems to 
have started in August 2014.  During that financial year, 
2014 
to 
2015 
I 
think 
the 
amount 
of 
the 
irregular 
expenditure, according to the Auditor General was about 
R550million and then from 2015 to 2016, that financial 
10 
year, it shot up to R15billion, an astronomical amount that 
is irregular expenditure and from, I think – for the next 
financial year I think it was R20billion and the last financial 
year which – your Board was no longer there, I think, it 
was R24billion.  So, I certainly, am very interested in 
hearing the full explanation from yourself, as to, what was 
the story about this irregular expenditure that was going on 
that was going up like this every year as if there was 
nobody on the face of it, I mean, you might be able to 
explain, you are referring to the investigations that were 
20 
going on.  You might be able to say, no, part of these 
amounts that are said to be irregular, they may have been 
irregular but they had been used to good cause, it’s money 
that’s connected with the investigation, maybe it’s payment 
for Werksmans or whatever but when I look at those figures 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 200 of 220 
 
and I know that, for most of those years it’s your Board 
that was there and I think in one of your letters to – ja in 
one of your letters to Minister Peters, I think the one for 
August 2016, where you were responding to her letter 
where she had said stop the investigation. I think you 
referred 
to 
relevant 
legislation 
with 
regard 
to 
the 
obligations of the Board, and if I’m not mistaken you refer 
to provisions which seems to suggest that it’s the Board 
that must prevent irregular expenditure or fruitless and 
wasteful expenditure.  So, I think it’s important that, at 
10 
least for the years that your Board was there, you are able 
to deal with this – these irregular expenditure amounts that 
seem to be going up every year as if nobody was trying to 
keep them down.  So, if you say, look I’m not ready to deal 
with 
this 
because 
it 
needs 
preparation 
and 
some 
documents that I need, that’s fine but I think it’s important 
that it be explained and that you explain it as the 
Chairperson of the Board, at least for the years that your 
Board was…[indistinct – drops voice]. 
DR MOLEFE:   Ja, Chairperson, thank you very much.  We 
20 
will 
certainly 
– 
I 
will 
certainly 
go 
and 
prepare 
a 
comprehensive report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Fortunately, the investigations that we 
conducted 
through 
Werksmans 
would 
show 
where 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 201 of 220 
 
irregularities occurred and the amounts attaching to those 
irregularities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   PRASA is a big organisation without that 
investigation we would not have known where these 
irregularities are occurring and I would not say that the 
Auditor General’s report that says there was R100million 
irregularity, that was necessarily accurate.  They use a 
sample they were not given all the…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It may have been a tip of the iceberg. 
10 
DR MOLEFE:   It was the tip of the iceberg even the 
R500million.  Once you begin to get into these things as 
we did – I mean there were lots and lots of small 
contractors in the category of work called the general 
overhauls which would have been the repairs of – and 
maintenance of locomotives, coaches and so on.  That’s 
where some of these big irregularities occur.  Procurement 
of diesel, for example, how contracts had been awarded 
but we would not have know without this investigation that 
we conducted and the Auditor General would not have 
20 
known the extent of the irregularities without us sharing 
information with the Auditor General.  There were regular 
meetings, also, between the Auditor General and our 
investigators which assisted the Auditor General in dealing 
with those things. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 202 of 220 
 
 
Part of the difficulty and of course we take blame 
for this is that the delay in appointing the Group CEO has 
meant, also that the management of the subordinates who 
are the actual ones in the supply chain management and 
so on were not properly supervised and the Board would 
not have been able to do that job itself, there’s no way that 
any Board would do that the Board works through the 
Executive team and it has to be a proper and reliable 
Executive team. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that’s fine, when you deal with 
10 
that issue of how those amounts of irregular expenditure 
occur as far as the Board is concerned and what measures 
the Board took and so on and so on, do deal with certain 
issues, I understood you to be talking about having to go 
to or approach, I don’t know whether it’s the ruling party or 
whoever 
and 
there 
being 
delays 
at 
the 
deployment 
committee and so on.  Deal with the situation to, you know, 
properly to say, these were the constraints if there were 
constraints on the Board acting because as far as I’m 
concerned the PRASA situation is difficult to understand, 
20 
how it is possible, under any govern that an organisation 
that is so important to the country, that was going through 
such challenges in terms of allegations of corruption, 
irregular expenditure and so on, big amounts could be 
allowed to have no permanent Group CEO for as many 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 203 of 220 
 
years as we know it was without, how is this possible.  So 
there may be certain things that we need to be told – we 
need to be told about, that produced this situation.  So, I’m 
just saying – ask when you do that as the best picture that 
you can give us in terms of exactly what were the 
challenges, if there were any challenges. 
DR MOLEFE:   We will do that Chairperson, I suppose at 
the end of its work, this Commission, as part of the 
recommendations that it will make it would separate the  
roles of the politicians from the roles of the company and 
10 
the Executive but we shouldn’t – the deployment committee 
of the party was not intended to determine who the Board 
applies, things changed, I think, the last ten years or so, it 
had always been there to say, who amongst us are the best 
qualified people we would like to encourage to apply for 
certain positions because they were well trained for it but 
they would still have to go through the proper process of 
interviews and selection.  They succeed if they perform 
well, not because they carry the label of a particular party 
that has never been the intention and I think that this point 
20 
must be made that, structures of political parties must 
have nothing to do with the institutions of the State organs 
or State and the same should apply to the Cabinet as a 
role.  Executive authorities must have their own role, we 
must 
review 
the 
Board 
charters, 
memoranda 
of 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 204 of 220 
 
incorporation to say that you can’t have a memoranda of 
incorporation of a Board charter that ties the hands of a 
Board.  When the Companies Act says that the Board is the 
ultimate authority of the company.  So, all of those things 
will have to be dealt with.  The Chairperson will see, I’m 
just gracing the counsel, the Chairperson will see that in 
the submission that we were asked to make as Transnet 
and we were asked to say, okay, you came to us you talked 
about all of these things that had happened, now we want 
you to make a submission that tells us what you have done 
10 
about this, what are the remedial action.  Some of these 
issues we were raising in that submission, we won’t make 
everybody happy but we are not in the business of making 
individuals happy we are in the business of protecting 
public interest. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
that 
submission 
relating 
to 
Transnet, I think it was mentioned to me, if I’m not 
mistaken, Mr Soni – or an affidavit or something. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, maybe it is somebody else 
20 
because I think I was told at some stage that there was a 
plan for Mr Molefe to come and testify but he was going to 
deal with – maybe it’s a different work stream, maybe it’s 
the Transnet work stream. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 205 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he was going to testify with regard to 
what steps the Board has taken at Transnet to sort out 
certain problems and I indicated that I’d like to see that 
submission but it might not be important for him to come 
and give oral evidence in the light of our time constraints 
but we would take it into account.  So, to the extent that 
you have already sent it to the Commission, it probably is 
with another work stream of  the Commission but at some 
stage it will come to me but I do want to say, based on 
what you have just said, it seems to me that, part of what 
10 
you are saying is, part of the delay at PRASA in dealing 
with certain matters may have been because the reality 
was that the Board or yourself as Chairperson had to 
consult with a structure of the ruling party such as the 
deployment committee and it doesn’t sit all the time and 
that may delay things, is my understanding correct? 
DR MOLEFE:  No, no Chairperson the understanding is not 
correct, the Board does not have to consult with the 
structure of the party.  The Board it accounts to the 
Executive authority being the Minister it is the Minister who 
20 
consults with the structures of the party, but these are 
unwritten rules, the convention that they have adopted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But written or unwritten they might 
contribute to certain problems. 
DR MOLEFE:   Certainly they did that certainly contributed 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 206 of 220 
 
to this and I’m happy to write about it in my feedback. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please, because we can’t arrive at the 
right recommendations if we don’t know the full picture, 
you know, so it’s important to know the full picture.  What 
caused this, what caused that, what contributed to this so 
that 
one 
can 
say, 
this 
must 
stop, 
that’s 
the 
recommendation, 
this 
must 
stop, 
that’s 
the 
recommendation in order to create an environment where 
these entities can be run properly, professionally and 
successfully, okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Molefe I 
only say this because you appear to think that it is I who 
drew a link between the non-appointment of the CEO and 
these figures.  So, when 
you’re dealing with these 
increases 
in 
irregular 
expenditure, 
please 
look 
at 
paragraph 62 of Mr Makwethu’s unsigned affidavit because 
that is where the link is drawn, I’ll tell you what he says, 
he says, 
“The instability in the Board and at PRASA’s key 
management 
level, 
negatively 
impacted 
the 
20 
operations of the entity and contributed to the 
collapse of controlled environment”, 
 
That’s where the link is from not by me.  I say that -  
want to also say to you Mr Molefe, I have looked at the 
contribution that your Board made in PRASA, looked at 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 207 of 220 
 
contribution of previous Boards, negatively but positively 
fair that your Board and the negatively shaped subsequent 
Boards on PRASA.  So, don’t for one minute believe that 
I’m suggesting that the Board was bad but I have a duty to 
say that in this regard the Board didn’t do what good 
governance required and that’s the only point in asking 
those questions and I need to contextualise that.  When I 
challenged Ms Peters about the appointment she put part 
of the problem on the Board and so when you have, what 
you call, two centres of power you never know who’s right 
10 
and who’s wrong.  So, that’s why I asked you so that you 
could 
identify 
precisely 
when 
the 
Board 
made 
the 
recommendation, how long it took, so that we know the 
extent of the attribution.  I wouldn’t like you to think that I 
am disparaging of the good work, I’m not.   
 
Now let’s just get back to the issue of the non-
appointment of the CEO.  If you, when you are making – 
and I don’t want to hold you to something today, but you, 
when you are making your submission, and I know it will be 
in writing, set out and annex all your correspondence, 
20 
urging upon the Minister to expedite that process, that’s 
the first point but the second point I want to raise with you 
is this, and it’s a question of good governance.  The 
charter gives you the power to make a recommendation.  
Now, let’s say you had made the recommendation in 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 208 of 220 
 
early…[indistinct – dropped voice] and the Minister hadn’t 
acted on it.  The question is, what should an organ of 
State, like the Board of control of PRASA do when it has 
fulfilled its function, because remember, ultimately it’s not 
the Minister as the Executive authority who will be held 
responsible, in terms of the PFMA you are held responsible 
and so the question really is, did you take other steps, for 
example did you write to the President, I’m not saying you 
should have these are just the questions, I think, that may 
require a fuller examination so that the Chairperson can 
10 
look and say, well these are the weaknesses in the 
business and these are the structural changes that need to 
be made so that we don’t have a repeat of this and that’s 
why this Commission is so important because it is in a 
unique position to re-visit the way we are running the 
…[indistinct dropped voice] and you can contribute.  You 
and all organs of State can contribute to that. 
DR MOLEFE:   I agree Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you can keep your mic on ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now the…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, don’t switch it off it is fine you 
can keep it on ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The further issue that Ms Peters 
made in regard to the relationship between the Board and 
the Minister was, she often said, well Mr Molefe agreed 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 209 of 220 
 
with this, we met and he agreed with this and the question 
arises as to how does one determine where responsibility 
lies for non-performance and one of the issues that comes 
up is, when something is not done, how does one place it 
on record because you’re, of course, in a difficult situation, 
you’re a Board you don’t want to antagonise the Executive.   
That is an issue too in this Commission.   Now Ms Peters is 
...[intervenes]   
DR MOLEFE:   But Chairperson am I – should I respond to 
this thing?   See where Ms Peters says I met with the 
10 
Chairperson, we agreed, and quite often some of those 
discussions she was talking about as if they were casual in 
the passages, she mentions talking in the passage.  I do 
not know if – whether it is material for me to respond that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you might have a situation where 
you never met with her in passages therefore you say no 
but I never met with her in passages.   You may have a 
situation where you say yes we met sometimes in passages 
or whatever and there may have been casual talk but I do 
not remember that specific issue or I do remember, but 
20 
until it was raised formally I was not going to pay attention 
to it, so it just depends, but if you do not wish to comment 
on it you are free to say no I do not wish to comment on it. 
DR MOLEFE:   Well I will comment just very crisply.  The 
Chairman of the Board, is the leader and representative of 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 210 of 220 
 
the Board.  There will be many instances where the 
Chairman of the Board will meet with the executive 
authority just between the two of them, and of course, he 
will report back to the Board.  But there are meetings 
where we require the executive authority to meet with the 
Board.  Sometimes the Chairman of the Board meets with 
the executive authority together with a Chair of the Audit 
and Risk Management Committee, which happened quite 
often as in the case where we met with the chief 
procurement 
officer, 
except 
that 
what 
she 
said 
was 
10 
incorrect.   
That meeting agreed that PRASA will continue to be 
the custodian of the investigations and will coordinate that 
National Treasury, his findings will be channelled into 
PRASA not the other way around.  Then I will attach in my, 
you know, supplementary affidavit that I have agreed to do 
to make the correspondence where we were inviting the 
Minister to address the Board and she was not updating 
herself, we will do that.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson in so far as Ms Peters is 
20 
evidence goes I do not have any further questions for Mr 
Molefe because the issue I was still raising with her 
related to the termination of was going to culminate in the 
circumstances leading to the Boards termination and on 
that score with respect I - it seems to me that some of the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 211 of 220 
 
allegations 
made 
by 
Mr 
Molefe 
appear 
to 
be 
more 
consistent with the objective facts as partly revealed in the 
Parliamentary matters that I was going to ask.   
I do not have any further questions relating to Ms 
Peters at this stage for Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think there might just be one or 
two questions that I want to ask with reference to the 
meeting of the 20 t h of August 2015, if you still remember 
that important meeting at the presidential guesthouse.  Ms 
Peters said that President Zuma at the time President 
10 
Zuma succumbed to exhaustion, I think that is how she put 
it, succumbed to exhaustion before he could say much at 
that meeting, except what he said at the beginning.  I think 
that is what she said, what is your comment on that? 
DR MOLEFE:   I have confirmed that he fell asleep. I 
confirmed that he fell asleep Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   In my previous…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is a question…[intervene] 
DR MOLEFE:   And I did also confirm that, I did also state 
20 
that that happened after I had said to the President, that I 
was not going to sit in a meeting of a political party, as a 
result of which go back and change the decision of the 
Board because I did not understand what his problem was 
with the fact that the Board had agreed to release Mr 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 212 of 220 
 
Montana.  
And I invited him to come and explain his problems 
to the Board.  I think it was shortly after I made that point 
that day, that he fell asleep. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you - I think part of your affidavit 
say something along these lines, either you say, you got 
the impression that Mr Zuma wanted the Board to take Mr 
Montana back, either you said put it like that or you said 
you - it was clear to you that that is what he wanted.  Do 
you remember which is which? 
10 
DR MOLEFE:   Chairpersons, because he did not say 
reinstate him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   So I can only talk about the impression, I 
got. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MOLEFE:   Firstly from the fact that he calls a meeting, 
the prior, Mr Montana to prepare thoroughly for that 
meeting, and that meeting is preceded by a report on 
PRASA to Mr Jeff Radebe who is the one who urges the 
20 
President to meet with me and at that meeting, the content 
of the speech of Mr Montana is largely that that report that 
he wrote to Mr Radebe. 
I got the impression that they tried to say, he is a 
good man, you are treating him badly, this Board does not 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 213 of 220 
 
want him to do his job.  There is nothing wrong with him, 
you know, you just hate him.  You cannot work with your 
CEO, which is a refrain that I picked up in the evidence of 
Ms Dipuo Peters.  She says every time the Chairman went 
overseas with the CEO when they come back, they are not 
in 
good 
terms. 
 
So 
in 
a 
way 
that 
is 
ridiculous, 
but…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the one thing we can get out of the 
way, as far as what Mr Zuma may have said at that time, is 
that he never said reinstate Mr Montana.  
10 
DR MOLEFE:   No he did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He never put it like that, but you say you 
got the impression that that is what he wished for, to say 
the least. 
DR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson you are right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And, but there was a discussion, I think 
you said in your evidence, one of the occasions when you 
came 
here, 
during 
the 
meeting, 
when 
there 
was 
a 
discussion about the Board's decision to release Mr 
Montana, is that correct or did I misunderstand was there a 
20 
discussion of the decision? 
DR MOLEFE:   There was a discussion Chairperson on 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And how did that arise, if you are able to 
remember you might not remember? 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 214 of 220 
 
DR MOLEFE:   Well firstly, it was the first point is it arose 
because the President was saying that Mr Montana should 
not have been allowed to leave because he is a very 
experienced 
rail 
asset 
there. 
 According 
to 
him 
an 
excellent manager who has a great contribution to make to 
the future of PRASA.   
And Minister Dipuo Peter says, well, you know, the 
Board did not warn me before it acted that it was going to 
release Mr Montana, they did not consult me had they 
consulted me I would have treated the matter differently.  
10 
You know, I would have dissuaded them making that 
decision, it was in that context that that it arose. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay no that is fine thank you.  Now 
nothing arising Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Nothing arising. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will excuse you, Mr Molefe and you 
have undertaken to furnish a further affidavit to deal with 
some of the earlier matters that we discussed.  I think Mr 
Soni and yourself will talk about the timeframe and so on.  
It might not be necessarily for you to come back, but a lot 
20 
would depend on what the content looks like, you have 
come back to the Commission quite a few times.  
So, if you would prefer not to come back, I would 
understand, but it may well be that when one has read the 
affidavit, particularly on this very important issue of the 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 215 of 220 
 
irregular expenditure, it may well be that it would not be 
right not let you come in and deal with whatever questions 
but when I say come in, it may be that you might not need 
to be physically here.  It may be that we do a Zoom or 
video link but nevertheless get a chance to put certain 
questions to you. 
DR MOLEFE:   Thanks, Chairperson I will take guidance 
from counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you very much, we have come 
to the end of today's proceedings then. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, may I say for tomorrow, 
we have subpoenaed Mr Auswell Mashaba, we have 
summoned him, a summons has been issued.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And we expect him to be here at 10 
o'clock tomorrow morning and after he gives evidence we 
will 
lead 
the 
evidence 
of 
Mr 
Sacks, 
the 
forensic 
investigator 
appointed 
by 
PRASA 
and 
Werksmans 
to 
investigate the irregularities and improprieties in the 
Swifambo contract.  His produced a 112 page report 
20 
Chairperson and he will talk to the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is the liquidator? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no that is the investigator, and 
then thereafter, Mr Hannes Muller, who is the liquidator of 
Swifambo will come and set out what the position was at 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 216 of 220 
 
February 2020 in relation to the liquidation account of 
Swifambo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   They are quite - I just point this out -
they are quite revealing as to who, on the face of it 
appearing not to be involved in providing any services 
received major benefits in some cases, amounting to 
millions of rands, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you choose not to say anything 
about how certain you are that Mr Mashaba would be here 
10 
for now you, you want to deal with that if it arises. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, let me place it on record, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is important, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What happened is once we got Mr 
Sacks’s report, and once we got the – well then we need 
the liquidators report and Mr Molefe’s replying affidavit in 
the Sifambo matter, we served a 3.3 on Mr Mashaba he did 
not respond to it.  We then asked for a 10.6, a regulation 
10.6…[intervene] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Affidavit…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did the Commission issue regulation 
10.6 directive for him to file an affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Which he did, and then we have 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 217 of 220 
 
asked thereafter, we were not certain whether he would 
come because he did not indicate any positive response to 
the 3.3 we therefore issued a summons for him to come 
tomorrow. 
In response, we got a letter from his attorney to say 
that they are of the view that summons is defective without 
giving 
any 
details 
about 
what 
was 
wrong 
with 
the 
summons, and Mr Mashaba will not be coming.  We 
immediately wrote back to them and said…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:  When was the letter received that came 
10 
from his attorney saying the summons was effective and 
they would not attend? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I do not have it with me but it was 
early last week, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you did send me the letter, I think 
it was on the same day, I think it was on Monday last week.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The same day that Mr Zuma was 
supposed 
to 
appear 
before 
the 
Commission, 
and 
I 
understood you to say the Commission received that letter 
20 
a few minutes after I had the adjourned those proceedings. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed Chairperson, and that is a 
point we raised in our response to – because what we are 
concerned about Chairperson…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think I must just say, Mr Molefe you 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 218 of 220 
 
can feel free to leave you are excuse, if you would like to 
leave. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But you are free to stay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are free to stay, as well, okay 
alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson and you are quite right, 
it is just that it was a week ago, and I had really been 
immersed myself in all of this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We noticed as soon as the letter 
10 
came from the attorney that it was at around 2:30 it was 
about the time proceedings of the Commission ended last 
Monday in regard to Mr Zuma’s non-attendance and the 
decision that you Chairperson had announced as to what 
was going to follow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And of course, there had been a letter 
from Mr Zuma’s attorneys that had come in the previous 
week, I do not know if it was Friday, which for the first time 
raised the issue of the summons have been irregular 
without any substantiation.  
20 
But what you are saying is that the attorneys for Mr 
Mashaba sent a letter to the Commission not long after the 
proceedings on Monday relating to Mr Zuma, we adjourned 
and they to raised the issue that the summons was 
irregular or defective, and that he would therefore Mr 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 219 of 220 
 
Mashaba 
would 
therefore 
not 
appear 
before 
the 
Commission.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And just like Mr Zuma’s attorneys Mr 
Mashaba’s attorneys did not substantiate their contention 
that the summons was defective.  They did not say, what 
were the grounds for them saying the summons was 
defective, and they cited that Mr Mashaba would not 
comply with the summons tomorrow. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  We immediately wrote and 
10 
Chairperson I must place that on record, we immediately 
wrote back and said, two important things.  We dealt with 
the timing of the letter, that it had come just about the time 
that the proceedings had been finalised on Monday last 
week.  But the second point we made is and it was based 
once the issues you Chairperson had raised that Mr Zuma’s 
non-attendance might have these consequences.  
And 
we 
pointed 
out 
that 
you 
had 
in 
those 
proceedings said if you have a problem take the matter to 
court and set aside the summons, until it is set aside the 
20 
summons remains effective.  And that is where we are, we 
have sent that letter back we have not received a response 
to that.  So we are hoping that good sense prevails and Mr 
Mashaba will be here, and he will then be questioned on 
the bases of his affidavit. 
23 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 348 
 
Page 220 of 220 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay no that is fine.  Okay, we are 
going to adjourn for the day then otherwise tomorrow we 
will proceed with PRASA related evidence as Mr Soni 
indicated. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 24 FEBRUARY 2021 
