 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
25 JANUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 330 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 183 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
25 JANUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 3 of 183 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 25 JANUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we are ready Chair to proceed 
with the events of the day but to begin with there are 
present 
at 
least 
ten 
legal 
representatives; 
some 
representing the same party; others representing others 
but as discussed in chambers Chair may they place 
10 
themselves on record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes please they can do so.  You may do 
so from where you are seated if your microphone works.  If 
your microphone does not work you might have to go to the 
podium then but they will sanitise the podium before you 
use it.   
ADV KGOROEADIRA:   Thank you Mr Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:   I beg leave to remove my mask 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
20 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:   Thanks.  Chairperson my name is 
Rapulane Gaositwe Michael Kgoroeadira from Kgoroeadira 
Mudau Incorporated. I represent Mr Fraser [?], Adv [?] 
Bongo, Mr Venematuma, Mr Graham Engel, Mr Prince 
Makwatana, Ms Martie Wallace, Ms Moliem Mnana and Ms 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 4 of 183 
 
Roxanne Human who are likely to be implicated today. 
 
One has to add Chairperson that our counsel – or 
before getting to our counsel I will be appearing with two 
of my colleagues Chris Mudau and Tshepo Gomomo [?].  
They will be joining us a bit later.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:   Our counsel is Advocate Moses 
Skhikhane 
and 
Advocate 
P 
[?] 
Motsepe 
who 
are 
unfortunately not able to join us today.  With your 
permission Chairperson I would like to address on a few 
10 
other issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us finish the introductions first and 
then when everybody has introduced themselves and 
placed themselves on record then you can address me on 
the other issues. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:   Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV RENDANI: Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV RENDANI:  My name is Advocate Brumbi Rendani.  
20 
Chairperson 
I 
am 
on 
instruction 
from 
PG 
Matseke 
Attorneys.  I will be appearing herein with my instructing 
attorney Ms Palesa Matseke. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure whether with the mask on 
the transcribers would have heard everything you say.  I 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 5 of 183 
 
want to see if there is an indication that – ja they say they 
did hear.  Okay alright.  Thank you.  Okay thank you. 
ADV RENDANI:  Chairperson I do not know if for the 
purpose of recording if I should say my client in terms of 
who I am representing? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry just raise your voice I am 
struggling to hear you. 
ADV RENDANI:  Chairperson I was saying for the purpose 
of record I do not know if it is permissible to say to my 
client who I am representing. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you – you know best what it is that 
might militate against you saying who you represent.  You 
might wish to – I do not know if you might have had a 
discussion with Mr Pretorius on the issue 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair certain persons who will 
testify or may be implicated have been given pseudonyms 
to protect identities for various reasons related to state 
security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If the person being represented is 
20 
such a person you may use the pseudonym. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes what – because the intelligence 
community has got its own special features and there is 
legislation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Quite correct. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 6 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  To that certain people their identities 
need to be protected.  So – so I guess that if your client is 
one such person then there will have to be some alphabet 
given to him.  Maybe Mr Pretorius may assist because he 
knows up to what alphabet he has used so far. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No in the documentation each such 
person whose identity requires protection has been given a 
pseudonym and so … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In he… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So representatives would know. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Oh okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So their legal representatives then 
are invited certainly by us Chair it is in your hands. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  However. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  To use that pseudonym. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  
ADV RENDANI:  Chairperson thank you for that.  We had a 
serious issue with the pseudonym that was used for our 
20 
client that is why which I started by asking permission in 
terms of if I should – if it would be necessary for me to say 
the name because the pseudonym that is used is closely if 
not same in terms of pronunciation to our client. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – I think I would suggest that you 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 7 of 183 
 
get an opportunity to discuss with Mr Pretorius – to discuss 
that issue with Mr Pretorius to see if you cannot reach 
agreement and then once there has been that discussion 
then I can be told what the position is. 
ADV RENDANI:  I think I will agree with that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that alright? 
ADV RENDANI:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So for now I am not going to know who 
you represent but I know you represent somebody. 
ADV RENDANI:  Thank you Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV [?]: Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
 My name is 00:07:09 I will be in these proceedings or from 
Sikeya 
Attorneys 
I 
will 
be 
in 
these 
proceedings 
representing the former Minister Mr David Mahlongo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay alright.  Now if 
everybody – if all the legal representatives – oh there is 
still another one.  Oh I am sorry okay. 
ADV 
GAWULA: 
Good 
morning 
Chair, 
good 
morning 
20 
everyone. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
 I am Neville Gawula from Gawula Incorporated on behalf 
of Ms Mokwena.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you – thank you.  Just sanitise 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 8 of 183 
 
before passing it on to somebody.. 
ADV SAULI:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV SAULI:   Yes Chairperson.  My name is Puseletso 
Sauli I am here on behalf of Abrahams Kiewits Attorneys.  
Our clients name has been used as Apricot the pseudonym 
but they are not a member of the intelligence community or 
anything but we – to follow what has been done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think there is something wrong 
either with your voice or with. 
10 
ADV SAULI:   Can you hear me now? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or with the microphone. 
ADV SAULI:   Oh okay yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it is your voice or how you are 
holding the microphone. 
ADV SAULI:   Okay thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just start afresh. 
ADV SAULI:   Oh yes morning Commissioner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning.  
ADV SAULI:   My name is Puseletso Sauli on behalf of 
20 
Abrahams Kiewits Attorneys. Our client’s name has been 
used as the pseudonym Apricot in the documents and so 
we – we will stick to that for now.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV LAMOLA: Good morning my name is Madimetja 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 9 of 183 
 
Lamola am I audible Deputy Chief Justice? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just start afresh please. 
ADV LAMOLA:  My name is Madimetja Lamola. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LAMOLA:  From Lamola Attorneys in Pretoria. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I can hear you. 
ADV LAMOLA:  Yes.  We are here on behalf of Dr 
Siyabonga Cele.  We are already on record in this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV LAMOLA:  Thank you very much. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much. 
ADV NDEBELE:   Morning Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV NDEBELE:    My name is Advocate Bheki Ndebele 
from the Pretoria Bar representing Dr Mufamadi and the 
State Security Agency.  I am with my senior colleague 
Marumo Morane who is joining the commission virtually.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay thank you. 
ADV NDEBELE:    Thank you. 
20 
ADV MORANE:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where is the… 
ADV MORANE:   Can you hear me? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is Mr Morane’s voice but I cannot 
see him. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 10 of 183 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He is present remotely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes Mr Morane.  Good morning. 
ADV MORANE:   Good morning Chair.  Good morning 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV MORANE:   As my colleague has said Mr Ndebele I 
represent Mr Mufamadi instructed by the State Attorney in 
these proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you Mr Morane – thank 
you. 
10 
ADV MORANE:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes well was that the last one of the 
legal representatives to introduce themselves and place 
themselves on record?  It looks like.  Now I think one of 
them wanted to raise some preliminary issues.  I am giving 
you a chance to indicate now what those are before – what 
they are – I am not saying that we must discuss them I just 
want to know what they are and then we will – I till indicate 
where in the sequence of events they may need to be dealt 
with. 
20 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Thanks Chairperson.  The issues I 
want to raise one is to do with our appearance. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair may I ask. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If he is sufficiently distanced my 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 11 of 183 
 
learned friend is sufficiently distanced from everybody else 
that he be permitted to remove his mask so that we can 
hear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes so we can hear clearly yes. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  I had forgotten your permission 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  My apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  The one issue that we want to raise 
10 
Chairperson has to do with our appearance on behalf of – 
or the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The number of clients you are appearing 
for? 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Yes there are issues with regards to 
their appearance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:   
2. We would also want to bring an application for the 
proceedings to be held in camera. 
20 
3. Want to – would like to request or rather to address 
Chairperson on a request or requests that we have made 
for documentation and finally on the inability. of our clients 
to elect whether … 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the what of your clients? 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 12 of 183 
 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Inability. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Of our clients to elect whether they 
would want to give evidence, call any witnesses or cross-
examine any of the witnesses against them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm.  Well  
1. As far as you wish to bring any application you – you 
would have read the rules you know what to do to 
comply with them. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Well Chairperson the rules provide 
10 
for 
the 
application 
to 
be 
a 
substantial 
kind 
of 
an 
application but they do not exclude a possibility of an 
application being made from the Bar as we intend doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if it is an application for evidence to 
be heard in camera I think it should need to be a 
substantive application. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Okay – well Chairperson in the 
case… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is quite a serious matter it is not one of 
those just procedural and simple things. 
20 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Well we – we are probably willing to 
at least leave out that application but I just move in on 
other issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay well I am not sure about the 
other – you – the other issues you said is the inability of 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 13 of 183 
 
your client’s to elect – to exercise one or more of their 
rights in terms of rules.  Can you elaborate on that I am 
not sure what that is? 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  This is related to their rights to 
legal representation.  As things are Chairperson my 
instructions in respect of all my clients except Mr Fraser 
and today but what we would like perhaps the assistance 
of the commission and going forward.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not need – you do not mean you 
are asking the commission to provide financial assistance 
10 
for his to employ a… 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  No not at all.  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So.. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Well – but if the commission is 
willing to work with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what kind of assistance do you ask 
for the commission? 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Chairperson in keeping with Rule 
3.3.5 of the Commission’s Rules the notice advised our 
clients that they are entitled to be assisted with – by a 
20 
legal representative of their choice.  Consequently apart 
from Mr Fraser who was already represented all other 
clients upon receipt of the Rule 3.3.5 Notices or Rule 3.3 
Notices 
applied 
to 
the 
State 
Security 
Agency 
for 
confirmation that the agency would be responsible for their 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 14 of 183 
 
fees.  The application to the agency is informed by the fact 
that the activities forming the basis of the evidence 
implicating them – official activities of the agency or rather 
they relate to official activities of the agency and in the – 
well as members and in the case of Advocate Bongo in his 
capacity then as the Minister of State Security.  Such a 
request we submit Chairperson to the agency is not 
unprecedented. As we know… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I can understand the request to the 
agency but I am trying to understand where the commission 
10 
comes in. So what is – what relief are you asking from the 
commission in regard to that? 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Well the relief that we seek from 
the commission is that to the extent that the agency has to 
date failed to respond to our clients applications.  We 
request then that the commission at the very least I 
suppose at all… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Interferes. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  No not interfere. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want the commission… 
20 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  At the very least to – to 00:16:41 
the agency to at the very – to respond to the application.  
They do not have to say yes as per the direction of the 
agency – of the commission but there must be a response.  
There has been no response whatsoever and it affects our 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 15 of 183 
 
clients’ right to representation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I thought attorneys have quite some 
weapon that they normally do when somebody is not 
responding.  They threaten litigation.   
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Well at… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in a number of times then there 
would be a response either favourable or not favourable. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Chairperson you know there is no 
point in making threats that you cannot carry out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Surely definitely. 
10 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  My clients do not have the money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  To bring an urgent application to 
compel the agency to – at the very least to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  We – it is our submission that the 
Chairperson is better placed at the very least to – to 
request the agency to respond to our application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I would have liked to assist but I do not 
think that I have got any power to get involved in those 
20 
matters. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  But when you see that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And of course – and of course you are 
not pointing to anything in any instrument that gives me 
that power.  Of course – of course it would be good that 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 16 of 183 
 
though everyone who needs legal assistance should get 
legal assistance in order to – to be here but I – we cannot 
get involved in under what circumstances he should be 
granted or should not be granted you know. We cannot – 
we do not – that falls outside our jurisdiction.  You 
understand that. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  We cannot take the matter any 
further Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  But … 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  And I suppose… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And we hope the security – the agency 
will – will at least respond one way or another. 
ADV KGOROEADIRA:  Given what you know about the 
agency they are not going to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Okay thank you very much.   
UNKNOWN COUNSEL: Chair with your permission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  I am not sure whether I – while Mr 
Kgoroeadira was on this point also point out – point out to 
the commission we also have almost a similar points to 
20 
raise with the commission.  I cannot take it further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But at least you know exactly what I have 
said to your colleague. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  That is correct.  I am just noting 
for the record. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 17 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  That we have a similar situation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay alright thank you.  Okay 
alright.  Mr Pretorius I now give you a chance to – you 
want to do your opening or to explain certain issues? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  May I just for the assistance of my 
learned colleagues just enumerate the four applications.  
The first and I will deal with them in a reverse order.  The 
first in relation to legal representation what may be termed 
an application for cajolement you have made your position 
10 
clear there Chair. 
 
The second is the availability and the time when a 
person can appear that can be part of the substantive 
application.  It is not an urgent application to be made now 
and you will no doubt deal with such applications as you 
have dealt with others when they come. 
 
The third is an application for documentation.  That 
too can be properly motivated and set out and properly 
responded to.  Much of the information we have received in 
correspondence deals with documents which have not been 
20 
declassified 
and 
that 
would 
take 
a 
process 
if 
the 
production of the documentation is warranted. 
 
And the application to hear evidence in camera 
Chair must be brought properly – properly motivated on 
behalf of specific people.  I can just give you the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 18 of 183 
 
assurance Chair that the evidence to be given at least by 
the first two witnesses this week does not go further than 
what has been officially declassified by the Director 
General and consultation with the President’s office and 
what is already in the public domain.   
 
May I proceed then? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair you – you have before you a 
printed copy of the opening address.  It is necessary with 
respect to place certain matters on record to place the 
10 
evidence in its proper context. 
 
It is a document in a red plastic folder.  Chair the 
evidence to be given this week at least orally deals with 
evidence in regard to the conduct of the State Security 
Agency and that evidence is given in the context of the 
evidence that the commission has heard in relation to Law 
Enforcement Agencies as a whole. 
 
The evidence given to date has focussed principally 
on the prosecutorial arm of the state particular the 
National Prosecuting Authority and the policing arm of the 
20 
state.   
 
We 
have 
dealt 
with 
the 
South African 
Police 
Service, the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigations, 
Crime 
Intelligence 
and 
the 
Independent 
Police 
Investigative Directorate.  So it is in that context that the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 19 of 183 
 
evidence of this week will be given where we will focus on 
the intelligence arm of the state. 
 
Intelligence functions Chair are shared in this 
country 
under 
our 
constitution 
by 
three 
main 
Law 
Enforcement Agencies. 
 
The first is the Intelligence Division of SAPS – 
South African Police Service.  That is Crime Intelligence. 
 
The second is the Intelligence Division of the 
Defence Force and the third is the State Security Agency. 
 
You 
have 
heard 
evidence 
concerning 
Crime 
10 
Intelligence.  We will deal this week with the State Security 
Agency. 
 
What we will deal with Chair are the features of the 
State Security framework which deal with vulnerabilities in 
the regulatory framework and which make the Intelligence 
Services 
particularly 
or 
especially 
susceptible 
to 
appropriation of capacity resources and financial resources 
for improper political and personal gain. 
 
What 
the 
evidence 
will 
deal 
with 
is 
the 
appropriation and I use that word deliberately it is not to 
20 
foreshadow any findings you may make on them – meaning 
of the word capture in the context of the evidence as a 
whole.  But the appropriation of state resources in 
contravention of the constitutional framework for improper 
political and personal gain. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 20 of 183 
 
 
Of course what makes matters difficult is that the 
sensitive and secret nature of intelligence operations and 
in 
our 
evidence 
we 
will 
respect 
legitimate 
secrecy 
requirements and I stress legitimate secrecy requirements 
of the Intelligence arm of the executive. 
 
It carries a heightened risk because it is in secret 
and 
because 
it 
is 
largely 
unaccountable 
there 
is 
a 
heightened risk of corruption as operational funds and 
operational activities are not subject to the same level of 
scrutiny as other public budgets. 
10 
 
The evidence will also deal with oversight bodies.  
The Inspector General of Intelligence will testify.  The Joint 
Standing Committee on Intelligence – a Parliamentary 
Committee will be dealt with in evidence and matters 
related to the Auditor General of South Africa will be dealt 
with in the evidence. 
 
We will also deal with the role of Law Enforcement 
Agencies in relation to the alleged criminal activities of the 
State Security Agency.   
 
For example you will hear Chair that much of the 
20 
evidence of the alleged criminality to be led this week was 
actually handed over to the Hawks as early as 2019 and 
more recently handed over to the NPA. 
 
We will also address certain other questions as to 
in relation to the Law Enforcement Agencies and in relation 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 21 of 183 
 
to the State Security Agency itself had they been operating 
properly under the proper supervision of the Parliamentary 
Committee the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence 
and the Law Enforcement Agencies themselves whether 
much of the work that this commission is doing would have 
been necessary had the Law Enforcement Agencies played 
their part and you have heard much evidence about that 
and we will deal with that again in relation to the State 
Security Agency. 
 
Chair the approach that this commission has taken 
10 
consistently throughout is to ask the question firstly what 
happened and that is part of the public nature of this 
inquiry – this inquiry must investigate and the public is 
entitled to know precisely what happened and that is the 
basis upon which the evidence this week will be led. 
 
But 
more 
– 
perhaps 
just 
as 
important 
the 
commission has focused on why this would happen – how 
could it happen that these acts of corruption alleged state 
capture, fraud could occur and we will deal with that issue 
as well. 
20 
 
And thirdly in relation to steps that can be taken to 
put matters rights is that we are to ensure that these 
things do not happen again. 
 
Now in relation to those three questions we must 
stress Chair that we have had a great deal of cooperation 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 22 of 183 
 
both from the President’s office and from the office of the 
Director General of the SSA and steps have been taken 
and we will detail those steps.  Whether the investigations 
have gone far enough; whether everything that should be 
dealt with has been dealt with is another question and that 
is a matter that you will adjudicate at the end of the day. 
 
But what the SSA evidence will show we know that 
in relation to Law Enforcement Agencies their inaction 
contributed to a great deal in accordance with the evidence 
given should you accept it to what occurred and that is one 
10 
of the reasons why it was allowed to happen. 
 
But the evidence in relation to the State Security 
Agency goes further.  Not only were the surveillance or 
intelligence functions which should have seen what was 
going on and taken steps to deal with and we know of 
evidence given previously that warnings were given to the 
former President. 
 
What not only did the SSA not do its work – that is 
what the evidence will be.  But the SSA embarked upon 
projects itself in a manner which was completely in 
20 
contravention of constitutional principles and constitutional 
dictates to appropriate the capacity and the resources of 
the 
Intelligence 
Agency 
to 
favour 
political 
interests, 
factional political interests and other beneficiaries who 
were not entitled to those benefits and that is what you will 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 23 of 183 
 
hear about this week.  
 
 
So, firstly Chair, State Capture has an intelligence 
failure.  In other words, the allegations that had been made 
before you that are alleged to constitute State Capture to 
what extent the address the question will be addressed was 
this as a result of or contributed to by a failure of the 
intelligence arm.  You have heard some evidence there 
already Chair. 
 
Secondly.  To what extent were factual interest that 
enabled corruption, allegation of State Capture protected by 
10 
the State Security Agency or capacitated by parts of the 
State Security Agency to protect. 
 
Thirdly.  To what extent was the SSA itself involved in 
corruption and the abuse of state resources.  And so, the 
evidence may show and certainly there will be evidence to 
the 
effect 
that 
the 
State 
Security 
Agency 
itself 
by 
appropriating 
state 
resources 
for 
illegitimate 
means 
including corruption may itself constitute the unconstitutional 
and unlawful appropriation of state resources which may well 
when you finally decide on the definition of State Capture 
20 
constitute a direct project of State Capture. 
 
And of course Chair, the secrecy and unaccountability 
that places a veil of secrecy over the activities of the State 
Security Agency compound the problem unless there is strict 
legislative financial and supervisory control particularly at 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 24 of 183 
 
the level of the Inspector-General and the Parliamentary 
Committee 
and 
questions 
will 
be 
asked 
about 
the 
effectiveness of these bodies at the relevant time. 
 
We will also deal and today’s evidence will deal with it to 
a certain extent Chair with the perceptibility of intelligence 
agencies to politicisation.   
 
You will have heard evidence in relation to the white 
paper and how attempts were made in 1994 to transform the 
intelligence arms of the state so that they could comply with 
a very carefully thought out constitutional dispensation. 
10 
 
And one of the primary objects of the new intelligence 
dispensation was that it should not be used for political 
purposes let alone factional political purposes. 
 
Unfortunately, that was not carried out in the period 
under review and the susceptibility of the intelligence 
agencies to politicisation was in fact realised to a great 
degree over that period. 
 
If I may take the time because I think it is important 
Chair to place this in its proper context as a matter of 
principle. 
20 
 
In paragraph 43 we quote – in fact, a member of the 
Mufamadi Panel, Professor Laurie Nathan, who says: 
“Intelligence agencies the world over have special 
powers that permit them to operate with a high level 
of secrecy and acquire confidential information 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 25 of 183 
 
through the use of intrusive measures. 
Politicians and intelligence officers can abuse these 
powers to infringe civil liberties, favour of prejudice 
political parties and thereby subvert democracy. 
Because of their proximity to the country’s rulers 
and their capacity to fair it out personal and party 
secrets, intelligence agencies have the means to 
wield undue influence within the state and political 
arena. 
In the light of these dangers established a new 
10 
democracy the like are confronted by the challenge 
of ensuring that the intelligence services respect the 
democratic system and are subject to democratic 
control. 
The failure to achieve this in countries freshly 
unshackled from the authoritarianism can retard the 
consolidation of democracy. 
The obstacles to intelligences reform in these 
countries are formidable, however.   
They 
typically 
include 
an 
institutional 
culture 
20 
steeped in the repression of decent, the historical 
politicisation 
of 
the 
intelligence 
agencies, 
a 
pervasive 
believe 
that 
democratic 
controls 
will 
reduce the agencies effectiveness and the lack of 
expertise and confidence on the part of the new 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 26 of 183 
 
executive in parliament. 
Above all, reform is inhabitant by the extreme 
secrecy and political sensitivity of the intelligence 
community.” 
 
And those are precisely the challenges that had been 
faced and are continued to be faced by our intelligent 
agencies. 
 
There was a second important shift Chair that took place 
when the constitutional dispensation was set in motion in 
1994 and that was dealt with in the evidence of Shaik and 
10 
others last year Chair, where the reform of our own 
intelligence services coincided with the paradigm shift in 
global thinking on security. 
 
So to put it starkly and simply.  Under the previous 
dispensation prior to 1994, security was associated with a 
restriction 
of 
human 
rights, 
detention 
without 
trials, 
banning’s and the like and that was the front role and 
function of the security agencies in the Cold War context. 
 
The philosophy of intelligence agencies is to protect 
rights.  Now to expand rights, to ensure that citizens of a 
20 
country are protected by the intelligence agencies rather 
than their rights removed. 
 
And it seems that that principle too has fallen by the 
wayside in the period under review.  But that was the 
essence of the white paper. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 27 of 183 
 
 
And so Chair the notion that the intelligence community 
should be there to restrict or to partake in political factional 
struggles as it were or to ought to go beyond their mandate 
which is a protection of human security as a whole rather 
than state security or parts of the state for example the 
former president is fundamental to the evidence that will 
follow. 
 
Another issues arises which is an issue of principle 
Chair and that is the evidence that will be given makes it 
very clear that there should be a division between the 
10 
powers and functions of the executives the one hand and the 
operations of state security agencies on the other. 
 
To preserve the independence and the capacity of the 
intelligence agencies to do their job.  That principle too has 
been eroded and we will place before you the relevant 
legislation that deals with the role of the minister and the 
powers of the minister and the duties of the minister in terms 
of 2013 amendments to the legislation and the constitutional 
principle which is set out in paragraph 51 that it is only the 
political responsibility that rests and not the functional and 
20 
operational responsibility that rests with the minister. 
 
However, that does not seem to be reflected in the 
current legislation and it is something that you will be 
addressed on in due course. 
 
So the high level review panel chaired by Dr Mufamadi 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 28 of 183 
 
who will give evidence, itself made the observation that the 
legislative powers relevant to the operations of the state 
security agency under the control, in fact, of – and 
supervision of the minister, seemed to cut through the 
necessary boundary between political and administrative 
management and that their delegation downwards may be at 
the whim of a particular minister.  But you will hear detailed 
evidence about that in due course. 
 
And then the third weakness that has given rise to much 
of what you will hear about in evidence is the weakness in 
10 
the regulatory framework and financial controls and some 
evidence will be given there as to the frustration that the 
Auditor-General’s office has suffered in the past and in due 
course steps taken to remedy that situation. 
 
And then of course secrecy, the use of classification and 
covert operations.  Now quite interestingly Chair.  The 
legislation empowers the minister to make regulations 
including 
regulations 
regarding 
classification, 
declassification and the like. 
 
And that same act says that the minister need not 
20 
publish these regulations.  So one has the result that 
regulations which governs secrecy and the extent and the 
ability of the minister and the law enforcement agencies to 
keep matters secret is itself secret which is completely 
contrary to our constitutional principles. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 29 of 183 
 
 
So for example – and there has been recent litigation 
where members of the public, Chapter 9 institutions or non-
governmental organisations with an interest of promoting and 
preserving democracy have an interest in whether a matter is 
classified or declassified. 
 
Has an interest or have an interest in ensuring that the 
weapon of classification is not abused to conceal criminality, 
is not abused to conceal governmental inefficiency or is not 
used 
to 
prevent 
an 
embarrassment 
to 
any 
interested 
government party. 
10 
 
But despite the fact that the citizen and citizen bodies 
have an interest in knowing those boundaries, that regulation 
is concealed from it.  They are not entitled, as we 
understand the approach, at present being conducted by the 
ministry.  We are not entitled to see the law which governs 
the very law that affects us.  But we will deal with that Chair 
in due course. 
 
And I am referring there particularly Chair to Chapter 25 
of the regulations issued by the minister in terms of 
Section 37(1) of the Intelligence Services Act.  That material 
20 
is in the files. 
 
We deal in more detail at page 12 – it is not necessary 
for present purposes to go into too much detail but we deal 
in detail in the opening at least and will in due course deal 
with the powers statutory and otherwise, and in many 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 30 of 183 
 
instances abuse of those powers to keep documentation 
secret. 
 
So the white paper on intelligence in this regard says 
the following Chair: 
“The 
development 
of 
a 
more 
open 
intelligent 
community will go a long way towards demystifying 
and 
building 
trust 
in 
the 
national 
intelligence 
community where legal limited secrecy including 
criteria and timeframes for classification are clearly 
understood and accepted by society, the dangers of 
10 
the intelligence system becoming self-serving are 
reverted.” 
 
But of course Chair, the irony is that those legal limits 
dealing with classification at least are also secret.  And then 
Chair we will deal in evidence with Covid operations.   
 
The evidence in regard to what was actually done in the 
period under review is to put it at its least disturbing term.  
And one of the difficulties, of course, that an intelligence 
agency will face is what is lawful and what is unlawful. 
 
But many of the projects, in fact most of the projects 
20 
about which you will hear, were manifestly unlawful and they 
will be dealt with at least in summary and to a high level 
degree by Dr Mufamadi. 
 
We will also deal with the high level conditions which 
gave rise to the evidence of the unlawful projects about 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 31 of 183 
 
which we will hear.  You have heard about the centralisation 
of authority within the SSA in 2009 through the proclamation 
which was then issued and regularised by legislation only in 
2013 and detail about that has been given in evidence and 
will be expanded upon by Dr Mufamadi and others. 
 
But 
again, 
the 
centralisation 
which 
was 
done 
by 
proclamation in 2009 is, it highlights one very important 
failure in oversight mechanism.  Parliament knew in 2009 
that to change the structures and amend security legislation 
on the basis that was purported to be done in terms of the 
10 
proclamation had to be done by Parliament, had to go though 
the consultation process in Parliament. 
 
When this happened Parliament remained supine until 
2013 when the act was finally put into position “regularising” 
what was done quite improperly and unconstitutionally by 
proclamation in 2009. 
 
So quite apart from the direct actors there was a 
complete failure on the part of Parliament in relation to that.  
The weakening of oversight therefore is a fundamental factor 
in answering the second question that you addressed Chair 
20 
and that is:  How could this have happened?  Why was it not 
picked up?  Why was it not dealt with when it should have 
been dealt with? 
 
Chair, if I may just mention two things that will arise in 
evidence. 
 
In 
2006, 
a 
principle 
agent 
network 
was 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 32 of 183 
 
established.  It was terminated in 2011.  Arising out of what 
were quite clearly unlawful activities, there were a number of 
investigations.  Those were the Pan Investigation.  That 
investigation was initiated in 2009 and finished in 2012.   
 
However, the unlawful activities did not end and why that 
happened and at whose instance that happened will be dealt 
with in evidence. 
 
So that during the period 2012 to 2018, further activities 
took place about which you will hear in some detail which 
were 
manifestly 
unlawful 
and 
undermining 
of 
our 
10 
constitutional democracy. 
 
That period has been and is being investigated by the 
SSA internally itself.  The problem is that that investigation 
does not have the powers, ironically, that a thorough and 
proper investigation should have.  And you will hear of many 
projects which have yet to be fully investigated, projects of 
great concern and that is Project Veza. 
 
So you have Pan on the one hand dealing with the 
principle agent network and activities and investigation 
dealing with an earlier period and Project Veza dealing with 
20 
investigations of activities in a later period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the v-e-z-a is probably isiZulu and 
would be Veza.  Project Veza. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Veza.  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which means something along the lines 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 33 of 183 
 
that you must show or abrupt(?) something.   
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 Yes, 
we 
have 
adopted 
the 
pronunciation that we were told. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Veza.  Project Veza. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the point is taken Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Project Veza. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Project Veza.  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, so the evidence that will be 
placed 
before 
you 
will 
begin 
with 
the 
evidence 
of 
10 
Dr Mufamadi.  Dr Mufamadi was appointed by the President, 
the sitting President in 2018 to chair a high level review 
panel.  And he produced a report.   
 
They finished their work in 2018.  You will hear about 
the panel and its expertise and its work.  They produced a 
report in 2018, redacted version of the report. 
 
One of the concerns that Dr Mufamadi will raise is that 
people seem to have been asleep when the report was 
released.  The reaction that should have emanated from the 
release of that report just was not there and that is a matter 
20 
that Dr Mufamadi will testify to. 
 
The release of the report was conditional.  It was 
released in a redacted form.  In other words, certain 
sensitive areas of investigation and the outcome was 
redacted from the report. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 34 of 183 
 
 
In cooperation with the Director-General, the office of 
the SSA and the President’s office, the Commission was 
given access to the full report and was able to consider that 
full report. 
 
However, that full report is classified or was classified.  
Then there was a process of interaction between the 
Commission 
and 
the 
state 
security 
agency 
and 
the 
President’s office. 
 
Of course, this Commission is duty bound to protect 
what legitimately and I stress the word legitimately should be 
10 
protected, names of operatives and legitimate intelligence 
methods.  Those are entitled to take place to a degree of 
legitimate or under a veil of legitimate secrecy. 
 
But what is not, for example criminality, cannot ever be 
covered legitimately through any classification process and 
the Secret Regulation say so. 
 
Chair, but we have now a further version of the report 
which contains far more or a greater degree of information 
than the redacted version released to the public originally 
contained. 
20 
 
So the President and the SSA itself have cooperated in 
an endeavour principle conducted by the Director-General of 
the SSA who has the powers to declassify to produce a 
further version of the report which is in the bundle. 
 
The Project Veza Investigation will be dealt with in detail 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 35 of 183 
 
in evidence this week and the fruits of that investigation.  
For that purpose the Director-General has given permission 
for persons who otherwise would be precluded by law from 
speaking to communicate with the Commission and to give 
evidence. 
 
So much of the evidence – in fact all of the evidence 
that is given this week Chair and that should be a matter of 
interest to legal representatives here, is either evidence 
already in the public domain. 
 
Much of the evidence, in fact, is already in the redacted 
10 
version released by the President in 2018, let alone the 
expanded version now available to the Commission for public 
release. 
 
Or it is evidence which the Director-General himself on 
consideration has determined may be released in the 
hearings of this Commission.  So anything of a sensitive 
nature has the stamp of approval.  We have been very 
careful to clear that.   
 
Importantly Chair, there has not always been agreement 
and to the extent that there is disagreement that matter may 
20 
be canvassed in evidence or determined by yourself if it 
comes to that but for the moment we have cooperated to 
release most of the information, not all.  And the differences 
in approach between the legal team and the SSA will become 
apparent in due course.   
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 36 of 183 
 
 
So Chair, there are two reasons why the evidence that 
will be given this week must be given.  The first is that it is 
within our Terms of Reference.  That is not a difficult issue to 
determine.  We have statutory terms of reference as directed 
under the Constitution by the President.   
 
Quite simply, we must do our work.  The law enjoins us 
to give that evidence public.  People can respond, answer 
and implicated persons can put up concrete versions or 
cross-examine if necessary but the fairness aspect is dealt 
with. 
10 
 
The second is that the restoration of a proper intelligent 
service also demands the attention of this Commission.  We 
are obliged by your mandate to deal with it.   
 
Importantly Chair, as we know from Constitutional Court 
decisions and we know from the act under which we operate, 
the public have a right to know and that right to know must 
be respected. 
 
If there has been a threat to the institutions of our 
democracy through the operations covert and unlawful 
operations of the SSA, the public have a right to know. 
20 
 
That it is sensitive.  There are certain restrictions that 
we will respect but unlawful activity must be dealt with.  And 
so we will really address this week and in submissions 
before you in due course Chair or in evidence analyses 
before you in due course, answer the question as I stated 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 37 of 183 
 
earlier:  Were the capacity and resources of the state 
afforded to the SSA unlawfully appropriated under a veil of 
secrecy and unaccountability for personal, political and 
factional political gain Chair?  That is really what the 
evidence will deal with.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you Mr Pretorius.  We are at 
eleven.  I take it from you side you are ready to start 
leading? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair we are ready to begin. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There are some housekeeping matters 
10 
that need to be attended before you start with Dr Mufamadi.  
I think it will be convenient that we take the tea adjournment 
now so that when you start, then we can carry on until lunch 
time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will take the tea adjournment.  I hope 
that the preliminary or housekeeping issues to be dealt with 
can be finalised by quarter past but if they are not finalised 
there might be a delay before we resume.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I have been ready from quarter 
past, I understand that you needed more time.  Are you 
ready now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 38 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we are ready, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Please administer the 
oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second, if you are going to 
remove the mask later on you may as well remove it now.  
Ja.  Okay, alright, thank you.  Okay, alright. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Chair, I am sorry to be doing this, 
with your permission, if we may? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
UNKNOWN 
COUNSEL: 
 
You 
directed 
us 
before 
the 
adjournment that we have a housekeeping discussion 
before we proceed with this witness.  May I bring to bring 
to 
your 
attention 
that 
we 
indeed 
engaged 
what 
my 
colleague have asked from the lead team.  The evidence 
that is going to be led partly will also implicate my client 
and there were notices that were provided to us, about 
three pages of it, and we have heard from the evidence 
leaders, Mr Pretorius, suggesting that there is at least 
20 
three reports, or at least …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   At least they...? 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  There is three reports, Chair, and 
particularly there is a final version that has recently been 
discovered which will be used as this witness lead 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 39 of 183 
 
evidence. 
 
We 
have 
not 
been 
provided 
with 
these 
documents and part of us placing us placing on record on 
last week and as and when we were briefed, we have been 
in engagement with the Commission, however we have not 
been responded to, at least to an extent of being provided 
all the necessary documents.  It might be so, Chair, that 
my colleague, Mr [indistinct] 02.25 had pointed preliminary 
issues which I think, Chair, we need your guidance and 
direction because to me it is not clear.  Maybe it is just my 
lack of understanding.  Chair, there is …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I think let us do the oath first and 
then after you can continue. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
FHOLISANI SYDNEY MUFAMADI:   My name is Fholisani 
Sydney Mufamadi.  
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
DR MUFAMADI:   I have no objection. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
DR MUFAMADI:   I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give  
will be the truth the whole truth and nothing else but the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 40 of 183 
 
truth.  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
DR MUFAMADI:   So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Let me check whether the 
transcribers could hear the registrar?  You could not hear 
her?  Ja.  No, I think you must take off your mask so that 
they can hear you.  I am sorry, Dr Mufamadi, the oath has 
to be repeated, they did not hear her. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
10 
FHOLISANI SYDNEY MUFAMADI:   Fholisani Sydney 
Mufamadi.  
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
DR MUFAMADI:   No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
DR MUFAMADI:   I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give  
will be the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth.  
20 
If so, please raise your right hand and say so help me God. 
DR MUFAMADI:   So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  You may be seated, Dr 
Mufamadi.  Thank you very much, Dr Mufamadi, for coming 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 41 of 183 
 
to assist the Commission and to give evidence.  Thank you.  
Mr Pretorius, you may proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  If I may just say, 
Chair, 
the 
document 
that 
has 
been 
requested 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, counsel had something that 
he had started dealing with and I said I would give him a 
chance to deal with it after the oath.  Do you want to 
confer with him?  Ja, ja, okay.  It looks like the matter is 
settled.  Ja.  Okay, alright. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, just for transparency sake, 
the 3.3 notice that is issued in terms of the rule to persons 
who are implicated or may be implicated contains full detail 
of the implicating evidence.  Supporting documentation or 
documentation 
which 
may 
be 
considered 
relevant 
to 
evidence to be given in rebuttal or used in cross-
examination should such an application be granted is 
normally dealt with between the parties.  We have issued 
well over a hundred 3.3 notices, we are dealing with 
volumes of correspondence over the weekend and the truth 
20 
of the matter is once the document is tabled it becomes 
public domain and will be made available to my learned 
friend and it is going to be tabled now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Mufamadi, would you go please 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 42 of 183 
 
to EXHIBIT YY2? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Pretorius, you confirm that we 
will be using mainly if not exclusively SSA bundle 02? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For the duration of Mr Mufamadi’s 
evidence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For Dr Mufamadi’s evidence we will 
be using SSA bundle 02. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Which contains the statements of a 
10 
number of witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the moment we would just like 
to place on record EXHIBIT YY2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Which is the statement of Dr 
Mufamadi together with the high level review panel report 
and it is the classified version before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Dr Mufamadi, do you have EXHIBIT 
20 
YY2 before you? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is your affidavit and annexure 
but if we go please to page 32 and we are dealing with the 
black numbers in the top left hand corner. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 43 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   Page 32 you say? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes please. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that your signature there? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one just above the word deponent 
because there are two signatures …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you look at the top left hand 
corner, Dr Mufamadi, of that page. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Of the page. 
10 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, that is my signature, yes.  So you 
are using the black numbers. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The black numbers. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can disregard the red numbers 
on the pages. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So happily ignore the red numbers, 
they are for administrative purposes only. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the statement that you have 
made for the purposes of your evidence begins at page 3 
of SSA2, do you see that?  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is your statement.  
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 44 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   This is my statement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you satisfied that the contents 
of that statement are true and correct? 
DR MUFAMADI:   I am satisfied, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  What is your current 
position, Dr Mufamadi? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius, sorry, do you ask me to 
admit this - - his affidavit as an exhibit? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes please, Chair, if you would 
admit it, it is EXHIBIT YY2, the affidavit and the document 
10 
annexed which we will deal with in evidence, to a degree.  
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Fholisani Sydney 
Mufamadi, which starts at page 3 is together with the 
annexures to be admitted at EXHIBIT YY2. 
AFFIDAVIT 
OF 
FHOLISANI 
SYDNEY 
MUFAMADI 
TOGETHER WITH ANNEXURES HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT 
YY2 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Your current 
position, Dr Mufamadi? 
DR MUFAMADI:   I am currently employed by the 
20 
University of Johannesburg as Director of the school.  
Well, it is now called the Centre for Public Policy and 
African Studies. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  The content of your 
evidence today, Dr Mufamadi, will deal with state security 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 45 of 183 
 
and the events over a period of review that we will come to 
in a moment.  Your background in this field, would you 
briefly place that before the Chair? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, I have been in public life for over 
45 years now.  Just to give you the relevant highlights, 
relevant to what we are about to discuss, during the 
transition from the apartheid dispensation to the new 
dispensation, I became one of the [indistinct] 11.10 of 
activists who were charged with the responsibility of 
managing that transition.  Those were difficult times when 
10 
one of the single biggest threats facing the transition was 
the politically orchestrated violence and needless to say, 
ending that violence was an important element of the 
equation of change.   
 
So I was one of the people who conceptualised 
what came to be known and the National Peace Accord 
involving all the politically interested parties in the country 
and therefore I even served on the National Peace 
Committee, which was a multi-party formation which sought 
to level the political playing field in the country at the time. 
20 
 
At some point in that transition, a transitional 
executive 
council 
was 
formed 
which 
really 
was 
a 
manifestation of a situation of dual power in the country 
because 
the 
elected 
bodies 
lacked 
the 
necessary 
legitimacy 
to 
see 
that 
transition 
through. 
 
So 
the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 46 of 183 
 
transitional executive council was formed and I served on 
one its sub-councils and that sub-council was called the 
sub-council on law and order and again, our responsibility 
was to ensure that there is effective governance of the 
conduct of people in the security establishment during that 
interregnum.   
 
This was really a period which required a lot of 
rethinking, reimagining because you could not do things in 
the same old way if you were going to have a thorough 
going process of transition in the country. 
10 
 
So one of the things we did in the sub-council on 
law 
and 
order 
was 
to 
conceptualise 
the 
normative 
framework with the practice of state craft in the functional 
area of security broadly defined to include even civilian 
intelligence.  So from that point of view I have been, I will 
say, a policy practitioner even before the new dispensation 
was instituted. 
 
I 
then 
participated 
also 
in 
the 
process 
of 
formulating 
the 
programme 
of 
demilitarising 
policing 
culture in the country.  I think the Chairperson will recall 
20 
the period during which a piece of legislation had to acted, 
it did not emanate from parliament, some people used to 
call it colloquially the Goldstone Act which talked to the 
issue of public order policing.  I was party to the process 
of conceptualising that whole framework and the legislation 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 47 of 183 
 
itself. 
 
So for sure from the point of view of practice I can 
lay some modest claim to having acquired some knowledge 
which I think the President recognised when he asked me 
to participate in this high level review panel on SSA.  
Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Dr Mufamadi, if you 
would then tell the Chair – and you deal with that in 
paragraph 2.1 of your statement of the high level review 
panel and your appointment and what its key objective was 
10 
in 2018.  You deal with that in paragraph 2.1. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes.  Well, really the objective, as the 
name implies, review panel, it was to be involved in a 
process of looking at the rear view mirror what happened in 
the period under review.  The role that was played by SSA 
and actually to look at okay, these are the functions of the 
civilian intelligence agency in the system of government, 
does 
the 
agency 
have 
the 
requisite 
capacity 
skilled 
personnel to executive the task it has?  That was one. 
 
The other the was to look at you do have oversight 
20 
mechanisms, since we are a constitutional democracy, 
which must be relied upon to ensure that organs of state 
act in accordance with the dictates of the law.  Are they 
adequate?  In instances where they may have been 
circumvented, why was it possible to circumvent this?  And 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 48 of 183 
 
the President was concerned that we should have really a 
professional security agency or intelligence agency and the 
question then would have been in instances where we find 
evidence which suggests otherwise what recommendations 
do we make to help the President to reconstitute a 
professional and national intelligence capability for the 
country that will respect and uphold the constitution and 
the relevant legislation.  In a nutshell that was the task 
given to the panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You were assisted, Dr Mufamadi, 
10 
by a number of people, we do not need to name them, but 
just very briefly, what was their level of experience and 
competence in the field? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, that panel brought together people 
with skill sets that were sort of sufficiently complementary 
to enable the collective to discharge the task given.  
Amongst the members of the panel you had practitioners of 
a craft itself who were no longer in the employ of the 
agency, you had progressive scholars who belonged to 
disciplinary communities whose occupations are germane 
20 
to the craft and therefore appropriate for the task at hand 
and, as I say, in their combination, the people on the 
panel, who I think were sufficiently equipped, to carry out 
the task. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If we may go back to paragraph 1.4 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 49 of 183 
 
of your statement, Dr Mufamadi, there you deal at a high 
level with at least four key findings of the panel.  Would 
you just talk to the contents of that paragraph please and 
we will come back to the panel in a moment. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, the key findings of the panel were 
that 
there 
had 
a 
been 
a 
serious 
politicisation 
and 
factionalisation of the intelligence community over what the 
we referred as the past decade, that period under review 
and this factionalisation actually refracted or reflected the 
factions that existed within the ruling party in the country 
10 
and we were presented with allegations which I am 
choosing to call evidence of disregard for the Constitution 
of the Republic, policy, legislation and other prescripts and 
part of the evidence given to us was indicating that the 
civilian intelligence community had been turned into a 
private 
resource 
to 
serve 
the 
political 
and 
personal 
interests of particular individuals.  We also noted that 
during the period under review there had been a doctrinal 
shift which was given effect to by the proclamation that 
was issued by the President in the year 2009. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think you might have to specify, I 
assume that was President Zuma.  You know, in 2009 there 
were two Presidents.  In the first few months of the year it 
was President Motlanthe and later on President Zuma.  So 
which one? 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 50 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   I need to be assured that I should not 
hide the name of a President.  No, the proclamation was 
issued by President Zuma in 2009 and the essence of it 
was in contradiction to the doctrines and outlined in the 
constitution and in the White Paper on intelligence and 
other prescripts.   
 
So the effect of it, the effect of it that it was a – 
rather let me say it, runs …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Dr Mufamadi, I see most of 
the time you have your hand here, is that light giving you a 
10 
problem? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One of the lights, is it giving you a 
problem, I see you have your hand here most of the time. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, it is giving me some problems but I 
did not want to go to war about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I am just thinking that for 
television and so on, put your hand here they might be 
complaining. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Oh yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think the technicians can just see 
what they can do but as we proceed, do indicate if there is 
no improvement. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think they will try and see what 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 51 of 183 
 
you can do.  But if necessary you can continue protecting 
yourself with your hand until they have sorted it out if – ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, Chair, so I was saying that 
proclamation, as we saw it, runs counter to the basic 
tenets of our constitutional democracy, it rides roughshod 
over 
the 
principle 
of 
separation 
of 
powers 
because 
proclamations have more or less the same status as 
regulations that get issued by ministers of government.  
10 
They cannot trump the constitution which is the supreme 
law of the land. 
 
So when you have a proclamation which establish a 
department called State Security and the ministry of State 
Security when the philosophical foundation of your security 
establishment is that here we are talking about National 
Security and not State Security, then you are usurping the 
role of the legislature but also, you see, that principle of 
separation of powers, what it is does is that it limits and 
constrains executive authority and I think as we go on you 
20 
will realise that there have been instances where the 
fetters on executive authority in practice were removed 
because there was this framework which was a deviation 
from the provisions of the constitution which promoted that 
kind of practice.    
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 52 of 183 
 
But also, the concept of State Security, Chair, has 
got really ominous connotations, it is anti-democratic.  As 
a country we cannot have suddenly forgotten where we 
come from before 1994 where we had an intelligence 
service which was in the service of war techniques 
because that was a warfare state which could only be 
maintained through suppression of the will of the majority 
of the people. 
So without that, the proclamation, besides issues of 
usurping the role of the legislature, was creating a 
10 
situation which once more ran the risk of bringing the 
security establishment back into the cockpit of our political 
system and with the possibility to re-choreograph the 
theatre of wrong deeds that we saw in the past, either 
political partiality or weaponisation of the intelligence 
community for purposes other than those which the agency 
existed for. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 1.4, Dr Mufamadi, 
you talk about the politisation and the factionalisation of 
the intelligence community.  You talk about it becoming a 
20 
private resourceful, personal and political gain.  You talk 
about the doctrinal shift away from what was conceived in 
1994 at the time of transition and the conclusion you lead 
to 
is 
the 
conclusion 
that 
there 
was 
a 
deliberate 
repurposing of the SSA, those are your words at the end of 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 53 of 183 
 
paragraph 1.4. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, as I was saying, you know, the 
repurposing meant in this instance that, as I say, there was 
no – there could not have been any confusion as to what 
the agency exists for.  You just look at the constitution, 
you look at the founding legislation of the civilian agency 
and I referred to it earlier on, the expectation that the 
Agency will be politically neutral, the expectation that the 
Agency will uphold the laws of the land, and as I am saying 
as we go forward you will see the basis on which we made 
10 
findings ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   ...of non-adherence to those prescripts. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you proceed Mr Pretorius it may 
be that this is not the right time, but maybe later, when you 
might be going into details on some of the findings. I would 
be interested in knowing whether - having regard to 
everything about the  issuing 
of 
a 
proclamation 
to 
do 
something that should not be done by way of proclamation 
20 
and the proclamation being inconsistent with what is 
contemplated in the constitution.   
Whether having regard to everything at the review 
panel and did take a view or whether if the review panel 
did not necessarily take a view.  Whether you think that the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 54 of 183 
 
- what seems like a breach of the constitution may have 
been oversight, or whether it was deliberate.   
You might not be able to say but I make an example 
about the Commission, if Dr Mufamadi has been watching 
the proceedings of the Commission for a long time and 
knows from that, that witnesses come in and sit there and 
give evidence from there and when his supposed to come 
and give evidence, he comes and sits here you would say, 
but he knows where the witnesses sit.  What happened? 
You know, it can be because he did not know.   
10 
So I wonder whether the panel dealt with that but if 
the panel did not deal with that, whether having regard to 
what was available was known, you might be able to say 
something.  If you are not able to say anything about it, 
that is fine but you can deal with it later on, if that is 
convenient.   
DR MUFAMADI:   Chair, well, as I say, the manner in which 
the matters that are contained in the proclamation were 
introduced 
was 
manifestly 
unconstitutional. 
 
Now 
in 
general, we ought to know what it is that the constitution 
20 
sought to avoid.  So if between the time or let me say, after 
the proclamation was introduced the things that the 
constitution 
sought 
to 
avoid, 
including 
what 
we 
are 
referring to as doctrinal shift.   
It is not just theoretical postulates it has some 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 55 of 183 
 
materiality. 
 
So, 
after 
the 
proclamation 
has 
been 
introduced, you see things happening at least for a period 
of four years because the relevant legislation so to speak 
which grounded – let me call it the new dispensation.   
If it took four years after the proclamation was 
issued, for the law to come into place, and so many things 
happened, which were untoward from the evidence given to 
us.  It becomes difficult to believe that the wrong things 
were not of proclamation provenance, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    In other words, are you saying it 
10 
becomes difficult to say to the extent that the proclamation 
went against the constitution.  This was because of 
oversight on the part of those who do - I mean, we know 
government functionalities, Ministers make decisions that 
are later found by the courts to be unconstitutional all the 
time, sometimes that constitutional or sometimes they are 
not constitutional and it does not always mean they 
deliberately decided to do something unconstitutional.   
It does not necessarily mean they deliberately went 
against the constitution, knowing what the constitution 
20 
says but there could well be a situation where for whatever 
reason somebody decides, well this is what we will do.  
Obviously, if it is oversight one looks at it in a certain way 
but if it was, is like, deliberately a decision was taken, we 
will do this even though we know it is against the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 56 of 183 
 
constitution, then one looks at it in a much more serious 
light.   
So what you are saying does it go anywhere 
towards any of this or is it difficult?  As I said, if you 
cannot say. 
DR MUFAMADI:   No, no Chair what I am saying is, it is 
difficult for anybody to say if the act of introducing the 
proclamation is an enabler for wrongdoing and then in this 
instance, wrongdoing ensued, after the introduction of the 
proclamation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   It will be difficult for anybody to argue 
that there is no causal link between the two.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. Thank you.  
DR 
MUFAMADI: 
 
 
Of 
course, 
there 
is 
the 
added 
consideration Dr Mufamadi which you made in response to 
the Chair also, perhaps deal with the matters to answer the 
question 
why 
parliament 
with 
its 
several 
100 
representatives sat by and watched what appears to be 
face 
value 
participation 
of 
its 
powers 
on 
a 
non-
20 
constitutional basis.  
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, maybe I must rephrase my answer to 
this question by saying that I find it astounding, and I am 
speaking on my personal behalf and on behalf of the panel 
that we are not appearing to be ready to part company with 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 57 of 183 
 
the obsession with secrecy, undue secrecy.  Because if you 
could have an unconstitutionality to persist for that long 
usurpation of parliamentary power and we pay the price 
that I think we paid as a nation.  
Why was Parliament sleepwalking if we are not safe 
in the hands of the body as important as that, I am sorry to 
bring in even the judiciary because I mean, I believe that 
being proactive does help sometimes.  So the whole nation 
went to sleep for that long period.  The moment this letter 
is raised in such a manner as it was raised following the 
10 
release of this report by the President one expected to 
hear a lot of public discourse around it because our 
democracy 
and 
our 
own 
lives 
depends 
on 
our 
own 
vigilance.  So it is a matter that gives me sleepless nights 
up to now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I will not defend the judiciary when 
they do not deserve to be defended but I think in this case, 
I must defend them.  Remember that the judiciary cannot 
give a directive say bring that case here to us, somebody 
must bring the case.   
20 
Even if they read in the newspaper about some 
unconstitutionality 
unlawfulness, 
that 
whether 
it 
is 
parliament or the President is doing they are not supposed 
to say bring that case.  Somebody must bring the case and 
once they have brought the case, then it is the duty of the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 58 of 183 
 
judiciary to do its job.  So unless of course, you have 
knowledge that it was brought and the judiciary did not do 
his job. 
DR MUFAMADI:   No, no I think this is part of, Chair this is 
part of the discourse we should have in the public domain. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, because I think the lessons that 
come from this experience are so profound that we may 
have to rethink quite a lot of things.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine. It is quite important 
10 
nobody says we should not include you in the debates 
things that we might not have for some time that should be 
done. We are faced with serious challenges that may 
require things to be done differently from how they have 
been done before. So but I think part of what you are 
saying is, you are astounded by the fact that the relevant 
parliamentary committee and parliament's seemed to do 
nothing for about four years, when there was this situation, 
which as far as you are concerned, was quite a clear 
unconstitutionality.  
20 
Ja, okay Mr. Pretorius.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes, thank you and you go on and 
paragraph 1.5 to place the findings of the high level review 
panel, in the context of the work of this commission.  And 
you 
asked 
the 
question 
whether 
the 
capture 
and 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 59 of 183 
 
repurposing of the SSA as indicated in your report was 
designed to facilitate and protect the project of state 
capture or image that capture that is the question which we 
will deal with in your evidence.   
I may rephrase so it is not to include terminology 
that might foreshadow the findings of the Chair to say that 
what your statement will deal with is the question whether 
there was an appropriation of State institution and its 
resources under the veil of secrecy, or private and political 
gain.  Would that be a fair summary of the question you put 
10 
there? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Some and I think these, we can explain 
why we were puzzled.  We can explain it on the basis of 
some evidence that was put before us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    If we could go back then to the 
high level review panel, it is formation and it is activities.  
In paragraph 2.3 you say, to the Commission to the Chair 
how the panel went about its work.  Could you just tell us 
something of that, please? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, what the panel did was that we 
20 
requested documents from the SSA, which we thought were 
going to assist the panel to better understand its own task.  
So an extensive number of documents including policies, 
legislation, regulations and directives, previous review 
reports because there had been review reports before and 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 60 of 183 
 
discussion documents as well as investigative reports.  We 
asked for those documents to be made available to us.   
We invited submissions from various units of the 
State Security Agency and from other sectors of the 
intelligence 
community 
that 
would 
include 
crime 
intelligence in the South African Police Service, Defence 
Intelligence, Financial Intelligence Centre.   
We invited the Inspector General for reasons which 
should be obvious, given that we needed to understand the 
efficacy of the oversight mechanisms that are in place.  We 
10 
interacted 
with 
the 
Auditor 
General. 
 
We 
invited 
practitioners, past and current individuals from members of 
the community and not only the ones who were operating at 
national level, but as well as those who are operating at 
provincial levels and so on.  So that is how far we went we 
interacted with the relevant committee of parliament, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    The panel also interviewed a 
number 
of 
senior 
executive 
members 
and 
senior 
administrative 
personnel 
and 
those 
interviews 
were 
recorded, correct?  
20 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes.  
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
The 
documentation 
and 
the 
recordings in fact, all the record of the panel are lodged or 
have been lodged with the SSA and are under the control 
of the SSA. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 61 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, they are under the control of the 
SSA. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And we have been given access to 
those 
particularly 
changes 
become 
relevant 
later, 
transcripts 
or 
recordings 
rather 
of 
certain 
implicated 
parties. Unfortunately, at least one of the transcripts has 
been totally corrupted, and we cannot hear a word, one 
can make of that what one will but that will in due course 
will be placed, relevant portions will be in due course be 
placed.   
10 
But that process of going through the transcripts is 
not with the recordings is not yet complete.  If we could 
turn, please, because I would like to introduce the 
document annexed to your exhibit at page 32.1.  That is 
the annexure to your statement at black number, top left 
hand corner 32.1. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    You will recognise…[intervene] 
DR MUFAMADI:   You say 32.1? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Yes, black numbers in the top left 
20 
hand corner of the page. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    There. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    You have it?  You recognise that 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 62 of 183 
 
document?  
DR MUFAMADI:   I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    So that is the high level review 
panel report.  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    But it is important to place on 
record what we see there.  You know that you presented 
because you say so in due course.  The high level review 
panel report in its full un-redacted version to the President 
in December 2018.  Correct?  
10 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    A redacted version was then 
released to the public by the President's office.  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, on our recommendation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    On your recommendation? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    So certain portions were excluded 
for security reasons.  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Since then, and in cooperation 
20 
with the Commission a declassified version of the whole 
report was given to us subject to certain conditions.  That 
is the un-redacted version.   
Now the complete version was afforded or the 
Commission was given access to it subject to certain other 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 63 of 183 
 
redactions, but of a lesser import than had been redacted 
originally.  Now, the declassified and the report was 
declassified by the Director General. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    To the knowledge of the 
President's 
office. 
 
Subject 
to 
those 
conditions 
a 
declassified version of the high level review panel report, 
which includes certain redactions is now available by 
direction of the Director General and that is the document 
that appears at page 32.1 and following.  Am I correct? 
10 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Right.  Paragraph 2.4 of your 
statement, or your affidavit, Dr Mufamadi you deal with the 
operations or the investigations of the panel in a little more 
detail.  Would you deal with that please? 
DR MUFAMADI:   3.4, 2.4? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    2.4. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Let me just look at it.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And 2.5 and 6. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay, I will have to spend a little bit of 
20 
time looking at it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And in particularly in 2.4, you 
mentioned investigation into 
operations 
and funds in 
relation to the operation?  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes.  Ja, what about that?  You want me 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 64 of 183 
 
to say something about it?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Well, perhaps I could just put it to 
you because it is not controversial.  The panel examined a 
unit called the Special Operations unit.  It is a chief 
directorate special operations.  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Those are covert operations.  
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And you looked at certain 
operations conducted by the chief directorate of special 
10 
operations, and you examined how funds in relation to 
those operations were spent, and how they were accounted 
for and not accounted for.  Am I correct?  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And the general manager Special 
Operations 
and 
later 
the 
Deputy 
Director 
General 
counterintelligence was also interviewed by you in relation 
to those topics, is that correct?  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    You also engaged with the joint 
20 
Standing Committee on Intelligence, the parliamentary 
committee, the Inspector General and the Auditor General 
as you have said.  Is that correct? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And you have also mentioned that 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 65 of 183 
 
your terms of reference were limited to the State Security 
Agency but nevertheless, you invited submissions from its 
sister 
organisations. 
Crime 
intelligence, 
that 
is 
the 
Intelligence Division of the South African Police Service, 
and the Intelligence Division of the South African National 
Defence Force.  Why did you invite those representations 
or submissions?  You deal with that in paragraph 2.6. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, we invited what you are referring to 
as sister organisations, because of the similar environment 
in which these intelligence divisions work and after all, 
10 
even their work, the work of Defence Intelligence, crime 
intelligence, 
the 
civilian 
intelligence 
community 
is 
coordinated through a structure called UNICOC.   
So, it is not easy to make the determinations that 
we were being asked to make.  If we were just looking at 
the operations of SSA, in isolation from the entirety of the 
intelligence community. So, that is the reason why we 
looked at it, at these others but again the general point 
really to make is that intelligence State craft has the 
possibility to invade for reasons that all of us have been 
20 
referring to secret nature of your operations and so to 
invade regular governments.   
So, it was also important for us coming back to that 
question Chair as to whether there was a deliberate 
intention to do wrong and so on.  Also to try and 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 66 of 183 
 
understand whether some of the things that we were seeing 
which were untoward with a peculiarity of SSA or to what 
extent has this intelligence work lent itself to these issues 
of invasion of irregular governance.  So that was a 
necessity for us indeed we thought to try and have a 
broader base from which to come at this issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has the lights improved anything? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, I think it is a bit more comfortable.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, sorry I will try also - my hands just 
10 
remained where it was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Dr Mufamadi you say in paragraph 
2.6 that you actually made or the committee made a 
recommendation in relation to the activities of crime, 
intelligence and Defence Force intelligence.  Do you recall 
that?  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, we did.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    What was the recommendation? 
DR MUFAMADI:   The recommendation was that the 
20 
President should consider having a similar process of 
review directed at these other agencies that are part of the 
community to which SSA belonged because we thought that 
there may well be takeaways from what came out of the 
review that the panel conducted, which can give some idea 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 67 of 183 
 
as to what needs to happen to the entirety of the 
intelligence community going forward. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    If one then goes on to paragraph 
3, you there set out in paragraph 3.1.123.1.12 the terms of 
reference of the panel.  The terms of reference, it is 
apparent, were very wide and covered a range of topics.  
We do not need to go into them all they are there as a 
matter of record.  But I would like to just draw the Chair ’s 
attention to the term of reference 3.1.5, the effectiveness 
of 
controls 
to 
ensure 
accountability. 
 
How 
did 
you 
10 
understand that term of reference? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, you see in any organisation besides 
the service which the organisation renders to its clients, in 
this case, to the people of South Africa.  You must have 
what you call internal environment control.  Very important 
in a situation where you, you use public resources in your 
work.  Also resources must be fully accounted for.  I think as 
we go on you will see why we thought there was a problem 
with the internal controls. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And if we could also mention 
20 
3.1.7 one of your Terms of Reference was the involvement of 
members 
of 
the 
National 
Executives 
in 
Intelligence 
Operations and measures to prevent this.  What was the 
underlying principle which gave rise to that line of enquiry 
and Term of Reference? 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 68 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja well as I said you see the constitution is 
very clear as to how to limit and constrain executive 
authority so that a member of the executive does not end up 
getting involved in operational issues and so on. 
 
That would then constitute an executive over-reach.  
You could not have a review process of this kind without 
trying to understand whether such a transgression happened 
or not.   
 
So this Term of Reference was directing us to look at 
that issue. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And then in 3.1.9 you refer to 
a Term of Reference which asks for the investigation and 
development of guidelines that will enable the members to 
report… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry Mr Pretorius 3.1.8 
is quite interesting it does seem to relate to is it 3.1.7? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How did you understand that one.   
“The Policy framework including legislation 
20 
that governs operational activities conducted 
by members of the National Executive.” 
DR MUFAMADI:  Okay.  Ja, no, no, no.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You can see that it is interesting. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja, no, no we understand – we understood 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 69 of 183 
 
that if you act the word nod you will have understood what 
your brief was.  But it was in a situation where the nod was 
always neglected – was often neglected. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.  Continue Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  In due course Chair we will 
refer to Provisions of the current legislation that deals with 
10 
the role of the executive in relation to the operations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Of the SSA and we will deal with that 
through Mr Japhta the Director General. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
The 
Provision 
in 
3.1.9 
the 
development of guidelines that enabled members to report a 
manifestly illegal order as envisaged in Section 119(6) of the 
Constitution.  The evidence perhaps not directly given by 
you Dr Mufamadi but certainly other evidence will reveal that 
20 
manifestly illegal projects were carried out; devised at a 
higher level and executed by subordinates. 
 
We know that the constitution makes it very clear and 
that is borne from the history of State Security in South 
Africa the many decades that illegal orders simply may not 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 70 of 183 
 
be obeyed.  The constitution takes the trouble to say that 
expressly and in detail.   
 
Do you have any comments there as to the Term of 
Reference and why that should be there? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja well as you correctly said I think you  
know we are all South Africans here we know what happened 
in our country before 1994 when we saw people coming 
before for instance forums like the Truth Commission and 
saying I was obeying orders. 
 
And those orders all of us would have agreed then 
10 
that they were manifestly illegal.  So you needed something 
that does not put your operatives at the mercy of people who 
are warned to do illegal things but they are sitting in 
positions of seniority you know giving you orders that are 
illegal. 
 
Something that gives the operatives the – that 
empowers them to say, no I am not going to do this because 
it is illegal.   
 
So maybe this – I am saying one would have – will 
have understood this Term 
of 
Reference 
against that 
20 
background.  And indeed when people became – came 
before the panels some of them were saying, I did not know 
that it was illegal because I was expected to deliver on this 
matter. 
 
So we do make recommendations about what we 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 71 of 183 
 
thought needed to be done that you needed to have 
something that protects the operatives and that should be 
guidelines that are very clear on this issue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Then finally in relation to 
Terms of Reference if we could go to the end 3.1.12?  The 
effectiveness and appropriateness of the existing oversight 
mechanisms in ensuring accountability and transparency.  
You have dealt with that to a degree.  Is there anything you 
wish to add? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja the general point maybe to make here is 
10 
that on paper the oversight mechanisms were good on paper 
which then makes it difficult to easily understand why some 
of the things that happened actually happened despite the 
existence of these oversight mechanisms. 
 
And when we interacted with members and we 
interacted member of the Agency and we interacted with 
even the relevant Parliamentary Committee we thought that 
it will be important.  There is a recommendation we make I – 
I am not quoting the exact words which was sort of saying 
that meritocracy in the deployment of people into some of 
20 
these oversight organs will go a long way towards avoiding a 
repeat of some of the wrong things that we saw happening. 
 
Also 
you 
know 
you 
have 
got 
an 
academy 
of 
intelligence.  I remember when I was growing up as a 
youngster we were at primary and higher primary school and 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 72 of 183 
 
the teachers would sometimes be away from school they 
were attending a refreshing course.  We thought that you 
know things like those were a necessity in order to make 
sure that the necessary capabilities are in place to ensure 
that this oversight mechanisms do not just exist in name. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  You then in paragraph 4 
deal with something you have also dealt with in – you are of 
course free to deal with it in such detail as you think 
appropriate but you have touched on an essential aspect of 
your evidence and of the evidence to follow that there was 
10 
complete mind shift and policy shift and philosophical shift in 
relation to intelligence operations that took place in 1994 not 
only in South Africa but in other countries as well which 
distinguished intelligence during the Cold War period and 
distinguished 
intelligence 
under 
a 
democratic 
and 
constitutional dispensation.   
 
Do you have anything to add in that regard?  You 
deal with it in paragraph 4.1.1 and following. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes I think as you correctly point out the – 
the demise of apartheid in this country happened in a world 
20 
historical moment where we were seeing serious shifts from 
what defined the Cold War.   
 
Where many states were fashioned themselves as 
warrior 
states 
placed 
intelligence 
or 
assigned 
the 
intelligence community with the role of identifying enemies of 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 73 of 183 
 
the state.  In other words it was really an anti-people outlook 
adopted by warfare states then and the apartheid state was 
one such state. 
 
So when change happened in 1994 there was talk of 
the need to move away from the mind-set of State Security 
to one of human security so that you sensitise government 
as a whole to the need for state power to be exercised in the 
interest of securing your population what I will all human 
centricity.   
 
But once if state – state security it is a reversion to 
10 
what we had before 1994 which I think it was a very 
unfortunate development.  So it has hit us in the face as a 
panel the fact that we were dealing with SSA which was not 
called SSA before the proclamation of course. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  All this is contained in the white 
paper which is before the Chair and may be referred to in 
due course as well.  There are several principles embodied 
in the white paper some of which we have dealt with but one 
of these that bears mention because it is relevant to the 
evidence that you are going to give Dr Mufamadi is the 
20 
Principle of Political Neutrality.  Do you have anything to say 
in relation to what you say in 4.1.2 and 4.1.3 of your 
affidavit? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Well I can only say that I think as we go on 
there is some evidence that will be – we will speak to which 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 74 of 183 
 
was put before the panel which suggested that these 
principles you know Political Neutrality treating National 
Intelligence as a national asset that is politically non-
partisan.  There is some evidence that was put to us which 
flies in the face of these principles. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right and then in paragraph 5 you 
deal with the Proclamation issued by the former President Mr 
Zuma on the 11 September 2009.  You have dealt with that 
already in your evidence.  It is not necessary to go back to 
there as far as we are concerned but if you have anything to 
10 
add to what you say in paragraph 5.1 to 5.3 please do so. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Nothing to add really except to say that 
these – you see the – the intelligence – civilian intelligence 
community existed in more than one unit.  You had civilian – 
I mean you had NEA which was domestic – for domestic 
intelligence.  You had SASS – SASS South African Secret 
Service and the – the amalgamation of these as a result of 
the issuance of the Proclamation had the effect of creating a 
situation where some people sat in positions which were not 
existent for too long.  That does happen in a situation of 
20 
transformation and so on but for too long.   
 
But also it was a transformation which was happening 
after the transformation that happened in 1994 up to that 
point.  We thought that the operational efficiency generally 
speaking was somewhat undermined and that is why we 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 75 of 183 
 
made a recommendation of the amalgamating the service but 
I think the Director General will explain more in detail what 
then happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We go on then to paragraph 6 where 
you deal with some findings that were made.  It is perhaps 
important to understand the role of the panel.  It was not a 
commission or a court that made definitive findings of guilt 
or innocence as I understand it but you received a number of 
submissions and you received evidence which you felt 
relevant to make findings on in your report, is that correct? 
10 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The – there are two phases of 
intelligence activity that are relevant to the evidence before 
the commission and that – or those phases constitute firstly 
the activities of and allegations relating to the principle 
agent network.  I dealt with that briefly in opening.  The 
principle agent network conducted its activities between 
2006 and 2011 and was subject to investigation thereafter.  
Is that in accordance with your recollection? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then the Special Operations 
Unit. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Conducted its activities in a period 
thereafter and you had regard to both sets of activities, is 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 76 of 183 
 
that correct? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you summarise the categories – 
the nature of the factual evidence that was placed before 
you in paragraph 6.2.1 to 6.2.3 would you just deal with 
those very briefly please? Just place them before the Chair. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes.  Maybe I must say that there is a bit of 
a distinction to be made between what he heard about the 
Principle Agency Network and Special Operations. 
 
We were made to understand that there is – there 
10 
was an investigation that was underway looking at what 
happened in the context of the Principle Agency Network 
pan.   
 
A key point that was under investigation as we were 
told was the allegations of abuse of State Resources which 
then raised the question of the audit-ability of activities of 
the agency as well as spend to finance those activities. 
 
Now as the evidence leader is saying our task was 
not to take over those investigations but we thought we 
needed to record what we were told because that read 
20 
together with other evidence that was given to us would form 
an important backdrop for some of the recommendations 
relating to say financial control.  And also how to make sure 
that you do not have Special Operations being used as a 
ruse for hiving off resources from state coffers. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 77 of 183 
 
 
So that is about now pan.  But with respect to Special 
Operations we found that Special Operations appeared to be 
a catch all phrase for certain things to be done by SSA which 
do not fall within the realm of SSA. 
 
For instance protection of political office bearers.  I 
am just giving that as an example.  And other people who do 
not ordinarily warrant whose positions do not ordinarily 
warrant that they be provided with protection as at state 
expense. 
 
That is the constitutional function of the SAPS.  I am 
10 
just giving that as an example.  So we found that there had 
been things like that and instances of clear weaponisation of 
– of intelligence capability for ends other than those for 
which the SSA exists partisanship intra-organisational and 
inter-organisational and I think when we move forward we 
will talk about some of the operations which are somewhat 
dubious that you could only justify if you place them under 
the rubric of Special Operations.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we have heard many under-
statements. 
20 
DR MUFAMADI:  Sorry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have heard many under-
statements over the past three years and somewhat dubious 
is perhaps one of them. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Well I – I take that we are not at a stage 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 78 of 183 
 
yet where we will elaborate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  So I can assure you that by the time we 
leave here the commission will know what I mean by that.  
The commission will know what I meant by that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So – but from what you say it looks like 
you are saying that there would have been different 
categories of operations or units and it looks like whenever 
anything could not fit into any of the other units or 
10 
operations then Special Operations was where things would 
be put under. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes but also as I was saying those could be 
projects whose legitimacy … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is dubious? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Is dubious yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes and as I said we will talk about them. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:  We will just need a little bit of patience. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But at a high level Dr Mufamadi you 
say that the investigations of the panel and the information 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 79 of 183 
 
received by the panel covered three broad areas. 
 
The first is what you refer to as the weaponisation of 
Intelligence Services for Partisan or Factional purposes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The second is the opening up of the 
resources particularly financial resources – money of the 
SSA to those who wish unlawfully to appropriate that money. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the third is the abuse and 
bypassing of proper financial and procurement controls and 
10 
the projects that we are going to talk about will fall in one or 
more or under all of those headings. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja in one or more but I think the – maybe 
the point to make up front is that take Special Operations to 
the extent that you had projects that legitimately resorted 
under SSA.  SAA did not need to recruit people other than 
those who were fulltime employ of SSA to carry out those 
tasks. 
 
But Special Ops enabled the employment initially on 
temporary base – well on temporary basis of people who 
20 
went outside SSA and in the course of our interaction with 
permanent members you would hear complaints about the 
governability 
of 
these 
non-members 
because 
they 
considered themselves special because they were run – they 
were involved in special operations.  They considered 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 80 of 183 
 
themselves to be accountable to members of the executive 
rather than to these – the management structures of the 
SSA. 
 
And 
that 
included 
them 
coming 
forward 
with 
requisitions for funding because they are going to carry out 
these operations and so on and when they have to account 
they say but we do not account to you. 
 
One of the problems we faced as the panel was that 
at the point at which we were established the members of 
that Special Operations were now aggrieved because they 
10 
were promised that at some point they will be absorbed into 
SSA permanently and the system was refusing to absorb 
them.  I am just giving that as an example.   
 
So you – you then in a sense have a unit which is I 
do not want to use notions of rogue unit but whose 
legitimacy to exist in the first place is dubious.  And then as 
we will go into some operations you will see that those 
operations some of them could be justified but done by 
permanent members of SSA and others it was difficult to 
justify them. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  We will come to those projects 
in a moment Dr Mufamadi.  The – what you say in paragraph 
7 is important by way of background.  The notion of a 
Special Operations Unit that operates covertly is that 
unusual in intelligence circles internationally? 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 81 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  Oh ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It deals – para(?) 7.2. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja.  So it is not unusual.  But how you 
constitute matters.  I have already spoken to that issue.  It is 
brief also matters.  The fact of it being special does not 
legitimise illegitimate activities that it may undertake. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  And I think that has to be underlined. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And you say in paragraph 7.3 
that much of your work was directed at understanding what 
10 
happened under the rubric of Special Operations.  Is that 
correct? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  And what you are going to 
tell the Chair about in due course is what occurred under the 
heading or the rubric of state Special Operations. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But just to place it in its context.  
You say in paragraph 7.1: 
“From accounts provided to the panel, the Special 
20 
Operations Unit, the SSA was rekindled in about 
2011...” 
 
I take it that that is a reference to the Pan Investigation 
that we know took place in relation to activities of the State 
Security Agency in an earlier period.  What you are speaking 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 82 of 183 
 
about here is what happened in the second period. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, sure.  I think what we are saying there 
is.  To the extent that the notion of Special Operations by 
whatever name, is not strange to the work of civilian 
intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   It has existed before.  Now you could say 
that was a reincarnation of what existed before but it comes 
with new features that I spoke to earlier.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  But what is significant 
10 
perhaps is that what occurred in the earlier period between 
2006 and 2011 under the heading Principle Agent Network, 
was terminated and investigations were conducted.  But it 
seems that the powers that be were unable to or complicit in 
reviving those types of activities or unlawful activities in the 
second period from 2011 onwards.  Is that correct? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, well to the extent that the investigation 
of Pan was occasioned by the sense that something went 
wrong.  You will have expected that the powers that be would 
be really(?) concerned(?) about a repeat of that.  And when 
20 
you come up with Special Operations, later you would take 
care to avoid, as I say, a repeat of that.   
 
But what we saw was a repeat of some of what they 
were investigating in the context of Pan.  And more serious 
manifestly illegal activities.  H’m. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 83 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is a convenient time to break for 
lunch Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  We will take the lunch adjournment.  
We will resume at two.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, there is a problem with the light as 
well?  This one? 
DR MUFAMDI:   [No audible reply] [Mic muted] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   If they can move it?  They can shift it a 
little bit.   
DR MUFAMDI:   [No audible reply]  [Mic muted] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Did they interfere with it during the 
lunch break or was it always – was it like that before lunch 
or did you not notice? 
DR MUFAMDI:   No the fact that I did not complain, speaks 
to my resilience Chairman.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Okay.  Okay they will try and 
attend to it but we – I must just make sure they understand 
20 
what you suggest should be done.  Should it look – should it 
point this way, a little bit to the left or...? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Okay alright. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Okay. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 84 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Let us make sure it is fine first.  
How does it look like now? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, it is okay.  It is okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is okay.  Okay alright. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Let us continue then. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  We are at 
paragraph 7.3. 
DR MUFAMDI:   7.3... 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Of your statement Dr Mufamadi, 
where you say that the panel probed deeply and widely into 
the 
issue. 
 And 
I 
presume 
the 
activities 
of 
Special 
Operations. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you also referred to an 
investigation 
conducted 
by 
the 
Inspector-General 
of 
Intelligence into the activities of this Special Operations 
Unit. 
DR MUFAMDI:   H’m.  Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who was the head of Special 
Operations at the relevant time? 
DR MUFAMDI:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Or you refer to him as the key-
player. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 85 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, during the period under review, the 
Special Operations was led by Mr Dlomo. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that Thulani Dlomo?  They have 
Dlomo’s. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, Mr Thulani Dlomo. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Thulani Dlomo. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then in paragraph 7.5 you say a 
little of his background.  I do not think we need to go there 
unless you feel it is important to do so? 
10 
DR MUFAMDI:   Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 7.5 you deal with 
Mr Dlomo’s background. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I said it is not necessary to go there 
unless you feel it is important to do so. 
DR MUFAMDI:   No, it is not necessary. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Did Mr Dlomo testify before 
the panel? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, he did. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was he a good witness? 
DR MUFAMDI:   In our reckoning, he was the most difficult 
witness because he was uncomfortable to answer some of 
our questions and justify his reluctance to answer those 
questions, he invoked the need to know basis.  And we 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 86 of 183 
 
thought he did not quite understand.  But this is – a 
department established by the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   You cannot be an operative of the state 
organ and when the state wants to do some intro spectrum in 
an area you are operational, you invoke the need to know 
basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is like you are doing your operation for 
yourself. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, it is as if you are doing your operations 
10 
for yourself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To put it differently.  Did Mr Dlomo 
give a full and frank account of the activities of Special 
Operations? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Well, by the time he came to the panel, we 
had already other members of the Special Operations Unit 
who appeared before us.  And when we were trying to test 
some of the things that were said to us before he came, his 
20 
need to know defence, so to speak, stood in the way we 
think of him fully cooperating with the panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 7.7 ...[intervenes]  
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 87 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not know whether you, 
Dr Mufamadi, whether you actually did not want to be 
categorical in terms of the answer to the question as 
formulated by Mr Pretorius. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if that is the case.  But he was 
effectively asking whether he gave his evidence before the 
panel in your view or in the view of the panel – in your view, 
frankly and candidly and cooperative fully. 
DR MUFAMDI:   No, we did not get his full cooperation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 77. 
DR MUFAMDI:   7.7? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry, 7.7.  Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say certain matters became 
clear to the panel on reviewing the evidence and you drew 
certain, at least preliminary conclusions.  What do you say in 
20 
paragraph 7.7 in regard to what you discovered about the 
operations of the State Security Agency, Special Operations 
Unit? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  What we say in that operation...  Oh, 
the next(?) paragraph.  Is that the Special Operations, in our 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 88 of 183 
 
view, 
carried 
out 
some 
operations 
which 
were 
unconstitutional and illegal.   
 
And that there is a sense in which that unit was a law 
unto itself that is relative to the management structures of 
the SSA.  Because they were not reporting – following the 
reporting line from what we were told.   
 
Some of the senior – most senior people than Dlomo, for 
instance, would say:  We were not getting reports from 
Special Operations.  We were told that, you know, report as 
Special Operations to the executive and therefore we cannot 
10 
report to you.   
 
The money that was disbursed on request for operations, 
according to the relevant people in the chain of management 
– you know, they used to have what they call a TA System.  I 
am trying to recall what TA stands for.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   But it is an advanced ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is Temporary Advance Systems. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Temporary Advance Systems. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
DR MUFAMDI:   There was cash intensive transaction based 
work.  But besides that, you would then have huge amounts 
of money which we will talk to later which were allocated on 
a regular basis for projects.   
 
And the financial accounting people would say:  We did 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 89 of 183 
 
not get reports in which people were accounting for that 
money.   
 
Then as you will see, some of the operations were sort 
of really misdirected in that they were looking at things to do 
with, I will call it political intelligence, running the projects in 
inappropriate manner in that principle such as political 
neutrality and so on, were not observed.   
 
To the extent that we kept on talking about the findings 
which relate to the weaponisation of intelligence for wrongful 
political reasons.   
10 
 
Those had to do mostly, as we were investigating, with 
what the Special Operations Unit was doing. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The management that was saying there 
are these individuals who, as far as we are concerned, are 
supposed to account to us, to report to us, who are refusing 
to report to us or who are saying we cannot ask them certain 
questions because they report directly to the executive.   
 
As a result, we do not know what they are doing or we 
do not know what they are doing with the money that they 
20 
get given.  Did they say that they raised those issues with 
the executives?   
 
And if so, did the executive sight with those people and 
said there was nothing wrong?  Or was there something that 
your panel did not explore? 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 90 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   We did not explore.  But you know in 
general, you would have expected people to say:  We made 
representations to the executive.  But see, if people do not 
say:  We made representations to the executive.  And they 
were coming to us to tell us about how helpless they felt.  
Then you realise that there was something wrong there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, why it is important to establish 
that is because sometimes you could have a situation where 
those people who, as far as they know, are the people to 
whom reports should be coming from certain people.  See 
10 
this and see that it is wrong as far as they know in terms of 
how the organisation is supposed to work or operate. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But they are scared to raise it with the 
executive.  So they just sit.  And when the panel comes, they 
poor out their frustrations but they have never raised it.  But 
you could have a situation where they have raised it.  And if 
they have raised it, it would be interesting to know whether – 
what the response of the executive was.  So that is why I 
was asking. 
20 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, sure.  I think this matter must be read 
together that terms of reference we were talking to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   About the directives relating to manifestly 
illegal instructions. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 91 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Because it is difficult then to expect people 
to raise questions when they see wrong things being done 
when they did not raise these questions when the step that 
is...  Ja, they – the initial steps which leads to this, was not 
questioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if for example they did not raise 
those issues, one might ask the question why they did not.  
10 
It may be that when they are get given a chance they could 
give reasons that one understands.   
 
But it may well be that they give reasons and one says 
but this is not the type of leadership in an organisation that 
should be there.  
 
So going forward, maybe certain characteristics of 
leadership should be looked for, for this type of positions.  
We do not want people who are not going to raise issues 
they should raise.   
 
At least, they should raise them and see whether they 
20 
are not being helped or not.  Ja. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, sure.  But you see, I think that – now we 
are talking with the benefit of hindsight.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   We realise that they did not raise this. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 92 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   The question is whether there was enabler 
in place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   So if we are recommending that there 
should be directives that address these issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR 
MUFAMDI: 
 
 
We 
are 
really 
raising 
issues 
of 
empowerment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
DR MUFAMDI:   Where people can say...  I mean, I heard the 
Chair saying:  Can you give me an instrument I could have 
used to help you? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Yes, yes. 
DR 
MUFAMDI: 
 
 
In 
absence 
of 
such 
an 
instrument 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   ...people are disempowered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But the point I am making is.  The 
first step is to talk to them to say:  You are telling me that 
you have had these problems.  Were there people that you 
know to be under you and are supposed to report to you?   
 
When you ask questions about what they are doing, they 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 93 of 183 
 
tell you that they do not report to you.  They report to the 
executive.   
 
So I am saying, the first thing is to ask them:  If you did 
not raise it with the executives, why did you not raise it?   
 
Then they can say:  Here was the environment that I 
found myself in.  Maybe I found it intimidating or the minister 
was this type of person or whatever.   
 
Or, they might say:  Well, I actually did raise it and this 
was the reaction.  Or, I raised it a number of times.  He kept 
on saying we will talk about it.  After some time, I realised 
10 
that he was never going to engage with me on it.   
 
So that is the level to say, the start is just to find out 
whether there was a desire or a commitment or courage to 
raise but maybe the environment was not good or there were 
other reasons.   
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja.  Well, maybe I need to say which is 
really outside this report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   That the establishment of the panel seemed 
to be have been received roundly within the SSA very well. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m, h’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   So you know, people would say to you 
informally:  We welcome this initiative.  And then they tell 
you what they have seen which they hope this initiative will 
help.  So. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 94 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   You know, we are afraid to raise issues and 
so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   But you could not put that in the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR MUFAMDI:   These things that I said to you and 
Thomas(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   But we were sufficiently sensitive to the fact 
10 
that people would not just voluntarily just come forward and 
say:  I do not think it is the right way to do this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   And generally, you would know Chair as a 
labour lawyer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
DR MUFAMDI:   [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Once upon a time.  [laughs]   
DR MUFAMDI:   Once upon a time, yes.  That workers would 
always want to protect their job security and things like that.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  And I would not be surprised if 
the environment in the intelligence community which seemed 
to be dominated by secrecy might not be very empowering or 
might not be very conducive to people maybe ascertain 
certain rights.  I do not know, you know. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 95 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I do not know whether things can 
happen and it is difficult to get addressed(?) elsewhere, you 
know.  I do not know.  But I would not be surprised if that 
environment is not the best environment for people.  Ja, 
okay alright. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So by way of introduction to the 
evidence to come Dr Mufamadi, you say in paragraph 7.7 
10 
that it became clear to the panel that the Special Operations 
Unit was a law unto itself and directly served the political 
interest of the executive and that is what you mean by 
weaponisation of the service. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You also say that the Special 
Operations Unit undertook Intelligence Operations which 
were clearly unconstitutional and illegal and we will deal now 
with some of them.  Obviously, these are not all as you say, 
but the first is Project Çonstracao(?).  It is a Portuguese 
20 
word with Portuguese spelling.  And we will inform the 
stenographer accordingly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I thought Mr Pretorius you would – I 
thought on a lighter note, you would see whether the 
Chairperson could give you the correct pronunciation of this 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 96 of 183 
 
one.  [laughs]   
DR MUFAMDI:   [laughs]   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sure you could give the correct 
pronunciation.  [laughs]  But I even took the trouble of 
asking our researcher to tell us what that C was with that 
squiggle underneath.  It is a cedilla (or cedilha or cédille).   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the A with squiggle on top. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is a tilde.  (also “til” in Portuguese). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  [laughs]   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If that is of any interest to anybody.  
That is the spelling of Çonstracao 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What did that project involve? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  Maybe it is another illustration of what 
is meant by the unit being a law unto itself.  You see, it is 
the constitutional responsibility of the South African Police 
Service to provide what is called VIP Protection.  Protection 
for political office bearers.  Then the first thing that was 
20 
wrong that was done by this unit was to organise the training 
of undercover agents in VIP protection. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Before you go there. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if we can just take a step back 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 97 of 183 
 
to what you said about the duty of the South African Police 
Services to provide the VIP protection. 
DR MUFAMDI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To whom would the person providing 
that protection be accountable? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ultimately it is to the commissioner of 
police. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in this case that would have 
10 
been avoided.  That accountability line would have been 
avoided. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, once this function is being carried out 
elsewhere, then it means you are bypassing the structures, 
the reporting structures of the police. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And they become accountability to 
SSA operatives and the person receiving the benefit of the 
protection, as I understand it. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  Firstly, as you say, they are then 
accounting to the structures of the SSA and the SAPS is out 
20 
of the loop.  But also, you need resources to carry out that 
function.   
 
The budget of the SSA ought not to provide for that 
function because there is a sense in which there is double-
dipping.   
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 98 of 183 
 
 
Whatever these undercover agents do, may well be a 
duplication of what the SAPS believes itself to be doing.  But 
also, you can imagine that sort of stampede that happens 
when there is a parallel provision of VIP protection service. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  In any event.  I interrupted 
you.  My apologies Dr Mufamadi.  You say undercover agents 
were trained. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We need not mention but in a foreign 
country.  Did you know that? 
10 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, that is what we were told that they 
were trained in a foreign country. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Why would there be a need to train 
undercover agents in a foreign country to protect the 
beneficiaries?  And we will come to them in a moment. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Well, maybe let me put it this way.  There is 
an operational discretion on the part of the leadership of an 
organ which had got that responsibility to determine whether 
the people are to be trained and by whom.  And I am saying, 
as I – I am emphasising this.  That is the responsibility of 
20 
the police. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   They may feel ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For which training is available in 
South Africa, I presume. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 99 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   Well, they may feel that in some cases that 
there is a benefit to be had from accessing elements of 
training which they may not have.  I say, they may feel that 
way.  But I am saying it is not within the competence of the 
SSA to make that determination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But just to go one step on what you were 
saying earlier on.  One, that it is the responsibility of SAPS 
to provide the VIP protection to, for example, political office 
bearers.   
 
And saying when somebody else provides VIP protection 
10 
without being under SAPS, then they are bypassing the 
structures of SAPS to which there should – they should 
account.   
 
But of course, you could have a situation, I would 
imagine, where SAP members are being used to provide 
protection to certain individuals, maybe who are not entitled 
to that protection but it is SAPS members that are being 
used.   
 
And whoever is instructing them who is outside of SAPS, 
make sure there is no reporting to the top structure of SAPS.  
20 
That is one scenario.   
 
Another scenario is where, the people who are providing 
protection are not SAPS people in the first place.  Obviously, 
in that scenario you cannot even talk about bypassing to the 
SAPS.  They should not be there.  They should not be doing 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 100 of 183 
 
that at all. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
DR MUFAMDI:   No, sure.  They should not be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Because they are not SAPS. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Because they are not SAPS. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   But as you say Chairperson.  There may 
well be people who are provided with VIP protection services 
and they are not – they do not fall within, shall I say the 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Approved categories. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Approved categories. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   It is still the responsibility of the SAPS on 
the basis of threat analyses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   To make a determination of who are these 
people that are brought within the defined category who 
should be given protection. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Now you will see that there are people who 
do not ordinarily fall within this defined categories who were 
provided with protection by a special ops unit.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 101 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   Which is another transgression of basically 
the law.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   I mean, when a law govern society, you 
cannot have a function as sensitive as this one being a free 
for all activity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, you make two points in 
paragraph 7.8 and we will come to the detail in a moment.  
The first is that undercover agents were trained under the 
10 
auspices of the SSA in VIP protection.  And these were then 
assigned not to everybody across the board but to only 
certain select individuals. 
DR MUFAMDI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Some of whom fell within the 
category of those deserving of VIP protection in the ordinary 
and proper course and some who did not. 
DR MUFAMDI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the second point you make. 
DR MUFAMDI:   H’m. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who benefited from these private 
protection services or perhaps let us not use the word 
private but Special Operations Protection Services? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Well, we were told by people who came from 
the SAPS to meet with us, that they received reports that to 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 102 of 183 
 
the effect that you would have instances where the President 
of the Republic was troubling.   
 
Now when a person who falls within these defined 
category travels from, say from one province to the other, or 
sometimes 
going 
out 
of 
the 
country, 
particularly 
the 
President.  You will have what is called an advanced party.   
 
People who go ahead and look at this situation and 
make sure that everything is in order.  Who were told that 
there were instances where they would...   
 
These people who are going from the SAPS as the 
10 
advance party, they would collide into people who say we are 
from SSA, Special Ops.  We are here to look out for the 
interest of the President.  That is one.   
 
Then you also had, and this was confirmed now by the 
Special Ops people that we also interviewed, you would also 
have people who did not ordinarily fall within the defined 
category, who were provided with this protection services.  I 
do not know if in terms of your agreement you can 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You can  - this has been approved. 
20 
DR MUFAMADI:   I can mention the names. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mention the names. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, I have seen the Chair dealing very 
harsh with people who do not ask whether they should 
mention names.  Okay.  You had people such as the former 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 103 of 183 
 
Chairperson of the Board of South African Airways, Ms 
Dudu 
Myeni, 
the 
former 
National 
Director 
of 
Public 
Prosecutions, Mr Shaun Abrahams, the ANC Youth League 
President Mr Collen Maine and the former Acting Head of 
the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigations, General 
Yolisa Matakata.   
 
Now I am relying on memory because I do not know 
why this does not appear here, they spoke about the 
president then of the ANC Youth League, his services was 
apparently provided also to the then Deputy President of 
10 
the ANC Youth League.  The SAPS was not able to tell us 
that they had a threat analysis which justifies protection by 
the state of these individuals.  You can say on the face of 
it maybe the Director of Public Prosecutions but who 
makes that determination matters, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, there will be further evidence 
regarding this project but we understand it has been 
terminated.  Paragraph 7.9, Project Commitment, what was 
that about?   
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, your records will show, the ones 
20 
that will have been provided to you by SAA because I do 
not have the name offhand of an operative from Special 
Operations who – or maybe let me put it this way.  For 
each of the projects, there was identifiable individual who 
went to the window, as it were, to receive money it is 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 104 of 183 
 
based for that project. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it would always the same individual 
or one individual. 
DR MUFAMADI:   No, one individual per …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Per transaction. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Per project. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no what I mean is, you have for 
example here Project Commitment, so what I am asking is 
whether Project Commitment would have one individual 
who would be responsible to collect funds. 
10 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
For 
all 
operations 
of 
Project 
Commitment and you have Project Veza. 
DR MUFAMADI:   That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there you have one person who 
would have that responsibility, it would not be different 
people. 
DR MUFAMADI:   That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR MUFAMADI:   So once we had the possibility to talk to 
20 
– or let me put it this way, we were given documents 
before we started our work in terms of interaction with 
people.  So by the time we started our work we knew about 
these projects, we knew who was receiving money on 
behalf of what project and we were interested at least 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 105 of 183 
 
without asking them to give us documentary evidence in – 
we were interested to know what did he do with this money. 
And then with Project Commitment, we were told 
that that project involved providing then President with 
R2,5 million per month …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then President Zuma? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, well you will see the year, per month 
in the 2015/2016 financial year.  That is President Zuma.  
And this amount was increased to R4.5 million per month in 
the 2016/2107 financial year and the allegation there, at 
10 
least to the extent that we were just told this, apparently 
this money was provided via then Minister Mahlobo.   
 
The person who gave this information was saying 
yes, I am certain that the money was giving to Minister 
Mahlobo, but I cannot prove that it was received by 
President Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But was his evidence before your panel 
that the understanding in the money being given to 
Minister Mahlobo that he would pass it on to President 
Zuma? 
20 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that money …[intervenes] 
DR MUFAMADI:   He understood that this was the final 
destination.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 106 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   Without claiming to have witnessed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Two issues arise out of that, that 
the panel was told.  The first is that a minister appeared to 
be involved in the operations of the State Security Agency 
to the extent that it was intended that money handed to the 
Minister would be handed on to President Zuma, correct? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I take it we do not need to debate 
the propriety of that. 
DR MUFAMADI:   No, we do not have to debate the 
propriety of that.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but let – maybe it might not be as 
obvious to everybody listening as it might be to Mr 
Pretorius and you, Dr Mufamadi. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Point taken, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were a minister in cabinet for many 
years. 
20 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you know of any circumstances 
where monthly – because that seems to be what you say 
this person told you, as the panel, monthly a minister was 
given such large amounts like R2,5 million for a whole 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 107 of 183 
 
financial year, 2015 to 2016 and then 2016/2017 it 
increased to R4.5 million every month.  Would that be 
circumstances when a minister needs to be given any 
money other than his salary? 
DR MUFAMADI:   I must say that is unthinkable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, that is unthinkable and I do not know 
of such an instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   I can cite my own experience, I never 
10 
received such money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you never had throughout all those 
years that when you were Minister you never heard of a 
minister who received …[intervenes] 
DR MUFAMADI:   Maybe I was in government for too short 
a time because it was just 14 years and eight months, so… 
CHAIRPERSON:   But now did this person who gave this 
evidence to your panel say – I see here that it says per 
20 
month but was your understanding that he was saying 
actually every month during these two financial years he 
was the person who took during the 2015/2016 year R2,5 
million every month and gave it to Minister Mahlobo for 
onward passing, as he understood it, to President Zuma.  
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 108 of 183 
 
Was it an every month occurrence as you understood it? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Maybe let me put it this way.  I suppose 
the Commission will be able to find someone at SSA who 
says he made this disbursement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   And the person who says they received 
it, indeed they received from us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   But again, coming back, they did not tell 
us what happened to the money. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I accept that. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I am just talking because from what 
you say here it looks like the person that gave evidence 
before the panel that you are talking about, from whom you 
got this information, seems to have been clear before the 
panel that he or she knew that the money was given to 
Minister Mahlobo. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he says R2,5 million per month in 
20 
the 2015/2016 financial year.  That seems to suggest to me 
that 
it 
must 
have 
been 
monthly 
but 
that 
is 
my 
understanding. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So – and then in the 2016/2017 financial 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 109 of 183 
 
year it kind of doubled, it was R4.5 million again per 
month.  So at least as far as – that was your understanding 
of his evidence or her evidence, whoever. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright.  And was the – do you 
say this was cash? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, it is a cash …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
It 
was 
cash 
- 
these 
were 
cash 
transactions. 
DR MUFAMADI:   It is not these things that they call 
10 
electronic transfer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is not electronic transfer or a 
cheque, ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:   No, no, it was cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was cash. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, the second point that is 
evidence from what say in paragraph 7.9 is that no proof 
that was given to you that the funds were actually given by 
20 
Minister Mahlobo to President Zuma.  So at a very basic 
level the project could have been, as far as you are 
concerned, executed as per its intention and the money 
given to President Zuma or the money would have – the 
money trail would have stopped with Minister Mahlobo with 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 110 of 183 
 
all the implications that arise from that, equally serious. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, we have no basis to say it was 
given to President Zuma or it was not.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I see that apparently you were told 
that there were acknowledgements of receipt of these 
funds by Minister Mahlobo. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see that you say in paragraph 7.9… 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …that I think the person who gave 
10 
evidence before your panel seems to have said that there 
were 
acknowledgments 
of 
receipt 
of these 
funds 
by 
Minister Mahlobo. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and do you have recollection 
whether these may have been made available to you to see 
or not really? 
DR MUFAMADI:   No, no, they were not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh but he said the receipts were there. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, they were not and, as I said, we were 
20 
really not extending the investigations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you were high level. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, we were high level. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There will be further evidence. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 111 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   There will be further evidence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But I presume you would agree 
that in either case, whether the monies were kept and 
withheld by Minister Mahlobo, contrary to the intention of 
the project, or whether they were given to President Zuma 
in accordance with the intentions of the project, it is a 
matter worthy of investigation. 
DR 
MUFAMADI: 
 
 
Oh, 
it 
is 
a 
matter 
worthy 
of 
investigations.  As I said, these kind of practices unheard 
of in government, ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us deal with the next project, 
Project Justice, what was involved here? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, this is a project which ostensibly 
involved recruiting and handling sources in the judiciary in 
order to influence the outcome of cases against President 
Zuma. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, now before you go on, 
recruiting and handling sources, would this have been 
payment of monies? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sorry? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would this have involved payment 
of monies? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, information provided to the panel 
indicated that amounts of R1,2 million and R4,5 million 
were routinely given from SSA and provided to Minister 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 112 of 183 
 
Mahlobo whom, it is said, was responsible for handling 
these sources. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And these sources were whom, 
what category of person? 
DR MUFAMADI:   The panel was told that this project was 
motivated, as I said, by a specific need to counter the 
influence of judges hostile to President Zuma.  Allegations 
made were to the effect that judges were bribed to achieve 
this purpose.  This should, however, we thought be treated 
with extreme caution as one would not want to be party to 
10 
the destruction of public confidence in the judiciary.  That 
is what we thought and I will explain what I mean by that, 
because we were not provided with any actual evidence 
that the operation was actually carried out to conclusion.  
And if you want me to elaborate, I will. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, there will be further 
evidence.  But let us just deal with the issue of sensitivity. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   One acknowledges, without 
qualification, that this is a sensitive issue. 
20 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that it should be handled with 
caution. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because public confidence in our 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 113 of 183 
 
judiciary and the independence of our judiciary is of prime 
importance to our constitutional democracy. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   All that one can accept but if there 
is an attack on what might be termed the most valuable 
element 
of 
our 
constitutional 
democracy, 
that 
is 
an 
independent judiciary, this Commission is obliged to deal 
with it and the public have a right to know.  Would you 
agree with that? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Absolutely. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what must occur then is that to 
the extent that it has been investigated, this matter should 
have come before this forum in public and secondly, if 
investigations have not been concluded, they should be.  
Do you agree with that? 
DR MUFAMADI:   I agree but I must add this caveat, that 
on a matter of this gravity, we must refuse to be gullible.  
Even everything that we have said about this unit and it 
work because if we run ahead of ourselves we will put the 
house on fire and one Afrikaans-speaking friend of mine 
20 
used to say that they have a saying in their community 
which says do not start a fire which you may not be able to 
put off. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 114 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:   So very important that we approach this 
matter with circumspection. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And obviously one should not let a 
fire rage behind closed doors. 
DR MUFAMADI:   No, no, no, sure but also do not go 
public and put out – put fire …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, I understand that, yes.  But if 
the matter was before the panel. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This was contained in the 
unredacted or the redacted report, as I understand it.  No. 
DR MUFAMADI:    I do not …[intervenes]3 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Or certainly the unredacted report. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But be that as it may, I do not want 
to go down that side, Chair. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us just while the matter is 
before the Commission, it is a matter of sensitivity but it is 
20 
a matter or utmost importance that it be dealt with and 
thoroughly investigated and that is perhaps something we 
would present to the Chair in due course.  You would agree 
with that? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes but I hope you also agree with me 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 115 of 183 
 
when I say approach this matter with an open mind 
because I think – we had a sense that some of the 
operations could have been a ruse for moneymaking 
undertakings. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we will come to that in a 
moment. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think I understand completely what you 
are saying in terms of how it should be handled.  I think 
you are saying while obviously anything that deserves to 
10 
be investigated should be investigated.  At the same time, 
we must not fall into the trap of giving credibility and 
credence to something that might have no credibility or 
credence whatsoever. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
 
It 
is 
a 
balancing 
of 
the 
two 
considerations. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not want not to investigate what 
may be genuine but at the same time you do not want to 
20 
give credence to something that has no credence at all.  It 
is just how you strike the balance. 
DR MUFAMADI:   And it is a delicate balance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a delicate balance. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 116 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us assume for the purposes of 
the next questions then, Dr Mufamadi, that this project was 
not carried out, right?  It was conceived, we know that. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It was thought of by operatives and 
perhaps senior people within the SSA and money was 
attributed or given to this project.  That in itself would be 
serious. 
DR MUFAMADI:   No sure, I mean, if you have a person 
10 
whose imagination carries them that far and they are in the 
SSA then we are trouble.  That is the imagination, then I 
am saying we are in trouble and you therefore need to get 
to the bottom of it whichever way. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, yes.  And there will be further 
evidence and we will explore whether there has been a full 
investigation. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Or whether the fruits of the 
investigation have been disclosed to the Commission but 
20 
that is another issue that will be dealt with in due course 
but let us go to the proposition that you raised.  On the 
assumption 
that 
the 
project 
was 
not 
carried 
out 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius, I am sorry, I 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 117 of 183 
 
should have raised this while we were dealing with 7.9.  
So, in terms of arithmetic, so in the 2015/2016 financial 
year it would therefore appear that, if the evidence of the 
person who gave evidence to the panel that Minister 
Mahlobo was given R2,5 million every month, so over 12 
months that would have been around what?  Over 20 
million? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Over 60 million, 4.5 times 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I am looking at the first one, 2.5. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   30 million.  You are testing my 
10 
maths. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so then the 4.5 would probably be 
60 million or …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   54. 
CHAIRPERSON:   54. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes but, Chair, it depends, particularly 
with the first year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   On when exactly in that year did this 
practice start. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, of course. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, one would have to check, ja.  
But nevertheless, large amounts. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 118 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Large amounts.  Okay, I am sorry, Mr 
Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes and the totals are on the 
assumption of the full year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us just go back before we 
summarise Project Justice, Dr Mufamadi.  You raise the 
possibility in paragraph 10.2 that this whole project was a 
ruse, albeit a very imaginative and create ruse, to obtain 
10 
state resources.  In other words, it was merely a cover for 
the theft of money from the fiscus, is that correct? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes but as you say it is speculation, yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Speculation and it its probabilities 
…[intervenes] 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   …can be debated. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But it would seem a rather 
elaborate and dangerous ruse to conceal the theft of 
20 
money.  But that would be equally serious allegation – 
well, not an equally serious allegation because it does not 
have the constitutional implications that the project would 
have if it had been carried out but it is serious in the sense 
that we are instructed that at least R24 million was 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 119 of 183 
 
involved here.  You create a cover and you steal R24 
million and you hand it in cash to Minister Mahlobo.  That 
is a… 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, there are many elements of… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is a rather far-reaching, I 
would say, proposition. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, no, sure, sure, but as you say, I 
mean, the illegality of money – first illegality of just the 
action itself but also the principle of the separation of 
powers. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, could you say a bit about 
that, please? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Could you explain to the Chair? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, I am saying the independence of 
the judiciary, you forget about it if this project was indeed 
implemented.  So it is not just whether there was an 
illegality, there is a more fundamental issue of whether we 
can – our system can still be relied upon to deliver on what 
it exists for if an arm of state, the judiciary loses its 
20 
independence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, the point I think that you are 
making, if I can put it to you, is that broadly speaking there 
are a number of constitutional checks and balances built 
into the Constitution that deal with the judiciary. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 120 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And make the judiciary itself 
accountable in many ways. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To have a secret agency of 
government funded by the fiscus to interfere in the 
independence of the judiciary in a manner which is 
unaccountable is simply unconscionable.  Would you agree 
with that?   
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, unconscionable but there, you 
10 
know, our brief was to try and understand if we find that 
there are things that went wrong, how did they go wrong, 
when?  You have got such checks and balances provided 
for 
in 
our 
system 
of 
government, 
our 
constitutional 
democracy.  Anything that suggests that there was a 
subversion of independence of any one of these organs of 
state or even just contemplation of that subversion, it is a 
matter of grave concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, this evidence that the panel was 
told is quite concerning in terms of if these things are true, 
20 
if they did happen.  I mean, I have been sitting here – well, 
not all the time but we were sitting in another venue in 
2018 and 2019 as the Commission but I have been hearing 
a lot of evidence of the past two and a half years and so 
from what you are saying here and I get the sense from Mr 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 121 of 183 
 
Pretorius that maybe there will be other evidence, it is not 
the first time that I hear evidence or that I may be hearing 
evidence to say so and so says he used to give money to 
so and so to pass on to President Zuma.  I heard evidence 
like that from Mr Agrizzi saying that monthly BOSASA or Mr 
Gavin Watson gave money to Ms Dudu Myeni to pass on to 
Mr Zuma.  I do not whether it was R100 000 or R300 000 
but some money.  There was no evidence – there has been 
no evidence that that money was received by Mr Zuma.  
But I am just saying, you know, when I sit here, I remember 
10 
other evidence that I have heard.  So here I am saying that 
this would be the second time I hear evidence of that 
nature.  Okay, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is the reading of paragraph 7.10 
correct, that the sources referred to in the judiciary are in 
fact judges? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that allegations were made to 
the effect that judges were bribed to counter the influence 
of judges hostile to President Zuma, that was what you 
20 
were told? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But you say there was no actual 
evidence that the operation was carried out and we have 
dealt with it to an extent at least on the basis that such a 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 122 of 183 
 
project could ever have been conceived?  
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes but as I say it was not our place to 
dig deeper than that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we are ad idem are we that 
this is a serious matter warranting the fullest investigation. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We know that Minister Mahlobo 
gave evidence or spoke to or was interviewed by the panel, 
correct? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we have been given access to 
a recording of the interview he had with the panel.  
Unfortunately, that recording is entirely corrupted and 
we’re trying to see what we can do about it but perhaps 
you can help us.  Do you recall whether this series of 
actual allegations under the head project Justice were put 
to Minister Mahlobo? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, as you say, it’s really unfortunate 
that the part of our hearings with – was covered – was 
recorded and it’s not possible to record it and I’m talking 
20 
about technically was – the line was corrupted because I 
would have asked for that myself so that I could then, 
without relying on memory say, these are the questions 
which we put to Mr Mahlobo and this is how he responded.  
So, I have no recollection of questions we put to him in 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 123 of 183 
 
this regard and how he responded.  I would rather suggest 
that the Commission find a way of taking these matters 
further within. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let’s move on then, to, operation 
Lock paragraph 7.11 of your statement.  As I say,  Chair, 
there will be further evidence in this regard.  Operation 
Lock, what did this project involve, at least insofar as you 
were told? 
DR MUFAMADI:   The name, Eugene de Kock, depending 
on where you see it, it’s famous or infamous.  Now, Mr 
10 
Eugene de Kock spent some time in prison and he was, 
subsequently released, apparently on the basis of a 
memorandum of understanding with the Department of 
Correctional Services.  I don’t want to go into details about 
what – actually occasioned that, is not – was not a matter 
within the brief of the panel …[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We needn’t go in too much detail 
here, there are sensitivities around it. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I say, we needn’t go in too much 
20 
detail in relation to this project. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Save to say that, SSA provided him 
with a safe house and protection. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 124 of 183 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And on release from prison, who 
would normally bear the responsibility for the protection 
and provision of safe houses, if necessary, to a former 
prisoner, would it be SSA? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Well, I did not have sight of the 
memorandum of undertaking to start with, but logic would 
say to me, if the memorandum of understanding was 
between Mr de Kock and the Correctional Services, they 
would have committed themselves to ensuring that he’s 
protected.  That he has got a place to stay,  if he did not 
10 
have one himself, that is Correctional Services.  If they 
needed the assistance of a sister Department as far as 
protection is concerned, one would have thought that the 
appropriate Department to ask for assistance from, is 
SADS.  So, we don’t know why it was SSA, but we came, 
also, to understand that – I don’t see the exact amount 
here but there was an amount of money that was advanced 
to Mr de Kock for his upkeep, whilst he was out of prison, 
protection afforded and if that was the case, the question 
is, then, why was that money provided for by SSA but I 
20 
guess the appropriate person from SSA will answer this 
question. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, ja, I won’t say anymore but we 
are operating in consultation with the SSA in regard to the 
extent of the evidence that is given. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 125 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   7.12 Project Wave, would you tell 
the Chair what that project involved, as far as you learnt 
and was told? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 7.12 Project Wave, 
would you tell the Chair please what that project involved 
as far as you became aware? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, we were told that this project 
involved infiltrating and influencing the media at home and 
10 
abroad in order, apparently to counter bad publicity for the 
country and the, then President and the SSA, in other 
words in the opinion of SSA there was bad publicity in the 
country – within the country and beyond, about the country, 
about the President and about the SSA and – which then 
necessitated using filtration and influencing of the media.  
So, they say the project was launched in the 2015/2016 
financial year with a budget of R24million and they say one 
of 
the 
largest 
amounts 
issued 
for 
this 
project 
was 
R20million given to a media agency.  Apparently, therefore, 
20 
for services rendered for eight months. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it was originally intended that 
the name of the agency would be redacted, but you’ve had 
discussions with the SSA in that regard and it’s not 
necessary to redact the name, what is the name of the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 126 of 183 
 
Agency? 
DR MUFAMADI: The Agency we were told, is Africa News 
Agency.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then paragraph – well, and we 
know, don’t we, that there is already a legitimate arm of 
Government 
that 
deals 
with 
publicity 
in 
relation 
to 
Government and Government activities, correct? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, paragraph 7.13, Project 
Accurate or Project Khusela, what was this project about? 
10 
DR MUFAMADI:   We were told that this was a project to 
recruit toxicologists to test the food and bedding of then, 
President Zuma.  This project had then initial location of 
R500 000 per month which increased to R1,5million per 
month in the 2015/2016 financial year and again, we did 
not understand this to be the responsibility – as the panel 
of the SSA to deal with issues of that toxicology and 
related issues. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, one doesn’t want to make 
light of this but we do have evidence which may well be 
20 
presented to the Chair that, one of the fruits of this 
toxicology unit’s effort was to discover, expired cool drinks 
in the panty of the former President.  Do you know 
anything about that? 
DR MUFAMADI:   No, we were not told about expired cool 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 127 of 183 
 
drinks and that it cost so much to discover…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, exactly, that’s the point I 
think, and that evidence will be …[intervenes]. 
DR MUFAMADI:   The expired cool drinks – I always, 
check, also myself, whether cool drinks have expired and I 
don’t spend money…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Perhaps you won’t need so much 
money to check that. 
DR MUFAMADI:   I don’t have it, maybe it’s because of 
that, yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but I think the point is, 
although lightly put, the point is that it was an expensive 
project. 
DR MUFAMADI:   It was an expensive project indeed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then Project Tin Roof, what 
was that project about? 
DR MUFAMADI:   This, we were told, involved in an 
investigation into the alleged attempted poisoning of 
President Zuma by his wife, Ntuli but it also involved 
acquiring a safe house for Ntuli and seemingly, maintaining 
20 
her, even the quantum of the project budget of R5.2million 
with a monthly withdrawal of R800 000. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, so just to summarise so far 
in relation to the former President Zuma, we have evidence 
of a project to provide a security force for his benefit, we 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 128 of 183 
 
have evidence, at least prima facie evidence that amounts 
were allocated for his benefit of between R2.5 and 
R4.5million per month.  We have evidence of a toxicology 
unit being created and paid for, for his benefit and we have 
the amounts expended in relation to his wife Ntuli.   
There’s further evidence that you will deal with, where he 
benefited 
from 
certain 
projects 
conducted 
under 
the 
auspices of SSA but what would you say to that collection 
of evidence in relation to the state security/human security 
divide? 
10 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, I think, the point that you were 
making – the observation you were making, I concur with it, 
these are extraordinary expenses.  Financing extraordinary 
undertakings on the part of SSA.  Now, to the extent that 
some of them come up as – for the protection of the 
President and this you correctly said, Chair, I was Minister 
of Safety and Security for a period of five years, I was not 
involved in operational issues but these issues that are 
being heard here are not just operational they’ve got 
strategic implications and faced with such issues or similar 
20 
issues, the Commissioner of Police would have deemed it 
necessary to bring these issues to my attention.  At no 
point were we told that these issues were brought to the 
attention of a Minister of Police because that would have 
been the relevant Minister and the Department for which he 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 129 of 183 
 
has  got political responsibility would have been the 
appropriate Department and issues about toxicology and so 
on would have involved consultation between the SAPS 
and possibly the Department of Health or some such 
Department.  So,  you can see why I am saying, there are 
many questions that is being – begs quite a number of 
questions which possibly will come out in the wash. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Were you told what the justification was, 
at least from the point of view of SSA for giving – or 
arranging for a safe house for Ntuli, she was not an agent, 
10 
was there anything – anything really, advanced to the 
panel to say, well, as the relevant unit of the SSA which 
did this, this is how we see it as justified, we think it’s 
justified because of A, B, C, D? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Like with other project, we were not 
provided 
with, 
what 
I’ll 
consider 
a 
cogent 
logical 
explanation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:   For why, if there were challenges in this 
sort of areas, it was then the responsibility of SSA to step 
20 
in, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but as you recall you were given 
some – you were told something that they considered to be 
justification, but you didn’t consider it sound or you might 
not have been given an answer at all? 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 130 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, we might not have been given an 
answer at all, as I said, on the proper recollection of that 
but also…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but nothing sound as far as you are 
concerned. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, there also – Chair, you will 
appreciate 
that 
if 
we 
tried 
to 
follow 
everything…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I accept, I accept ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:   We were given, actually, six months. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no I accept ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:   To complete this task. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you had to be careful about not 
spending too much time on individual items. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You needed to get a globular picture. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 7.15, Dr Mufamadi, 
you deal with certain information you were given and 
20 
things you were told in relation to particular projects 
involving civil society and you mentioned at least two here, 
what were they? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, there are two issues here, 
interrelated.  The one we were told about was a testimony 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 131 of 183 
 
and there were legal papers that were provided which 
speak to that issue about a union called The Worker ’s 
Association Union.  Workers Association Union which was 
a ….[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your background, as a trade union is 
coming back now to give you a certain perspective about 
this name? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, you can imagine, I couldn’t stop 
laughing just at their attempt. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughter]. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Similar to that other trade union 
called, The General and Allied Worker ’s Union. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughter]. 
DR MUFAMADI:   That was a proper union which gave rise 
to what is today Cosatu’s largest affiliate now, not this one.  
So, I am saying, we were told that this union was 
established with the support of this Special Operations 
Unit of the SSA…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And its purpose? 
DR MUFAMADI:   The purpose ostensibly to neutralise 
20 
instability in the Platinum Belt and counter a growing 
influence of …[indistinct].  The related operation or activity 
was the putting under surveillance of unions that broken 
ranks with Cosatu which were critical of the President, 
that’s what we were told. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 132 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think, General Worker ’s Union of South 
Africa would have been much more imaginative. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, I think…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Than Workers Association. 
DR MUFAMADI:   There was a shortage of listing 
intellectual property. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughter]. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we know that the Labour 
Relations Act, deals extensively with the powers and 
10 
functions of the Registrar, the conduct of trade unions and 
that is all left to the Judiciary and the Labour Court to deal 
with.  The idea that a secret and secretively financed 
project should be dealing with trade unions and the 
conduct of trade unions by supporting new trade unions, 
presumably at their instance, what does that say about the 
separation of powers principle? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, freedom of association, that’s the 
issue. If people joined the union which is considered to be 
creating instability in the economy is the responsibility of 
20 
corporate leaders who find creative ways of relating to that 
reality, that’s the first point and workers have got a right to 
associate with a union of their choice.  Now, again,  you 
will 
recall 
that 
this 
practice 
is 
not 
new. 
 Whoever 
introduced this idea of forming a rival union, using State 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 133 of 183 
 
funds must have been reading from the script of the 
apartheid times.  You know I was part of the leadership of 
the Congress of South African Trade Unions, I was 
working, amongst others, with the late President of Cosatu, 
Elijah Barayi and Jay Naidoo and we were shown their 
coffins whilst they were still alive.  All these was brought 
about in the same way as this thing that we are reading 
about associate – well it’s called Association of Union or 
something like that.  A project which is designed to 
undermine freedom of association, to create a …[indistinct] 
10 
union – and by the way this is not speculation because you 
know for a fact that when the matter came before the 
Courts, there was a settlement between the Union and the 
SSA but again, I don’t think Cosatu itself would have 
appreciated having to be protected in this kind of way, from 
competition. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know, what I’m really not sure I 
understand in regard to this – you were saying, we are 
aware that there was a settlement because – that’s 
because – or Mr Pretorius and I have read some affidavits 
20 
that the public hasn’t heard.  It just seems strange to me, 
why a State institution such as SSA or maybe a politician 
who is in Government, if that is factually true, would say, 
let’s take taxpayers money and go and establish a union 
that must abide with that other union.  I can understand if, 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 134 of 183 
 
maybe there was some connection with a Cosatu rival 
union but from what one has read, it doesn’t look like there 
was any connection, it looks like it was something that just 
came from, either some politician or politicians or with or 
State Security Agency or State Security Agency, it just 
seems to be something that’s just so far away, you know.  
You know, when you read your affidavit where it is said 
that State Security – SSA or some operation under SSA 
approached the media to say, we are concerned about how 
the President is portrayed or the Government is portrayed, 
10 
we want to enforce the media to put the President or the 
Government in – or the country in a positive light.  One can 
understand that, it may be wrong, but one can understand 
why 
somebody 
would 
want 
that 
but 
it’s 
difficult 
to 
understand why SSA or some politician would want to say, 
let’s use taxpayer ’s money to create a union that will fight 
with that union.  I’m not sure – so there is that aspect, I 
don’t know if, whether it’s something you share as well or 
not? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja, well, you know, unions exist because 
20 
there is a particular Labour Relations framework provided 
by Government.  So, if there is serious instability on that 
front, just like on any other front, in the final analysis, 
Government will be expected to do something. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From the context from the perspective of 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 135 of 183 
 
not wanting instability? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR MUFAMADI:   But that something has to be imagined, 
so if your imagination does not take you beyond thinking 
about causing the formation of a rival union, that’s what he 
will do.  As I was saying,  it was done before, it is 
unfortunate that you could see a repeat of that in the post-
10 
apartheid South Africa, that is the problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay thank you, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 7.16, Project Academia, 
what did you learn, or what were you told about that 
project? 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, we were told that the project was 
designed to intervene in the Fees Must Fall protests and 
influence the direction of the student movement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, the name there has been 
redacted? 
20 
DR 
MUFAMADI: 
 
 
The 
name 
has 
been 
redacted 
and…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And replace by a pseudonym. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you can proceed. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 136 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes, and the idea was to support what 
was called Young Bright Minds to be …[indistinct] and to 
be strategically deployed to institute counter measures and 
then show stability in our universities. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, so – let’s just pause there 
a moment.  The main agent in the project whose name is 
redacted for security reasons, was sent on training, 
destination of that training has also been redacted. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The object or purpose of the 
10 
project was to influence the direction of the student 
movement. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it was to support “Young Bright 
Minds” to be patriotic and to be strategically deployed to 
institute counter measures and ensure stability and peace 
in our universities.  Now it may be quite legitimate to be 
concerned about peace and stability in universities, but the 
method used here, do you have any comment in relation to 
that and the freedom of association principle? 
20 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, what I said about freedom of 
association principle applies here.  No need for the State 
to intervene in the manner that we were told this project 
was designed to do and again, you know, the …[indistinct] 
of the conflict that took place in our country before we 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 137 of 183 
 
came to 1994 will tell us how undesirable this practice is.  
Again I happened to know evidence leader that you were 
part of the leadership of NUSAS ha? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I was. 
DR MUFAMADI:  So Craig Williamson is not somebody you 
do not know.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct. 
DR MUFAMADI:  You will – you know what role he played in 
Student politics. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And I know the impact it had on 
10 
the lives of people. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja and the impact it had on the lives of 
people.  So this question goes to the heart in what sense of 
newness is this new South Africa new?   
 
And again it is a matter as I say which I think is 
experience it is saying to us we must not think that we have 
arrived and therefore we can sit back and everything good is 
preordained to happen.   
 
And I – I hope that some of the recommendations we 
made will help to refocus once more the work of the decision 
20 
makers in this regard. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The – yes the counter-proposition 
that may be put in fact that you know the fact that this 
commission is sitting here deal with these issues of extreme 
sensitivity is an indication of the strength of democratic 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 138 of 183 
 
institutions and our constitution.  But you were going to 
make some remarks about that at the end of your testimony. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Please remind me. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I will. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I think it is important.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But that is a remark that you wish to 
make and I will remind you at the end of your testimony. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 7.1 Chair there will be 
evidence in due course of a report prepared by a – an 
10 
operative during this period which has become known 
colloquially as the Boast Report in which the author records 
certain activities of Special Operations under his or her 
watch.  And we have been given access to the report and the 
State Security Agency have permitted release of that report 
without redaction.  Initially it was intended to redact certain 
clauses of the report but after discussions it was agreed that 
the whole of the report could be released and four issues 
emerging from that report are dealt with in paragraph 7.17 Dr 
Mufamadi if you could just deal with them please?  It was a 
20 
report made to the SSA DG at the time Mr Fraser in February 
2017 dealing with certain activities of the Special Operations 
Unit during 2016/2017.  There are four issues that arise in 
your statement what are those? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja well this was called the Boast Report 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 139 of 183 
 
because the author was exposing the achievements of his 
group or unit. 
 
So he talks about what was – what were called 
countering operations that were initiated during the 2016 
ANC 
general 
- 
I 
mean 
January 
AIDS 
statement 
in 
Rustenburg.   
 
So the units says: 
“We initiated three countering operations to 
impede the distribution of CR17 Regalia 
impede transportation system of dissident 
10 
groups from Gauteng Province.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So ja 17 is a reference to the current 
President. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes the campaign for the 00:05:10 
including Presidents of the ANC.  Then it also says: 
“During the February 2016 State of the 
Nation Address the unit was ‘able to infiltrate 
and penetrate the leadership structure of the 
Zuma Must Fall movement.’  The initial Zuma 
Must Fall indicated that more than 5000 
20 
people would embark on Parliament but with 
efficient and effective countering actions and 
the 
dissemination 
of 
this 
information 
to 
supporters 
of 
Zuma 
Must 
Fall 
only 
appropriately 50 Zuma Must Fall supporters 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 140 of 183 
 
attended the march’” 
 
It is in the report that was tabled or filed by the – the 
member of the Special Operations Unit. It also says: 
“During the ANC’s manifesto launch in Port 
Elizabeth in 2016 a unit initiated – a unit 
“initiated 
a 
media 
campaign 
to 
provide 
positive 
media 
feedback 
through 
the 
placement of youth of various ethnic groups 
in photographic vision of media personnel 
thereby promoting social cohesion.” 
10 
 
Chair if you ask me what this last one means I will 
tell you I do not understand.  So the report boasts of various 
other similar operations including the “Active Monitoring of 
the South Africa First Right to Know Savesa.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Savesa. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes.  CASAC and Green Peace was done 
due to the penetration ability of the group. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  In due course if it arises in 
evidence of the Director General the debate as to what is 
legitimate and illegitimate surveillance activity one accepts 
20 
that if there is a perceived threat to the country on any front 
it is the duty not only the right of surveillance organisations 
such as Intelligence to see what is going on.  Infiltration and 
influence is another story but – but that is for another debate 
for another time.  But the first three paragraphs the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 141 of 183 
 
interference in the CR17 campaign, the infiltration and 
neutralisation of the Zuma Must Fall movement and whatever 
is said about the ANC Manifesto launch in Port Elizabeth 
whether clear or unclear is that an example of political 
interference that would be prohibited by the Principles in the 
white paper? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes I think I will put this in Zulu because I 
am addressing the Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR MUFAMADI:  The organ of state such as the SSA has no 
10 
business to seek to influence or to [African language]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will have to give the gist of that in 
English. 
DR MUFAMADI:  No I have read it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I understand it. 
DR MUFAMADI:  You understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I understand it. 
DR MUFAMADI:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I think – I think Mr Pretorius wants to 
understand it too. 
20 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes you see issues of incumbency 
influencing who ascends whether it is within political parties 
or even state organs it is not the responsibility of the SSA. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  And as you say the monitoring happens if 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 142 of 183 
 
you have got reason to believe that there is an intention on 
the part of the people you are – want to monitor to do 
unlawful things. 
 
And even for that there are permissions that need to 
be sought if part of the monitoring include listening in to 
people’s conversations and so on. 
 
So else you say evidence leader I think the DG will 
have to spend some time indicating to this commission what 
exactly is within the realm of the permissible with respect to 
surveillance.  But influencing things that happen in civil 
10 
society particularly organised formations that should be no 
no yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Dr Mufamadi in paragraph 8. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You refer to evidence that has also 
been presented directly to the Chair. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In relation to the persons there 
named. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Matlatuka, Ngentle and Shaik. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In relation firstly to a report given to 
the then Minister of State Security Dr Cele and evidence in 
relation to a meeting that took place in the study of the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 143 of 183 
 
President’s – President Zuma’s private home in Pretoria 
involving Ms Susan Shabango = Shabangu and Mr Ajay 
Gupta.  You confirm that you were told and learnt of the 
events as you set them out in paragraph 8.1? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Huh-uh. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We do not need to repeat them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I have heard the evidence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes you have heard the evidence.  
Then a matter that may not be a minor matter that the oath 
of allegiance that SSA members are expected to take 
10 
changed during the period under your investigation.  Just 
briefly describe how it changed?  How were members of the 
SSA expected to swear allegiance and it may be more than 
symbolic? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes.  Speaking from experience I did take 
an oath of office.  You are being sworn in as a Minister.  You 
swear an oath of allegiance to the Republic of South Africa, 
its 
constitution 
and 
any 
law 
that 
is 
duly 
passed 
by 
Parliament.  That kind of oath. 
 
And that is the oath you would expect not only 
20 
Ministers to take but people who find themselves doing this 
kind of sensitive work and as I understood it it was really a 
similar oath that historically members of SSA took. 
 
But at some point during this period that was under 
review by the 00:13:43 the members were expected to take 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 144 of 183 
 
an oath which also binds them to profess allegiance to the 
Minister of State Security and the President. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry if I can just interrupt there.  It 
would be to swear allegiance to the Constitution laws of the 
country as per the original oath but also now to the 
President. 
DR MUFAMADI:  And the Minister. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and then to recognise the 
authority of the Minister of State Security. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja sure – oath allegiance to the President 
10 
and recognise the authority of the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so this change in terms of the oath 
did not happen during the period that your panel was in 
operation but it happened during the period … 
DR MUFAMADI:  Under… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which you were reviewing. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Was this a situation where this oath 
the one you are talking about here the new one was it just 
additional to an existing oath?  Normally an oath might be 
20 
scheduled to an act of Parliament or something.  Was this a 
separate thing in addition to an existing official oath or was 
this the oath that SSA members took? 
DR MUFAMADI:  I will seek also the help of … 
DR MUFAMADI:  Oh. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 145 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:  Because there is a copy that was shared 
with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Both the evidence leader and. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Our side. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I can give you a copy of the old oath.  
Chair both of these – the new oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is in the bundle. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Registrar please assist. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I will give you a reference and I just 
want to hand to you the old oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sanitise before. 
DR MUFAMADI:  I think I will… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but it is for him or has – have you got 
– ja first and foremost. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  This is the sanitised oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  This is the – the old one. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja this is the old one which talks about the 
constitution and… 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 146 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you do not mind without mentioning the 
name of the person who – that appears there would you just 
read it into the record please as being the old one.  I see 
that this was in July 2003 when it was taken according to 
what is at the bottom.  Do you just want to read into the 
record so we have got it there?  Dr Mufamadi. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want to just read it into the record 
10 
this oath. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  It reads: 
CHAIRPERSON:  Without the name of the person. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
“I solemnly and sincerely declare to be loyal 
to the Constitution, The Republic of South 
Africa and the South African Secret Service 
above personal interests and promise to 
20 
endeavour to maintain and promote in my 
work at all times the security of the Republic.  
Subject myself to the Constitution; to do my 
work faithfully with all my strength and using 
all my talents to the best of my ability.  
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 147 of 183 
 
Conscientiously 
carry 
out 
the 
corporate 
policies and procedures applicable to the 
South African Service.  Promote the interest 
of the South African Secret Service at all 
times and above personal interests.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
DR MUFAMADI:  It is actually dated July 2003. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I see that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is trying to get the… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It will be good to have … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The new oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  They will be placed in the bundle 
next to one another. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In due course.  The new oath is in 
Bundle YY2 page 32.177 and perhaps that can be read onto 
the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said 32.? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  YY2 – 32.177. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.   
DR MUFAMADI:  It reads: 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Just one second.  I am sorry I – yes I 
have got it yes you can read it. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 148 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:  It reads: 
“Oath of Office.  I solemnly and sincerely 
declare my allegiance to the Constitution and 
the laws of the country, the President and 
Government of the Republic of South Africa.  
I sincerely and at all times undertake to 
maintain and promote the security and safety 
of the Republic and its citizens to the best of 
my ability and knowledge.  I undertake to 
contribute positively to the Government’s key 
10 
outcomes of ensuring that South Africans are 
and 
feel 
safe 
and 
that 
South 
Africa 
contributes to building a better Africa and a 
better world.  Furthermore I shall adhere to 
the 
principles 
of 
my 
profession 
as 
an 
intelligence officer as well as the norms and 
values of a democratic society.  I hereby 
recognise the authority of the Minister of 
State Security and undertake to promote the 
interest of the Civilian Intelligence Service of 
20 
my country above personal interests and to 
guard 
and 
promote 
the 
integrity 
of 
my 
profession as an Intelligence Officer as well 
as its methods and sources.  I consciously 
undertake to carry out the rules, regulations 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 149 of 183 
 
and directives applicable to the Civilian 
Intelligence Service.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in essence what you say in 
paragraph 83 is that the panel was surprised by the 
introduction of the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is paragraph 8.3? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  8.3 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I am sorry Chair.  Paragraph 8.3 
10 
you say the panel was surprised by the introduction of the 
oath of allegiance to the President and the requirement that 
the authority of the Minister of State Security be recognised. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes we were surprised because we thought 
that it – this was superfluous to the needs of a democratic 
republic and we thought also that it has introduced elements 
that lend themselves to a disturbance of the balance of 
power 
and 
authority 
between 
the 
legislature 
and 
the 
executive.   
 
You know it is to insist that employees of the state 
20 
must swear this kind of allegiance is tantamount to saying 
you know you must express loyalty to your God, your Creator 
and immediately after your God me.  You know what I – this 
is worrying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 150 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  The – the original or the old oath did 
not it seems include an allegiance – pledging allegiance to 
any individual whereas the second one. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Had included or introduced pledging 
allegiance to the President and recognising the authority of 
the Minister of State Security. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes but then you see it take us back Chair 
to what we were saying about if an individual in the position 
10 
of authority gives me an instruction which in manifestly 
illegal if I question that instruction I will be reminded of the 
fact that I swore allegiance to that individual. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DR MUFAMADI:  This is the distortion to the relationship 
which it introduces.  It then helps us to answer the question 
you were asking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Where operatives, members of the SSA 
operating in an environment which empowered them to 
20 
consider and respect the laws of the Republic as Sacrosanct 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  And – and which – did the 
environment empower them to raise issues that they might 
think certain individuals did not like to be raised. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 151 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and of course as you say Dr 
Mufamadi the injunction not to obey an unlawful order is in 
the Constitution itself. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Against that background in paragraph 
7.1 Dr Mufamadi you summarise the considerations which 
influenced the panel arising out of the evidence of projects 
placed before it.  Would you place those conclusions on 
10 
record please?  Para 7.18. 
DR MUFAMADI:  7.18 sorry I am going back to it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh are you going back? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes to para 7.18 it is back a page or 
two pages.  One page back.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh?  Is it something you had overlooked I 
thought we were at page. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No I just want to deal with the oath 
first. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay no that is fine. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To then continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  To deal with the conclusion reached 
because it stands in stark contrast to the oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 152 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja but to the extent that we – we pointed to 
evidence pointing to the existence of Special Operations Unit 
as a parallel intelligence structure serving interests of a 
faction of the ruling party and the personal political interests 
of incumbents this would have been a direct breach of the 
Constitution the white paper the relevant legislation and 
plain good government intelligence function which would 
then be an appropriation of a state entity in ways or for ends 
that run countered what is contained even in the second oath 
of allegiance.  In other words I am saying even the second 
10 
oath of allegiance it is internally contradictory to the extent 
that it correctly shares allegiance to the Constitution and it 
places individual incumbents at par with the Constitution.  
Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Dr Mufamadi in paragraph 9 and the 
– all the sub-paragraphs under that head you deal with the 
failure to implement financial controls in the SSA and 
importantly you deal with the absence of consequence 
management as you refer to it.  You did express some 
reservation that this detail of evidence should perhaps or 
20 
would be better perhaps given by someone closer to the SSA 
and that evidence can and will be given in due course.  But 
could you have a look at the evidence you give under this 
head in paragraph 9 and there are certain redactions 
necessary from paragraph 9.20 and I will explain those in 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 153 of 183 
 
due course.  But between paragraph 9.1 and 9.19 could you 
summarise that please?  But perhaps dealing with the failure 
to implement financial controls, the use of cash and 
consequence management and finally the Auditor General’s 
role and your concerns in relation to that? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes as we indicated earlier that we were 
told that it was very difficult to implement financial controls 
in a situation where the movement of money was actually 
cash based and you had also this temporary advance where 
you are given money; you go and use it as you are 
10 
implementing the project and you come back later and say 
well I have done what I needed to do.  You do not have to 
explain to the people who give you the money I want more 
money.  And there were many – there was no documentary 
evidence submitted to show what exactly the money was 
used for. 
 
And this matter was also corroborated by the Auditor 
General who said the agency was not always able to provide 
documentary support for money used in operations. 
 
And it was very uncomfortable with having to write a 
20 
report all the time which starts with a disclaimer of this kind 
because you are – you first look and see you are not talking 
about two cents. 
 
So this is what we were told.  But as I said to the 
evidence leader I think the operational people are best 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 154 of 183 
 
placed to give you the necessary details having regard to the 
actual controls that they put in place.  To start with their own 
assessment whether those controls were effective and if they 
were effective how come they were subverted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might not have looked into this 
because of the nature; high level nature of your review and 
the limited time that you had. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Sure. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it would be interesting to see whether 
in other jurisdictions SSA equivalents whether this problem 
of using cash so much whether they suffer from the same 
situation. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As well. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know.  I – I suppose that the first point 
they would make to try and justify is for example certain 
people that we deal with must not be known and they must 
20 
not be known that they are doing something for us.  Or they 
are giving us information.  They are collecting information 
from us.  And so that is why we – we cannot – we have to – 
got to give them cash and so on because there must not 
somewhere be proof that we are giving them something.  
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 155 of 183 
 
Maybe that is where it would start but the question is how do 
you stop abuse?  Because obviously a situation like that you 
know is fertile ground for abuse because somebody can keep 
on coming back and say I have given him – I have given – I 
have done what I am supposed to do with the money give me 
more.  You give them more. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They come back say I have done what I 
was supposed to do with the money give me more.  Or they 
can end up saying well every month you are going to have to 
10 
give me X amount and – because I am supposed to do 
certain things and I cannot tell you what those things are for 
the organisation and then every month they get this money.  
But they could be pocketing the money. 
DR 
MUFAMADI: 
 
Yes. 
 
But 
as 
you 
say 
Chair 
our 
responsibility is to prevent abuse.  Looking at examples in 
other jurisdictions it is – and something advisable to do.  But 
if we find nothing that helps there we still have an obligation 
to think.  You see the late Auditor General was saying to us 
you see we get told that yes you can audit but you do not 
20 
have 
people in the Auditor 
General’s 
office 
with the 
necessary level of security clearance to – to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Look into certain matters yet. 
DR MUFAMADI:  To look into certain matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Only those people – only people with that 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 156 of 183 
 
clearance can look into… 
DR MUFAMADI:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can see certain things. 
DR MUFAMADI:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  So the Auditor General says, no look if this 
– if such people exist on earth then between us and SSA we 
need to find a way of getting such people into the Auditor 
General’s office and we then said, no we think this is 
eminently reasonable. 
10 
 
So we need to – to put this question of intelligence 
work beyond mystification.  Because the best way to evade 
scrutiny is to suggest that the person who can do that is not 
yet born. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it seems to me that the country 
could easily have a situation where large sums of money are 
going to individuals who are not really doing anything for the 
country and the country cannot get to know that because of – 
of these excuses. 
 
And basically you know large scale theft could 
20 
happen.  Large scale theft can happen. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And we are not supposed to – to know and 
we are not supposed to – because if we do not know we will 
not be able to – we might not be able to put measures in 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 157 of 183 
 
place to make sure it does not happen again you know.  You 
– ordinarily you want to know what happened; why it 
happened and what kind of involvement gave rise to it – 
make it possible for it to happen.  So that you can then say 
what does not – what needs to be done to make sure it does 
not happen in the future. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Okay Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well even where the theft of money 
was known there seems to be a lack of consequence 
10 
management.  Perhaps you could refer to the Chair to the 
events described in paragraph 9.7?   
DR MUFAMADI:  Must we keep shifting my paragraphs are 
getting mixed up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page – page 21 black numbers. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes.  Chair I – is it 9.7? 
CHAIRPERSON:  9.7 ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  9.7. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Okay I think I am getting there now.  Sorry.  
Yes.  Yes you – one of the briefings we received as the panel 
20 
was a briefing on the theft of over R17 million from a safe 
inside the SSA complex in December 2015.  We were told 
that in spite of video footage of the perpetrators and the 
outcome of internal investigation there appears to have been 
no consequence management because we kept on saying 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 158 of 183 
 
okay with these capabilities you have but did 00:08:44.  And 
of particular concern to us was the report the panel received 
that they had of the Hawks at the time – am I allowed to 
mention the name – General 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well… 
DR MUFAMADI:  Was only one had Berning Ntlemeza failed 
to take the investigation of the burglary to its logical 
conclusion. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well that is what you were told. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We do not know that that was finally 
the outcome and perhaps we can hear more about that. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Ja possibly you will hear more about it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Because as at the time this is what we 
were told it is possible that the matter had been progressed 
beyond what was at the time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes but it was a matter of concern to 
you. 
DR MUFAMADI:  It was a matter of concern it was because 
20 
at that stage we were saying this matter cannot just end 
there yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes the detail of internal financial 
controls firstly whether to the extent that they existed were 
followed and secondly whether the financial controls were 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 159 of 183 
 
operationally sufficient to prevent theft and misappropriation.  
That will be dealt with in due course by witnesses before the 
Chair. 
 
But and it is important for him to consider what 
findings he might wish to make about what he hears in 
evidence.  But just by way of summary perhaps 9.13 of your 
statement to 9.16 would summarise the financial situation.  If 
you could just consider that and perhaps place that on 
record? 
DR MUFAMADI:  Chair point of exigency is it possible to be 
10 
granted a senior moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I was actually thinking about that. 
DR MUFAMADI:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think let us take a short adjournment 
because we have just gone past four o’clock.  Maybe there is 
also – let me just make sure that we – we all agree that we 
will try and finish with Dr Mufamadi. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we should finish with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We should finish at quite… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Twenty minutes to half an hour. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay – okay alright.  Let us take a 
short adjournment – fifteen minutes and then we return.  We 
adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 160 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue.  You may be seated.  
Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Sorry, Chair.  If I could just ask you 
Dr Mufamadi to look at paragraph 9.6.  And given the details 
and the constraints of time, I do not think the Chair will have 
an objection if you read that.  Obviously, one name there has 
been redacted.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Please switch on your mic Dr Mufamadi. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
DR MUFAMDI:   You say the name has been redacted.  I 
notice that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You wanted him to read from what 
paragraph Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Just 9.6.  [Indistinct] [speaker 
moves away from speaker – not clear] ...post the redaction, 
and perhaps he should also not mention the position 
because the redaction may be useless without ...[intervenes]  
DR MUFAMDI:   And there is only one name that has been 
taken out of that paragraph. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   The name in red.  You can use the 
name in red.  That is ...[intervenes]  
DR MUFAMDI:   Okay, okay.   
“If the panel received the submission from several 
members working in the finance department, they 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 161 of 183 
 
allege that Dwayne ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes, and do not reveal the position. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja. 
“...restructured the budget process leading to the 
collapse 
to 
the 
budget 
structure 
for 
Domestic 
Intelligence. 
The DG at the time was Ambassador Sonto Kudjoe. 
Dwayne 
removed 
all 
divisional 
heads 
and 
concentrated authority in his hands. 
These concentrations stripped further powers from 
10 
the chief financial officer and effectively made 
Dwayne the budget controller for all the SSA 
including the provinces. 
This concentration of power reduced transparency 
and enabled the movements of funds to areas of the 
SSA favoured by the SSA leadership such as 
Ambassador Kudjoe and Mr Dlomo.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes.  Now that may be the subject 
of furthermore detailed evidence but that is as far as the 
panel is concerned. 
20 
DR MUFAMDI:   Panel? 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   No. 
DR MUFAMDI:   You said the panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   The panel. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes? 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 162 of 183 
 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   That I am saying that there may be 
further evidence dealing with these issues. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Okay. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
(SC): 
 
 
But 
as 
far 
as 
the 
panel 
...[intervenes]  
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   ...the high level review panel is 
concerned, that is what you learnt and recorded. 
DR MUFAMDI:   That is what we noted and recorded. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes. 
10 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And then, if you could just please – 
and again I am sure that the DCJ or the Chair will have no 
objection, if you just place on record your observations in 
relation to the role of the Auditor-General and what you were 
told by the Auditor-General when you interviewed him.  
Paragraph 9.1.3 and following.  And I will stop you because 
there is a part at which redaction has once again entered the 
scene. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
20 
“The Auditor-General informed us that every year he 
is forced to automatically provide a qualified audit of 
the SSA   
Firstly, this is because he is not provided with 
access to information to allow him to verify the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 163 of 183 
 
finances and assets of the SSA.   
Secondly, he is not able to determine the extent to 
which performance started have been met. 
This situation pertains, notwithstanding attempts by 
the 
Auditor-General 
and 
the 
SSA, 
to 
develop 
mechanisms to enable a thorough audit process to 
be conducted. 
The AG’s report on the SSA for the financial year 
2017/2018 provides a useful example of why the AG 
is forced to qualify his audit. 
10 
He noted the high-risk environment within which the 
agency functions and yet the manner in which 
expenditure and assets were recorded, did not 
sufficiently mitigate the risks. 
He noted the extensive use of TA’s temporary 
advance... 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
“...for operations which were required to be certified 
for surety. 
20 
However, during the audit management was unable 
to 
provide 
documentation 
to 
verify 
operational 
expenditure of R 125.6 million or that the money 
was used of the intended purpose. 
The AG was unable to confirm redundant assets in 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 164 of 183 
 
excess of R 9 billion as there was insufficient audit 
evidence and the assets could “not be located by 
the agency”. 
He, that is the AG, was unable to confirm the 
reported irregular expenditure of R 31.3 million as 
stated in the financial statements. 
In addition, the AG has regularly findings on the 
internal control environment. 
In this report on the 2017/2018 he noted, for 
example, lack of consequent management and not 
10 
holding staff accountable for poor quality of financial 
and performance reporting. 
Inadequate 
internal 
review 
processes 
by 
management leading to material misstatements as 
required in Section 14(1)(a)and(b) of the Public 
Finance Management Act. 
Non-compliance with supply chain processes going 
unnoticed. 
Absence of approved standard operating procedures 
to guide collection, collation, verification, storing 
20 
and reporting of actual performance information. 
Numerous senior acting positions have been created 
or that they have created instability which resulted 
in delays in the audit of performance management. 
Lack of monitoring and implementation plans by the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 165 of 183 
 
accounting 
officer 
and 
senior 
management 
to 
address key-control deficiencies.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And then 9.18. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
“The panel recognised ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Or perhaps we should not admit 
9.17.  My apologies Dr Mufamadi. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Let us deal with 9.17 as well. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Deal with 9.17? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes, please. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
“The 
AG’s 
report 
also 
complaint 
about 
the 
incomplete assessment of the useful life of assets 
which have recurred year after year as a result of 
information being withheld. 
While is assumed to be because of SSA’s reluctance 
to disclose this information because of the covert 
nature of the assets, it could also be the agency is 
intent 
on 
hiding 
indications 
of 
serious 
20 
mismanagement 
or 
the 
serious 
management 
weaknesses.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And 9.18. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
“The panel recognised that the AG, as a result of 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 166 of 183 
 
limited access to information, could only provide a 
qualified audit and could not publish its annual 
report...” 
 
And this was really a matter of serious concern.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Right.  Now from paragraph 9.20 
Dr Mufamadi to paragraph 9.22.  We are informed that that 
information is restricted and should not be disclosed to the 
public. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Of course, the irony is that the very 
10 
budgetary arrangements that informed the grant of money to 
the SSA and how those are arrived at, they are secret. 
DR MUFAMDI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   So now, of course, the irony arises 
in relation to supervision and accountability.  Certainly public 
accountability.  But there it is Chair.  Those arrangements, 
for the present at least, are classified. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well...  I mean, what, at least, seems 
to be clear to me is that some of the things, you know, 
should not be allowed to go on like this.  They should be 
20 
steps taken to stem the tide to say:  Well, we are aware of 
this and it leads to abuse of taxpayers’ money.   
 
A way must be found that will strike a balance between 
ensuring that legitimate work of this institution will be able to 
be done but abuse and theft of taxpayers’ money will be 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 167 of 183 
 
prevented.  It will not be allowed. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes.  But let us take for example 
the notion that extraordinary high amounts of the state’s 
coffers are expended on National Security Project or Special 
Operations.  That would not be known.  One need not reveal 
the detail of each project in such arrangements insofar as 
operatives and operations were revealed.  But perhaps 
Dr Mufamadi could comment on that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Why budgetary arrangements be 
secret? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, why should budgetary arrangements be 
secret. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   They ought not be secret.  As we were 
saying earlier.  A way has to be found, at least for the 
Auditor-General to verify that the purported use into which 
this money was put, it is indeed what it was put into. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I mean it cannot be that – except 
20 
those involved in using it were abusing it.  Nobody else can 
or should know it cannot be.  There should at least be a 
category of persons or officials who can or even if it is one 
category namely the Auditor-General.   
 
But it cannot be that nobody has access to documents 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 168 of 183 
 
and information to say:  Was this money used for legitimate 
operations or legitimate purposes of the organisation?  It 
cannot be.   
 
And one can see that one talks of large amounts that – it 
just looks like somebody can just go and take, go away, 
come back and take.  It is...  There has to be a way. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
(SC): 
 
 
Yes. 
 
There 
are 
certain 
qualifications to the absolute rule of secrecy but the position 
that I put in is that I have been told that the whole of the 
paragraphs should not be placed before you.  I think that this 
10 
requires another intervention with the SSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And we will do that and deal with it 
insofar as we have or later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   But I cannot put the absolute 
secrecy or the relative secrecy because I am entering into 
paragraphs that I am told that I should not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   But be that as it may.  At 9.2.3, you 
20 
can place on record because it deals with legislation. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  And of course, there is a Section 2A of 
the Secret Act, Secret Services Act which allows the SSA to 
keep any unused funds at the end of the financial year 
instead of disclosing and ...[intervenes]  
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 169 of 183 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Dr Mufamadi. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not want to forget this because I 
thought I was going to ask you a few minutes ago and I 
forgot.  Did you get information as to whether, for arguments 
sake, the position is that since inception or since it was 
established SAA – these problems that the AG was talking 
about have been there all the time year in and year out?   
 
Of course, even before the establishment of the SSA one 
would be interested in knowing whether the same problems 
10 
existed with regard to the predecessor of SAA, the different 
organisations or whether this was new because these 
problems that the AG was meeting when seeking to do their 
job.   
 
Did you get any sense about how long these problems 
may have been going?  And once again, I accept that you 
had to deal with these matters at high level and did not have 
much time to go into certain issues. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Relying on memory.  The impression we had 
was that these problems were as old as the Intelligence 
20 
Services. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   You know, it is this situation in which where 
I was talking earlier about, rethinking, reimagining things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 170 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   And the rethinking and the re-imagination 
does not go far enough. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   So you leave with things which could be 
done better. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   That is the one point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   But it seemed to us that Special Operations 
and to some limited extent Pan brought to this defect into 
10 
sharp relieve. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Otherwise, the problem had been there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
DR MUFAMDI:   A low-intensity problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, they just grew. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, it just grew. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did you get the impression that 
20 
somebody who was supposed to have started the AG’s report 
in relation to SAA every year and who was supposed to have 
said:  Look, there is a problem here.  Something needs to be 
done.  May not have done that. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  You know, I was saying earlier that 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 171 of 183 
 
there are these things that we do by way of convention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   That is a no-go area. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   And it indeed becomes a no-go area. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Yes, Yes.  And then, and that is 
worse if nobody is going to ask you whether you are doing 
your job in regard to that. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because everything is secret. 
10 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Which then also, I think when we come back 
to me saying what I want to say.  It is important that the 
secret crows are becoming less secret. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR MUFAMDI:   And I think we could take solace out of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Because I would have imagined that 
the AG’s report in regard to SSA would definitely go to the 
relevant Committee of Parliament.  I would imagine.  But 
20 
obviously the minister concerned should know as well.   
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, but you would have noticed in my 
earlier evidence that the AG by way of complaint was saying:  
I always started my report with ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   A disclaimer. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 172 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, a disclaimer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughs] 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja.  [laughs]  And he did not say there was a 
response to the disclaimer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So the disclaimer became like a 
normal.  So ...[intervenes]  
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, nobody ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the disclaimer.  Really, it is fine.  That is 
10 
how it is. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Nobody could believe.  In fact, it was 
regarded – it seems to have been regarded as:  Well, this is 
what is to be expected from a report in this functional area.  
[laughs]  You know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Thank you, Chair.  Paragraph 
9.2.3.  Would you just place that on record, please? 
20 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, I am saying in terms of Section 2(a) of 
the Secret Services Act: 
“The SSA may keep any unused funds at the end of 
the financial year instead of disclosing and retaining 
this to the fiscus as all other departments must do. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 173 of 183 
 
This means that unused funds from the previous 
year can be utilised the following year off budget. 
If funds are underutilised over time, a sizable port 
may develop and has developed which can be used 
without any disclosure.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   This too is a matter of concern for 
the panel or was a matter of concern for the panel. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, in the same order of what we have just 
discussed now.  I mean, if I want to play true and – I just 
make sure that a big chunk of the funds is unused.  And 
10 
therefore it will not be accounted for.  Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   You then in your affidavit 
Dr Mufamadi 
deal 
with 
the 
Principle 
Agency 
Network 
Programme.  Now we know that that programme was 
terminated or suspended in 2011. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   You say that in paragraph 10.1. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And you say in paragraph 10.2: 
“The 
essence 
of 
that 
programme 
was 
the 
20 
recruitment of principle agents outside the agency 
and they in turn were trained in capacitated to 
recruit and handled sources who were of legitimate 
interest to the agency or could provide information 
to the agency.” 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 174 of 183 
 
 
Do you see that in paragraph 10.2? 
DR MUFAMDI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And then you say: 
“It appeared to the panel that Pan involved into a 
methodology designed to 
avoid or 
bypass the 
procedural requirements for recruitment of staff, 
disbursements of funds and procurement.” 
 
You wish to expand on that or is that sufficient as far as 
you are concerned? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Well ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   What went wrong with Pan? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   What went wrong with Pan, the 
Principle Agent Network? 
DR MUFAMDI:   Ja, well I can just give an example of 
something we became aware of namely that the panel 
became aware that one person was recruited into the plan to 
provide analysis support.  The analysis function does and 
should reside in the agency itself.  So there was no need to 
get 
a 
temporary 
employee 
when 
there 
are 
full-time 
20 
employees of the agency which should have the capacity and 
to deal with that function. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
(SC): 
 
 
Now 
there 
are 
several 
investigations who say that were conducted into the Pan 
programme and the results of those will be available and we 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 175 of 183 
 
can make available.  But if you were just to place on record 
10.4 over the page, please?  And perhaps 10.5 and 10.6. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  Yes, you see: 
“The panel noted that the nature of allegations or 
accusations and the evidence collected during the 
various investigations painted a disturbing picture. 
Allegations 
of 
malfeasance, 
procedural 
transgressions and criminal behaviour were placed 
before the panel. 
This included, for example, the procurement of 
10 
assets without adherence to formal procedures, a 
signing of fraudulent contracts and payments to 
persons without valid contracts having been signed, 
the 
employment 
of 
family 
members 
and 
close 
associates outside of formal processes, the abuse of 
assets and missing funds and assets.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Perhaps we should for the sake of 
transparency go on.  I do not want to omit anything 
deliberately.  10.5, 10.6 and 10.7. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes, I was advised that there was a...  That 
20 
one there? 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes, the last name in 10.5. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   ...is a hidden name.  So you can 
read what you see. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 176 of 183 
 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
“In these interactions with the panel, Mr Arthur 
Fraser confirmed the appointment of his son as an 
employee of a warehouse that was a front company 
for the SSA. 
He also confirmed initiating the employment of a 
relative of an employee of the SSA.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Okay.  Well put.   
DR MUFAMDI:   Okay, ja.  [laughs]  I had to make sure that I 
avoid... 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I see there is a position mentioned 
there. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that could lead to the identification 
maybe. 
DR MUFAMDI:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And ten 10.6. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
“It appeared to the panel that there had been 
20 
instances of serious criminal behaviour which had 
taken place under the guise of conducting covert 
work and that this behaviour may have involved theft 
for uttering fraud corruption and even bordered on 
organised 
crime 
and 
transgressions 
of 
the 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 177 of 183 
 
Prevention Of Organised Crime Act 121 of 1998.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Then you make an important 
observation in paragraph 10.7. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
“The panel was concerned whether the reporting 
requirements 
were followed by the 
responsible 
individuals in management when the allegations 
were discovered. 
This includes reporting of fruitless and wasteful 
expenditure to the National Treasury in terms of the 
10 
PFMA and to SAPS under Section 34 of the 
Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 
Act 12 of 2004.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And then 10.8 to 10.10.  If you 
would 
place 
that 
on 
record. 
 
You 
deal 
again 
with 
consequence management in paragraph 10.8.   
DR MUFAMDI:   10.8 to ten point...? 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Ten. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
“Of particular concern for the panel was that apart 
20 
from suspending the Pan programme in 2011, it 
appears that no formal action or consequence 
management has taken place by the executive or the 
agency management. 
The absence of consequence management has 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 178 of 183 
 
become a theme running throughout the agency over 
several years. 
The panel received the report that members of the 
agency’s Internal Investigations Team into the Pan 
Project had been subjected to various forms of 
intimidation and some had their offices broken into. 
The Pan programme has had other consequences 
which seemed not to have been addressed with the 
seriousness warranted. 
Once those consequences, the large number of 
10 
claims made against the agency and the Minister of 
State Security by former Pan members involving 
allegations of breaches of contract by the agency. 
This has amounted of hundreds of millions of rands.” 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   Yes.  We have collected some of 
these applications and their outcomes for the investigation 
files Chair.  But it is worth noting Dr Mufamadi as you 
informed us that where the contesting of a claim in open 
court may reveal irregularities or even secret operations, the 
only real option for some would be to settle. 
20 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And to pay. 
DR MUFAMDI:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS (SC):   And that has cost the fiscus 
millions of rands.  Before we get to the conclusions that you 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 179 of 183 
 
wish to raise.  May I ask you to look at paragraph 11?  You 
make certain conclusions there that are important to place 
on record.   
 
And you also wish, I understand, to deal with the issue 
of public accountability and transparency.  We have dealt 
today with many sensitive issues which I am sure many 
people would argue should not have been made public and 
yet in your evidence, they have been made public.  That is a 
debate that may well take place in coming days.   
 
But if you could just tell the Chair what your views 
10 
are in that regard, quite apart from our duty to deal with our 
Terms of Reference which is not negotiable but from your 
view what are your observations and any other concluding 
remarks you may wish to make. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Well, Chair, just to point out that the 
conclusions that are covered under paragraph 11 I actually 
dealt with them in the opening so if …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no need to repeat them. 
DR MUFAMADI:   There is no need to repeat those. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
DR MUFAMADI:   But, as I indicated to the evidence 
leader, I think notwithstanding everything that we are 
discussing 
here, 
which 
is 
quite 
disconcerting, 
it 
is 
important to remind ourselves that, as I said, this was a 
review of things that   happened during a period that we 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 180 of 183 
 
were asked to review, so that what we are saying 
happened, it is not what we are saying it is happening.   
But I think it would be instructive to wait for 
Director General to indicate what it is that they did in 
response to the recommendations that were made by the 
panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that evidence is to a degree 
comforting. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That evidence is to a degree at 
10 
least comforting from the DG that will come. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Oh, he says it is comforting. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
It 
is 
not 
clear 
whether 
you 
are 
commenting that it is comforting or whether you are asking 
him. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Oh, you are asking me if I …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, I am commenting, I am not 
asking. 
DR MUFAMADI:   Okay because I am not privy to that 
evidence unless you will have noticed I tend not to seek to 
20 
be privy to things that I should not have ask, the need to 
know basis, you remember?   
Ja, so – but I think we are lucky that we still have 
what I call a residue of the will to introspect on the part of 
the powers that be.   
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 181 of 183 
 
This is not an introspection for its own sake and I 
think the report shows basically an admission that certain 
things went wrong and to the extent that we were asked to 
make recommendations about how to avoid a repeat of 
those wrong things that happened, we must read in that a 
commitment to self-correct.   
But I think it will be wrong for the nation beyond the 
executive 
to 
sit 
back 
and 
watch 
whether 
that 
self-
correction will happen.  As I said, the legislative branch of 
government has not right to lower its guard and perhaps we 
10 
need to ask ourselves particularly those of us who belong 
to various organisational formations in civil society as to 
what kind of role should be played by the generality of the 
public in assisting the state to self-correct which is why I 
thought that it would have been the right thing to do for 
members of the public to say there is the – they call it the 
Zondo Commission - Zondo Commission is having this 
hearing, we are happy that it is being aired in public 
because it is when we become obsessed with secrecy, 
secrecy, that we actually disempower our people from 
20 
playing the role they must play to protect their own 
dispensation which came at a heavy price.  It is a price 
that those of us who know exactly how it was paid do not 
want our democracy to be taken for granted.  Thank you, 
Chair. 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 182 of 183 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Dr Mufamadi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Dr Mufamadi.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, that is the evidence.  I must 
place two things on record, however, of a formal nature.  I 
said in opening that Mr Laurie Nathan was a member of the 
high level review panel.  In fact he was a member of a 
previous panel, not the high level review panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And secondly, I also placed on 
record that the tape of the interview that the panel 
10 
conducted with Minister Mahlobo was corrupted.  I have 
been corrected – well, that was the information I received 
from the investigators last night.  That has been corrected 
and the correct situation apparently is that the interview 
was not recorded at all, as others were, but that notes 
were taken and I am sure the SSA will make those notes 
available to us in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you very much Dr 
Mufamadi for coming to give evidence and to highlight 
important features of your review and the report.  I know 
20 
that I am still going to hear quite a lot of details about 
some of the matters that you have touched on today but 
thank you very much.  It is unlikely that we will need you to 
come back.  I normally say to every witness if we need you 
to come back we will ask you but I think it is unlikely with 
25 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 330 
 
Page 183 of 183 
 
you.  But if the need arises I have no doubt you will have 
no problem.  Thank you very much for coming and you are 
now excused. 
 
Tomorrow, Mr Pretorius, do we have one witness for 
the whole day?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair, Director General. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so we will start at normal time, 
ten. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright.  We are going to 
10 
adjournment the proceedings for the day.  Tomorrow we will 
– I will hear the evidence of the Director General of SSA.  
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 26 JANUARY 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
