 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 273 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 92 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 3 of 92 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 29 SEPTEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That might be putting the bar a bit 
high Chair but I will explain in a moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh are you slightly ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  We received last night from 
Mr Sodi’s legal representatives some of the documentation 
10 
requested by the investigators since the last adjournment.  
It goes into some 150 pages.  I have not had time to 
analyse it and will not deal with it today.  The discovery is 
in any event incomplete but I will detail that by way of 
opening. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Okay so today we 
will deal with what you are able to deal with? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  No that is fine.  But also 
there is the matter of Mr Zwane’s evidence that we… 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes if we could start with that 
please? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let us start with that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The legal representatives of Mr 
Zwane have been provided with documentation.  It is 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 4 of 92 
 
voluminous and they require an opportunity to go through 
it.  They – we will assist them to do so or our investigators 
will assist them to do so it is not necessary for the – every 
page to be examined in relation to Mr Zwane.   
But I understand from the legal representatives that 
they would require at least a week to complete that 
process.  Of – for our part the documentation that we have 
yet to obtain has not been examined.   
I would imagine we would need at least a week to 
go through it as well and then this  needs to be put to Mr 
10 
Zwane and his evidence completed which would I presume 
take up to a day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well during the week of I think starting 
the 12 t h of October I am supposed to hear evidence 
relating to Transnet but the legal team dealing with 
Transnet have informed me that they think that if they were 
to start on Wednesday of that week into the following week 
that should be enough days for them. So that means we 
have Monday and Tuesday of that week available.  So I 
was thinking that maybe we should adjourn Mr – the 
20 
hearing of Mr Zwane’s evidence to Tuesday the 13 t h which 
is the Tuesday of that week.  
UNKNOWN 
COUNSEL: 
 
[Not 
speaking 
into 
the 
microphone]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Okay so you – you say – you 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 5 of 92 
 
say the date is suitable and you say you will manage to be 
ready by then? 
UNKNOWN 
COUNSEL: 
 
[Not 
speaking 
into 
the 
microphone.] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you very much.  Thank 
you for that cooperation.  Mr Pretorius is that fine with 
you? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.  To lighten my learned 
friend’s load we will assist him in pointing him to relevant 
pages certainly not necessary for him to read 6834 pages. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes 
so 
the 
relevant 
ones 
will 
be 
identified? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And they will not… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In collaboration with them.  If he 
wants to read them all that is fine too Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  But if the investigators and – will 
know exactly which.. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Pages are important. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  The hearing of 
further evidence by Mr Mosebenzi Zwane is therefore 
adjourned to Tuesday the 13 t h of October at ten o’clock. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 6 of 92 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes you are excused.  Yes please 
administer the oath again to Mr Sodi. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR SODI:  Pheane Edwin Sodi. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR SODI:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR SODI:  Yes. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help 
me God. 
REGISTRAR:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you for coming back 
Mr Sodi. 
MR SODI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Proceed Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Before dealing 
20 
with questions to Mr Sodi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We – we just confirm that Mr Sodi is 
legally represented is that right or not really? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes his legal representatives are 
present. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 7 of 92 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Before dealing with the questions to 
Mr Sodi Chair you will recall that both Mr Zulu and Mr Sodi 
in affidavits before the commission raised concerns as to 
why they had not been asked for documentation.   
That was dealt with at the last hearing – last 
hearings in facts both of Mr Zulu and Mr Sodi.  Since the 
appearance both of Mr Zulu and Mr Sodi further questions 
arising out of their evidence have been put to them and 
request 
for 
documentation 
made 
that 
against 
the 
10 
background of promises to provide information.   
We have received a reply from Mr Zulu which did 
not provide any documentation in fact he sent us off the 
South African Revenue Services to get his income tax 
returns and to say – to put it at its lowest Chair it is a – or 
its highest really it is not a very helpful response to our 
request for information despite his earlier protestations 
and promises.  But no doubt that can be dealt with in the 
course of time in relation to Mr Zulu.   
Mr Sodi’s response has been far more helpful 
20 
although the timing has not been entirely ideal for the legal 
team.  We received 150 odd pages last night which 
included some of the financial records of Blackhead and 
the tax returns of Blackhead.  We still await on the promise 
in their correspondence the personal tax returns of Mr 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 8 of 92 
 
Sodi.  It would not be appropriate for me to deal with those 
today.  They need careful scrutiny and we will deal with 
them if necessary, in the course of time.  But for the 
moment we do have certain questions to put to Mr Sodi and 
by your leave I will proceed to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed Mr Pretorius.  
Which – which of the files should I look at?  There is FS1 
and FS1.1 – 1.1. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well Chair it is really FS1 that we 
will get to and FS8 but later. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair for the moment I will just deal 
with the letter which has been placed in the bundle but the 
persons responsible for bundling have devised… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have not had time to deal with this. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well they have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But they have done it… 
CHAIRPERSON:  In a certain way? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  This very minute. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 And 
I 
quite 
frankly 
do 
not 
understand the bundling system that has been applied for 
it and it is not necessary to do so.  I will just place on 
record what is necessary. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 9 of 92 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Sodi on the 27 August a letter 
was 
addressed 
to 
your 
attorneys 
requesting 
certain 
documentation and information you no doubt were aware of 
that?  You have to say yes. 
MR SODI:  That is correct, correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Your response was provided last 
night together with a bundle of documents.  Your personal 
tax returns you have undertaken to submit in due course 
saying they are not yet available.  Correct? 
10 
MR SODI:  They are available Chair.  I think the point that 
we wanted to make here today was we have always wanted 
to cooperate with the commission.  We continue to do so.  
There is however a serious concern that we have which is 
to put it frankly quite disheartening that there is very 
sensitive and private information that find its way to the 
journalists.  And that is very concerning for us.   
We met with my legal team.  We said look this 
information is there but we need to appear before the Chair 
and raise this concern that you know to – for instance leak 
20 
private information such as the bank you know details and 
the 
transactions 
you 
know 
of 
an 
individual 
to 
the 
journalists who then make all sorts of conclusions cannot 
be right.   
And we said we will come here and raise this matter 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 10 of 92 
 
and 
say 
look 
we 
are 
quite 
willing 
to 
provide 
this 
information provided that we get some sort of assurance 
that it will not be leaked or at least make it available for 
inspection to the commission.   
But you know we felt that we need to make this 
point Chair because that information that gets leaked it is 
quite personal and very sensitive.  You may have seen 
Chair I am not sure on Sunday the newspapers publishing 
you know information that is very private which we 
certainly did not provide to the journalists.   
10 
I do not think the bank would have provided that 
information to the journalists.  So if it is not us and my 
legal team; if it is not the bank then who is it that is giving 
this information to the journalists?  Who then tend to make 
their own conclusions without us having been afforded the 
opportunity to deal with some of the information?   
It puts us at a great disadvantage because there 
are all sorts of perceptions that gets to be formulated and 
you know tarnishing people’s images as well.  So – so – so 
we are cooperating.  The information is there but we just 
20 
wanted to put that to the Chair to see if something could 
be done about it Chair.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I hear you Mr Sodi.  Any concern 
about information being leaked that should not be leaked it 
is [00:13:28] concern.  It is an old problem that we have 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 11 of 92 
 
had that the commission has had.  You may or may not 
remember that in 2018 in the second half of the year after 
the commission had started hearing oral evidence there 
were certain leaks to the media of affidavits that were – 
had been provided to the commission.   
I know that one such leak related to an affidavit by 
Mr Agrizzi and one of the people who complained about 
that was Ms Nomvula Mokonyane and indeed maybe two 
months ago an affidavit that we have been provided to the 
commission by Mr Coetzee the owner of The Victoria Guest 
10 
House concerning Ms Mokonyane’s birthday party they 
hosted 
was 
also 
leaked 
to 
the 
newspaper 
– 
the 
newspapers.   
I asked the investigation team of the commission 
way back in 2018 when the leaks started to investigate the 
leaks and I think early last year there were leaks as well.  
And 
there 
was 
an 
investigation 
that 
was 
done 
and 
ultimately it could not find that anybody – it did not find 
that 
anybody 
within 
the 
commission 
had 
leaked 
the 
information.   
20 
They had I think looked at computers of various 
individuals, laptops I think if I am not mistaken, they had 
even gone to – well I do not know if they had looked at 
personal laptops of people but that was the conclusion.  
We – there was a time when the leaks seems to have 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 12 of 92 
 
stopped for quite some time.  But from time to time they 
happen.  It is something very concerning but I – I also do 
know that also leaks do happen in other institutions of 
matters that should not you know find their way into the 
media.   
It seems quite difficult how to come up with a 
system which will make sure that no leak happens at all.  
My suggestion is that you and your legal team should talk 
to the commission’s legal team about the matter.  The rules 
of the commission permit a witness to identify information 
10 
that is confidential that they do not want to be made 
public.  Your team and the commission’s legal team can 
talk about that to see what can be done to try and find a 
solution.   
So I might not be able to give you any guarantee 
but all I am saying is I hear your concern.  I have the same 
concerns.  Some investigations have been done.  It does 
not look like it is possible to have a system that is – 
provides a guarantee completely.  But I am saying that 
there was a time when the leaks seemed to have stopped 
20 
you know.   
So I would just invite you and your legal team to 
look at what can be done; what application can be made 
that 
could 
assist 
in 
protecting 
information 
that 
is 
considered confidential and obviously the commission’s 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 13 of 92 
 
legal team will hear what your legal team has to say and 
take it from there.  Okay. 
MR SODI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair if I may add to that the 
problem of leaked information and its publication with the 
cooperation of the media has been with us for some time 
and it is a matter that as you say we have been alert to 
address as much as possible.  But it seems that there are 
those instances with their own motives who would want to 
10 
– in fact breach the regulations of the commission by 
disclosing information unlawfully and it seems that the – 
certain sections of the media continue to cooperate in that.  
That is the first problem.  We are dealing with it.   
This matter was brought to my attention this 
morning.  The legal team will address it in cooperation with 
Mr Sodi’s legal representatives and deal with it.  But I 
should add that the commission is not the only entity 
investigating these and related matters and so it is quite 
possible that the leak emanated from other instances.   
20 
But in any event we will look at it and seek to 
protect any confidential information as you pointed out and 
I have pointed out to Mr Sodi’s legal representatives there 
are in our rules and in the regulations mechanisms to deal 
with these sorts of situations. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 14 of 92 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Sodi last night we got a bundle 
of 
documents 
of 
over 
150 
pages 
from 
your 
legal 
representatives.  We were also addressed early this 
morning in regard to certain other information and our 
cooperation 
was 
sought 
in 
relation 
to 
preserving 
confidentiality and avoiding leaks we will undergo that 
process.   
I am not going to ask you questions on the 
information that was given last night.  I need time to go 
10 
through it and understand it but for the moment I would 
just like to summarise certain of the information given so 
that at least it is on record.  Your personal tax returns you 
say are available. 
MR SODI:  Correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But you want some assurances 
about confidentiality? 
MR SODI:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We can talk about that.  And of 
course your legal representatives will advise you and they 
20 
can 
take 
whatever 
steps 
they 
wish 
to. 
 
Blackhead 
Consulting’s tax returns you have provided. 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  You say the Joint Venture 
did not submit tax returns as each constituent’s member 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 15 of 92 
 
submitted tax returns individually? 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  The audited financial 
statements of Blackhead Consulting Pty Limited you have 
also provided? 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That makes up the bulk of the 
documentation that you have given to us? 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The audited financial statements of 
10 
the Joint Venture you say do not exist? 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You were also asked for the 
instructions 
to 
perform 
work 
issued 
by 
the 
Gauteng 
Department of Human Settlements for the period January 
2013 to August 2020.  That deals with your work in 
Gauteng and you have attached those. 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You were also asked in the 
evidence unearthed by the investigators there were records 
20 
of payments to Mr Jimmy Tau and you have said that he 
was not employed by Blackhead Consulting, correct? 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Nor by yourself? 
MR SODI:  That is correct. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 16 of 92 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So there are no agreements 
between you and Mr Jimmy Tau? 
MR SODI:  Well he was not employed Chair in his personal 
capacity.  There was a sub-consulting agreement between 
Blackhead and one of Mr Tau’s entities called [00:23:21] so 
the contract was between the two entities not in his 
personal capacity. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have heard evidence from Mr 
Mokhesi and from yourself Mr Sodi about what has been 
called a Joint Investment in a property in Bloemfontein. 
10 
MR SODI:  Correct. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
That 
joint 
investment 
was 
apparently governed by an agreement between yourself 
and a trust formed by Mr Mokhesi? 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You were asked who drafted that 
agreement and you say you cannot recall but you do think 
it was a collaborative effort between yourself and Mr 
Mokhesi? 
MR SODI:  Chair it definitely was.  I mean I thought well 
20 
and hard about it and I realised we – I got the template 
from the internet because I was thinking about who could 
have assisted.  So I got a template from the internet and 
changed it to suit our needs and I provided a copy to Mr 
Mokhesi to make his comments and inputs onto the 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 17 of 92 
 
agreement which he did and we finalised it.  But certainly 
there was never any legal person that was involved in 
drafting it.  It was really a layman’s agreement that was 
drafted by the two of us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In relation to the drafting of the 
agreement with the time of the drafting of the agreement 
you say you cannot recall but it would be around the time it 
was executed you said? 
MR SODI:  Precisely. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you do not have the electronic 
10 
devise on which the contract was drafted? 
MR SODI:  No I do not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Nor can you recall where it was 
signed? 
MR SODI:  I – I cannot recall exactly where it was signed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Mokhesi says you drafted it? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  How come you 
do not remember what electronic device was used to type 
it? 
MR SODI:  No, no, no I – it was used – sorry the device 
20 
that was used in an old device which I am no longer using. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR SODI:  So it was on an old laptop. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SODI:  Which I am no longer using.  I am using a – a 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 18 of 92 
 
new laptop now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR SODI:  I no longer have that old laptop ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SODI:  So that is what I am – that is what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might not be using it but it being 
available or you are not using it and it is not available. 
MR SODI:  No it is not available.  It is no longer available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is no longer available. 
MR SODI:    Ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You were also asked to provide full 
details of your purchases of liquor at the TZ Lounge that is 
the lounge related to Mr Zulu and you say you have no 
longer any documents in your possession and you cannot 
recall precisely what liquor you purchased. 
MR SODI:  That is correct.  That is correct ja.  I… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You have heard about the [talking 
over one another]. 
MR SODI:  I mean I looked for some of the receipts but I 
20 
you know I cannot find them and I mean… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But you say you bought this liquor 
during 2015 and perhaps the early parts of 2016? 
MR SODI:  Around about that sort of … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you do not have any records 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 19 of 92 
 
relating to the delivery to your premises? 
MR SODI:  No I do not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You will recall that the evidence 
was initially that the liquor was delivered to your premises 
later we learnt that it was put in the boot of your car and 
taken to your KwaZulu Natal residence by yourself? 
MR SODI:  Chair the last time I was here we dealt with that 
question and I said that I collected a lot of this liquor and 
put it in the boot of my car.  On a number of occasions 
when I visited the lounge and that testimony still remains.  
10 
But I you know put this in the boot of my car as Mr 
Pretorius is saying to my residence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event Mr Sodi we will look at 
the documentation that you have provided, the answers 
that you have provided to our questions and we will deal 
with them at some future date if that becomes necessary. 
MR SODI:  That is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The investment in the Bloemfontein 
residential property I have been asked by the investigators 
to ask you in turn whether you invested in any other 
20 
residential properties in Bloemfontein. 
MR SODI:  I did Chair.  There is one property in the town 
of Parys it is a smallholding that I invested in.  Almost 
similar – a similar arrangement to the arrangement that I – 
that I have – currently have with Mr Mokhesi.  There are 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 20 of 92 
 
two of us in that transaction and the understanding from 
Day 1 is being that we going to contribute equally for the 
purchase of the property.  I paid my 50% of the property.  I 
can provide records and evidence to that effect.  My 
partner provided some funding but he has not reached his 
full 50%.  But that property is still there in Parys. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
What 
is 
notable 
about 
the 
transaction between yourself and Mr Mokhesi is that there 
would be no evidence in the registry office of any link 
between yourself and the property.  It went via a trust, 
10 
correct? 
MR SODI:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say there are similar 
arrangements where you would have an interest in a 
property but it would not be registered wholly or partially in 
your name? 
MR SODI:  No, no I am saying the property that I am 
referring to in Parys, Chair, has not yet been registered in 
our names because it is not paid for as yet.  So the 
arrangement was to pay bit-by-bit.   
20 
 
As I said, I paid my 50% and my partner is still making 
efforts.  I know at some stage, she was out of employment 
and that sort of hindered his ability to be able to meet his 
obligations.   
 
But certainly, that is the only property including the one 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 21 of 92 
 
that I invested in with Mr Mokhesi where I went into 
partnership.   
 
Other than that, all the other property investments that I 
am involved, it is just myself. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   They are registered in your name or 
are they registered in names of trusts? 
MR SODI:   pretty much trusts.  There is maybe one or two 
that are registered in my name but the bulk of the properties 
that I am invested in are registered in the name of a trust.  
Ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If the investigators require or want to 
obtain information about properties in which you have an 
interest via a trust, you would be willing to provide that 
information? 
MR SODI:   No, that information can be made available even 
today.  It is available.  It is there.  It is not... it will not take 
long. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I got the impression from Mr Mokhesi’s 
evidence that you might be involved in other property 
business, maybe property development ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR SODI:   I am. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...in... and that you... there may be 
numerous properties which you have.  Is that right?   
MR SODI:   Chair, I am just thinking on top of my head. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 22 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   We could be talking in the region of maybe 20 or 
so properties. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR SODI:   Or even more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or even more. 
MR SODI:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And based on what you have just said a 
few minutes ago.  The one in which you are involved with Mr 
10 
Mokhesi and the one that you have just been talking about 
which is not registered in your name yet ...[intervenes]  
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...are the only two where you went in with 
a partner or somebody. 
MR SODI:   That is correct.  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR SODI:   And I can certainly explain why the first one, the 
Parys one.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
MR SODI:   The intention behind their position of the 
property.  It is, as I have said, it is a small firm.  The 
intention was to get into farming.  The partner that invited 
me into this venture, has got some knowledge, offer me.   
 
And he approached me and he said:  Look, you know, 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 23 of 92 
 
would you not want to diversify your business and look at 
forming?  And I was keen.  I looked at the investment.  It 
was not a massive investment.   
 
And you know, we agreed then that we will acquire that 
farm in Parys and we will then start buying livestock which 
we did.   
 
I think one of the questions that was posed to me by the 
investigators was a transaction where I used cows as a 
reference.   
 
So that was, you know, evidence relating to what we 
10 
were intending or what we still intend to do with regard to 
that property in the Free State. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe I should ask this question to 
you.  I asked... I mentioned to Mr Mokhesi.  It seems to me 
that based on the fact that you are involved... you are very 
involved in property development or in property business 
which you do on your own.   
 
It seems to me and also bearing in mind the terms of the 
agreement between yourself and Mr Mokhesi’s trust, that you 
really did not need him.  If you needed property, you could 
20 
go on your own and buy a property.   
MR SODI:   I could have gone on my own. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   But I explained here Chair that if one looks at 
the bulk of my property investments, it is mostly in Gauteng 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 24 of 92 
 
and the Western Cape which are areas that I know quite 
well.  There is probably one property in North West.   
 
But there are certain areas that I am not very familiar 
with such as the Free State or Bloemfontein to be specific.  
And when he approached me with this potential investment I 
said: Look, here is someone who lives in the area.  He 
knows it better.   
 
And because I am not very familiar with this area, I am 
quite keen to into an investment with him.  And that is what 
happened.   
10 
 
You know, I... for me it was someone who is familiar 
because, as I said, when he approached me he said:  Look, 
there is a new development that is coming up.  It has got 
huge potential for growth.   
 
The returns, you know, in a number of years are likely to 
be very good.  The upside will be very good.  And I believed 
him.  And my gut felt... told me that, you know, this person 
could be right.   
 
I did my own little research as well and I was convinced 
that, you know, this could be a profitable investment 
20 
opportunity for both of us.  And I agreed to invest with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course, what you are telling me 
about, relates to getting information or knowledge about 
whether buying property in a particular area would be a good 
investment.  That is what you are talking about.  So you are 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 25 of 92 
 
saying, the knowledge, his local knowledge was... you 
thought was useful to you for that purpose.  Is that right? 
MR SODI:   Precisely.  Because he... I mean, he knew... he 
lived in the area. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   And one as an investor always look at, you know, 
areas where you know there is likely to be a good 
investment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR SODI:   You know, no one wants to invest in something 
10 
which does not grow, which will not be able to give you 
better returns.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR SODI:   Now, as I have just said now that that particular 
area, I am not familiar with.  And certainly if someone comes 
along and say:  Listen, I know this area.  I live here.  I have 
got better information or better knowledge about the area. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR SODI:   And my view is that if we do one, two, three we 
will get better, you know, upside. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR SODI:   You know, if my gut tells me it is the right way to 
go and if I do my research and it says, you know, that is 
correct then I will go for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 26 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   And that is exactly what happened in this case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Of course, you could get that 
knowledge or information or even better information from an 
estimator(?), is it not? 
MR SODI:   Of course you can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At the time you entered into this 
arrangement with Mr Mokhesi, Mr Sodi, you knew that he 
10 
was looking for a property. 
MR SODI:   No, I did not know that he was looking for a 
property Chair ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You must have known, surely 
...[intervenes]  
MR SODI:   He came to me, he approached me and he said... 
and this was based on the discussion that we have had 
before where he knew my background, you know, and you 
know, what I was doing.   
 
And he said, his words were that:  Would you not want to 
20 
invest in a property?  There is a new development.  It is 
about two, three years old.  It is going very fast.   
 
And you know, you being a property investor, I thought I 
should present this opportunity.  I am looking at investing as 
well and I am looking for a partner that can invest with me.   
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 27 of 92 
 
 
I looked at, as I said, and you know I was confident that 
this 
could 
be 
potentially 
a 
good 
investment. 
 
And 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As I... sorry. 
MR SODI:   And you know, based on the growth in the past 
sort of five years since we have invested in the property, he 
was correct, you know.  And I am quite happy with that 
investment.   
 
And I am sure that in year seven, I will be even more 
happier because our predictions are that, you know, that it 
10 
will be profitable for both of us.   
 
So to answer your question.  Mr Mokhesi approached me 
as a potential investor and the outcome of that is yes I am 
willing to co-invest with you and then let us do it.  And that is 
exactly what then happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Sodi, the question was.  He was 
looking to invest in a property and looking for a property.  
You cannot look to invest in a property without looking for a 
property.  And that is capable of a yes or no answer.  You 
knew that. 
20 
MR SODI:   As I said Chair.  Mr Mokhesi approached me as a 
potential investor to invest with him in a property and that is 
what happened.  We had discussions and ultimately we 
agreed to invest in a property. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Sodi, I am not going to have a 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 28 of 92 
 
semantic argument with you because I want to ask another 
question. 
MR SODI:   That is fine.  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you know that he could not raise 
the full purchase price by way of bond? 
MR SODI:   You see that is a direct question which I 
appreciate Chair.  Thank you for the direct question.  I did 
not know that he could not raise a bond of a particular 
amount.   
 
That information, certainly, was not provided to me.  You 
10 
know, I heard it when he was here giving evidence that he 
could not raise bond because apparently he was blacklisted 
by SARS.  I never had that information.   
 
All that he discussed with me was that:  Listen, there is 
a potential, you know, got an opportunity from a property 
point of view.  Are you willing to co-invest with me?  And that 
is what I did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you know he was going to live in 
the property? 
MR SODI:   I, at the time when we initially had this 
20 
discussion, I did not know that he was going to live in the 
property.  We were talking about a potential, you know, 
rental income.   
 
But eventually, we settled on him staying in the property 
and I was comfortable with that because that produced in 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 29 of 92 
 
writing in terms of the agreement that we had that certain 
things had to be in place.   
 
And just maybe to expand on that.  Mr Mokhesi... I do 
not blame him because some of these things happened a few 
years ago.   
 
We actually agreed that instead of him paying rent, he 
must use those funds which was about, I think at the time we 
are talking about six or seven thousand rands per month but 
it was somewhere around there.   
 
We agreed that he must use that as a top-up of the bond 
10 
repayments, okay, instead of paying rent.  Let him use that 
as a top-up so that we reduce the repayment period of the 
bond.  That was an agreement that we had.   
 
But like I said, you know, perhaps he does not recall 
that, that conversation.  And you know, I cannot blame him 
because this happened, as I aid, a few years ago.   
 
But that certainly the agreement that I had with him.  
And you know, over and above that, the agreement was that 
he will be causing this payment of the property.   
 
He must be responsible for other costs such as security, 
20 
such as you know, insurance costs, rate and levies and so 
forth.  So in actual fact, I think it was a bit more honours on 
him to make sure that all those things are in place, you 
know.   
 
And that is that aspect dealt with the rental issue and I 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 30 of 92 
 
was quite happy that he can reside in the property for as 
long as... for as long as he pays that amount that we agreed 
on.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For completeness sake, Mr Sodi.  
The agreement does say that the trust shall raise a balance 
of one million rand required to purchase the property and 
Blackhead shall contribute R 650 000,00 to the acquisition of 
the property.  Correct? 
MR SODI:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the property he lived in.  
10 
Correct? 
MR SODI:   That is the property in question, sir.  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Clearly, the whole agreement was to 
his benefit as well as to your benefit as an investment.   
MR SODI:   I would not say it was to his benefit Chair.  It 
was a transaction that we both went into and there were 
obligations from both parties in terms of what needed to 
happen, what are the responsibilities of each party was 
supposed to be. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Sodi, why would one enter into a 
20 
profitable investment other than to benefit from it?  You 
yourself said it was a profitable prospect and the intention 
must have been to benefit from it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he admitted.  I think Mr Sodi did 
say it was to Mr Mokhesi’s benefit.  I think he accepted it 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 31 of 92 
 
was to his benefit as well but he... that is what he said.  Is 
that correct? 
MR SODI:   I said the whole idea for entering into that 
investment ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   ...was so that, ultimately, when we dispose of 
the property or later on, that we will realise our return on 
investment.   
 
Otherwise, Chair it would have been futile to get into an 
arrangement like that because first and foremost, it was 
10 
premised on that, that it is an investment.   
 
And one, naturally, expects that when invest, you expect 
to get you know an upside.  You know.  Which is exactly what 
is happening in this case.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct.  And that investment 
required the participation of yourself and himself.  You 
described that. 
MR SODI:   That is correct.  Represented, if I my add Chair, 
by the trust. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The involvement with Mr Zulu and TZ 
20 
Lounge, do you know who owns TZ Lounge and who owned it 
at the time in 2015/2016? 
MR SODI:   Chair, Mr Zulu mentioned that he has a lounge, 
that he owns a lounge and that is what I know.  As to who 
owned it before, I would not know.  I would not have that 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 32 of 92 
 
information but I knew him to be the owner of the lounge, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you say that you understood Mr 
Zulu to be the owner of the lounge at the time you repaid the 
debt to him? 
MR SODI:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Of course, if he was not the owner of 
the lounge, the debt would have been repaid to someone 
other than the owner of the lounge. 
MR SODI:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The investigators Mr Sodi have done 
10 
some research and that is summarised in the pages of the 
investigators’ report.  It would also be summarised in the 
documentation you have given us.   
 
But without going into exact detail, it seems that 
blackhead had a turnover, at least during 2015, of over a 
billion rand.  Does that record with your recollection? 
MR SODI:   That could be correct, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in 2014, it also had a turnover of 
over a billion rand.   
MR SODI:   That is possible correct, Chair. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   They have also established that 
Blackhead received payments from the Department of Human 
Settlements or the departments of Human Settlements in 
excess of a billion rand over the ten year period, over 
eighteen year period up to 2019.  Correct? 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 33 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   That is possible correct, Chair.  I think maybe to 
expand on that.  A lot of the work that we do is related to 
Human Settlements and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Relates to...? 
MR SODI:   Human Settlements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Human Settlements? 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MR SODI:   So it is unsurprising that, you know, you would 
find that the bulk of the work that we do or you know the 
10 
income, rather, our revenue generated comes from the 
Department of Human Settlements.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would you look at FS1, please?  
Page 404. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you 404, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry, Chair.  If you would bear 
with 
me 
a 
moment. 
 
What 
happened 
this 
morning 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...was because of the introduction of 
20 
the 150 odd pages.  Certain sections of FS1 had to be 
moved into a new file, FS1.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So if I may refer to FS1.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 34 of 92 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have FS1.1. there, Mr Sodi? 
MR SODI:   I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you could go to page 404.   
MR SODI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not have 404 on FS1 or is this FS1-1 
or 1.1? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I have got it.  That is just FS1.1.  
Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say in paragraph 48 Mr Sodi: 
10 
“From time-to-time, I have made donations to the 
ANC because I am a proud member of the ANC.  I 
will continue to support the ANC.” 
 
That was a correct statement of fact, is it not? 
MR SODI:   It is a correct statement, Chair.  Maybe I must 
qualify that.  I am not a card carrying member of the ANC but 
I support the ANC. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then in paragraphs 17 and 18 of 
your further affidavit which appears at FS1.1.505, you make 
similar statements.   
20 
MR SODI:   Which page are we at? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   505.  Further along in the bundle. 
MR SODI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 17, you say in the third 
line: 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 35 of 92 
 
“I donate substantial amounts to the ANC.” 
 
And in paragraph 18, you say: 
“As I will set out in more detail below, 2014 was a 
particularly successful year for Blackhead and I 
recall having made substantial contributions to the 
ANC’s election campaign.” 
 
Those are both correct statements of fact? 
MR SODI:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you would look please at FS8, 
page 53. 
10 
MR SODI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There has been an analysis of 
Blackhead’s bank statements and a number of payments 
marked ANC.  And for the period March 2013 to March 2019, 
amongst others, the following payments have been made in 
the following amounts and I want to refer you to that table on 
page... FS8, page 53.  Who is Bongani More? 
MR SODI:   He is a business associate of mine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was he not the Deputy Director 
General of the Gauteng Department of Human Settlements?  
20 
MR SODI:   He was at some stage.  According to my 
recollection, he resigned about, somewhere around 2014. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Why 
would 
you 
pay 
him 
R 7.5 million? 
MR SODI:   As I said Chair, he is my business associate.  
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 36 of 92 
 
When he left government, we agreed on getting into 
business together and he was very clear.   
 
In fact, when we spoke, he said:  Look, I want to get into 
the private sector.  I want nothing to do with government.  So 
whatever opportunities that we look at must be in the private 
sector and that is exactly what we did.   
 
So our first opportunity was in investment in a, call it a 
hotel development in Cape Town where we acquired about, I 
think it was about 20% through an entity where we had other 
partners. 
10 
 
And that was followed by an acquisition of a stake in 
another private opportunity which in this case was Melrose 
Arch.  That opportunity was funded by the PIC and we are 
still involved in it.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I can cut that short for you Mr Sodi.  
Are you saying these payments were made to him when he 
was no longer in government? 
MR SODI:   The bulk of this... as far as I am concerned.  And 
I need to say Chair but, you know, I need to thoroughly go 
through some of this, you know, and look at the dates on 
20 
which some of these payments were made because I never 
got to...  
 
You know, because of the restrictions of time, never got 
to analyse some of these dates and so forth.  But I am 
confirming that Mr More is currently a business partner of 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 37 of 92 
 
mine.   
 
And we are not together with him.  Not doing any 
business with government.  It is all private sector.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Well, perhaps we will ask 
you to assist us in that regard Mr Sodi. 
MR SODI:   No problem. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And follow-up at a later date. 
MR SODI:   No problem. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who is Colin Pitso? 
MR SODI:   He is someone that I got to know very well.  I 
10 
met him a number of years ago and he introduced me to his 
dad who is also in the construction industry.  And that 
introduction led to myself and you know his dad through an 
entity called KP Construction, getting involved in some of the 
construction projects.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am told by our investigation team 
that Colin Pitso is Nomvula Mokonyane’s chief of staff? 
MR SODI:   That is not correct.  He was at some stage.  
Nomvula Mokonyane’s chief of staff but that is not the case 
anymore.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When were these payments made?  
Do you know? 
MR SODI:   Again, sir.  I... this was a number of years ago 
but I will need to again go through my bank and check the 
date so that I provide you, Chair, with the accurate 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 38 of 92 
 
answers. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Why would you pay him R6.5 
million? 
MR SODI:   I have, Chair, just explained that the payment 
was not to him, I used his name as a reference.  The 
payment was to Kepi construction which is an entity that is 
owned by his father that I did business with.  So that 
payment relates to Kepi construction, not him as an 
individual. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
There 
is 
also 
a 
payment 
10 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am sorry, just that one, do you 
mean that the payment was not made into his account, into 
his personal account but into some entity’s account but you 
used his name as a reference? 
MR SODI:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR SODI:   I obviously knew him better than Kepi and I 
just used that as a reference, his name. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, this is information given to 
20 
me by the investigators.  Before taxing the witness, Mr 
Sodi, in regard to the details of these payments, my own 
view is it is necessary to do some further research. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Otherwise we are just going to 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 39 of 92 
 
waste time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think let that be done first, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because my information is that the 
payment was made to Colin Petzer(?), if that not correct, 
as Mr Sodi points out, I should not be putting it him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, I think let there be further 
investigation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let me just ask a few more 
questions and then put a proposition to Mr Sodi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The payment reflected here is a 
payment to Diane/Anoj Singh.  What would that be about? 
MR SODI:   Chair, again, I have got absolutely no idea as I 
am sitting here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   It is a payment of R10 000. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But as I understand it, Mr Sodi, 
you would be willing to sit down with the investigators, go 
through these payments. 
MR SODI:   Ja, absolutely.  You know, I do not, Chair, want 
20 
to sit here and start giving speculative answers, you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fair enough. 
MR SODI: I am [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] if I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The payment to Mokoena, Nosizwe 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 40 of 92 
 
Zuma, do you know anything about that?  R1 million? 
MR SODI:   Ja, this is a friend of mine, you know, but then 
again, you know, I cannot remember why I paid him this 
amount but he is a friend of mine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He is a sports personality 
apparently, Mr Mokoena.  
MR SODI:   He is, correct, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Linda Ncobo? 
MR SODI:   Yes it is again a friend of mine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Also, someone involved in the 
10 
administration in Gauteng Housing and COGTA. 
MR SODI:   Used to be but not anymore. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Why would the payment of 2 million 
be made, do you know? 
MR SODI:   This payment was made as a loan to Linda.  
After she left she was struggling. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So this is a loan to a previous 
official in a housing department. 
MR SODI:   Well, who is currently a friend and we are 
exploring as well, we are exploring business opportunities 
20 
together. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  There are payments made 
in respect of ANC tee-shirts, volunteers, etcetera.  Would 
that amount of R3.5 million be paid – had been paid to the 
ANC at the time of the elections, 2014? 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 41 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   Some of it, Chair, was payments made directly 
to the ruling party, some of it would have been service 
providers, for instance that in this case I am making an 
assumption, that some of that payment went to service 
providers or companies that were printing tee-shirts that 
were distributed to, you know, the volunteers and so forth. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  The payment of R371 553 to 
Paul Mashatile, what is that about? 
MR SODI:   That is payment that was made directly to the 
ANC. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For what reason? 
MR SODI:   From time to time, Chair, you know, we get 
requests to assist, you know, with donations and that 
happens.  It could be, for instance, you know, to pay 
maybe for a venue, for the lekgotla, it could be, you know, 
to assist with payment for salaries but that happens on a 
regular basis and different people would approach me and 
ask to help and where I am able to assist, then I assist. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So members of the ANC, for 
example, would know that you are in support of the ANC, 
20 
would know you are a successful businessman and would 
approach you for a donation? 
MR SODI:   A lot of times, yes.  But, you know, what would 
happen, ask for donations and I assist wherever that I can. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And Pinky Kekana, who is she? 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 42 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   She is someone that I consider a sister that I 
am close with.  She is currently in government as of last 
year, I think, with the new administration.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, she is a Deputy Minister. 
MR SODI:   She is a Deputy Minister, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you go over the page – well not, 
you do not have to go over the page, I do.  Mr Nxesi?.   
MR SODI:   He is a Minister in the current administration 
and he is unfortunately one of those that was mentioned in 
the newspaper articles that I referred to and I spoke to him 
10 
yesterday to check if he was given opportunity to respond, 
he said no, no one called me but, you know, there was 
mention of me and an amount of 45 000 that I received and 
said had anyone taken the trouble of calling to say Mr 
Nxesi, we see you received a particular amount, can you 
explain?  He would have given them the proof of payments.   
There were two payments, one of 15 000 and which 
was directly paid to a school of, you know, of a you know 
child, underprivileged child and that I paid, coming from 
his request.   
20 
 
And the second payment was 30 000 which was for 
accommodation also for underprivileged kids which was 
paid to an institution. 
 
So those are the two payments totalling 45 000 but, 
you know, the impression unfortunately gets created, you 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 43 of 92 
 
know, with the media that there is a current sitting Minister 
who received some money. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let me just …[intervenes] 
MR SODI:   So that is what the payment was for. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, so they have been explained, 
you have had an opportunity to explain them now. 
MR SODI:   I am explaining after the fact, which is 
unfortunate, Chair.  I am explaining after the information 
was widely published. 
CHAIRPERSON:   After the publication of the article. 
10 
MR SODI:   Exactly, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let me just place on record, I 
should have done it earlier, that very often when the 
Commission is about to lead evidence suddenly we find 
that that evidence appears in the newspaper prior to us 
leading the evidence not as a result of any lead from the 
Commission but from other sources who clearly might have 
mischief in mind but we will check our sources anyway in 
that regard. 
MR SODI:   Ja …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But I do not want to debate that 
with you. 
MR SODI:   Correct, correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is a matter which we must 
investigate. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 44 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   Ja, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The payment Thulas Nxesi we have 
dealt with.  Zizi Kodwa? 
MR SODI:   Zizi is a friend that I have known for a number 
of years and I have made payments to him in his personal 
capacity before he joined government when he still worked 
for the ANC.  And that can be verified.  He is currently the 
Deputy Minister of Intelligence, I think, but this was – it 
was payment that I made to him as a friend where he 
requested for assistance on a number of times and, you 
10 
know, a lot of it, Chair, was related to - you know, for 
instance, he will say we have not been paid on time this 
month from Luthuli House or there is delays in payment.  I 
mean, it is still happening even now and he would ask for 
some assistance because maybe he has got debit orders 
that have to go through and, you know, there will be a 
payment of 20k there, you know, 30k, 50k, that is what 
happened and the accumulated amount I think comes to 
174.  But those are the payments that I made to a friend. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the final payment? 
20 
MR SODI:   The final payment again was – it went directly 
to the ANC account and that particular individual there was 
the Treasurer General of the ANC at the time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, we do not need to – we 
should be consistent, that is Mr Nxesi.  You say it was paid 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 45 of 92 
 
to him in his capacity as Treasurer General of the ANC. 
MR SODI:   It was paid to the ANC at the time that he was 
the Treasurer General and he would have been the one 
that would have approached me at the time to ask for 
assistance and that is why his name is used as a 
reference. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that was just about 6.5 million, hey? 
MR SODI:   Ja, that is… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I understand from your statement 
and we can go to the detail, if necessary, but I would like 
10 
to put the question to you as a general question that often 
when you do business you obtain a contract or you used to 
contain a contract and ensure through the appointment of 
subcontractors the execution of the contract.  In other 
words, often you did not do the work yourself but as a 
manager and as a supervisor you would ensure the 
execution of the contract with your own expertise.  Do I 
understand it correctly that that was a way of doing 
business? 
MR SODI:   Well, Chair, I do not think it is entirely correct 
20 
to say that we did not do most of the work.  In any – most 
of the projects, let me not say any, but most of the projects 
that we were appointed on, we did most of the work.  There 
are instances where you require a specialist and if you do 
not have that sort of knowledge of skill in-house you would 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 46 of 92 
 
then subcontract a specialist. 
 
To give you a case in point – and I do not want to 
open a can of worms again, Chair, with the whole asbestos 
thing, is that you would do the work, for instance, the 
auditing and the assessment and so forth but when it came 
to the actual handling because we do not – we are not 
specialists, you would then get a specialist to handle that 
part and then you will charge a project management fee 
but you would find that in most cases project management 
fee is about 20%.  You know, as a general rule of thumb, it 
10 
is about 20%, the bulk of the payment would go towards 
the specialist. 
And when, for instance, I started my business, that 
is 
Blackhead 
Consulting, 
it 
started 
as 
a 
project 
management 
company 
and 
then 
it 
grew. 
 
Then 
we 
appointed engineers, we appointed civil engineers, we 
appointed 
structural 
engineers, 
we 
appointed 
environmentalists so that we then get to do the bulk of the 
work ourselves but certainly when we started we would 
subcontract a lot of the skills and maybe retain the 20% 
20 
but 80% of that would then be given – would then be paid 
out to specialists.   
So, you know, again, if you - Mr Pretorius here 
spoke about the turnover for Blackhead in 2014 and 2015 
and someone could be sitting there and say wow, this guy 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 47 of 92 
 
is actually making a lot of money but if you go deeper than 
you realise that a lot of that, anywhere between 70 and 
80% was paid to specialists and then we retain the project 
management fee but over the years we grew and we 
obviously, you know, added some of the core, you know, 
specialists within the company so that we, as I said, we 
tend to do a little bit more than just being a project 
management company.  So typically that is how the 
industry operates, you know?  And as I said, that is a rule 
of thumb if you know the project management fee of 20% 
10 
and the bulk of it going to specialist. 
To give you another example, if you – Chair, you – 
there are a lot of for instance construction buildings, you 
see a lot of them as you are driving and you would realise 
that pretty much maybe nine out of ten of those buildings, 
there is always a board which tells you that so and so is 
the construction manager, so and so in the electrical 
engineer, this one is the quantity surveyor, this was is a 
Health and Safety Act and so forth and so forth.   
You hardly find – and I have never seen it, I have 
20 
never seen it, a situation where, for instance, one building, 
one company has got all the different specialists and they 
are doing everything themselves.  I have certainly never 
found it.  I have never seen it.   
I mean, even with a normal house you would 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 48 of 92 
 
appoint a builder but you would find that someone who is 
doing plumbing, it is a different company because they 
specialise in plumbing.  Someone who is putting up the 
staircases, 
it 
is 
a 
different 
company 
because 
they 
specialise in putting staircases.  Someone who is doing 
electrical, it is not the builder but it is a different company 
which is specialising in electrical, you know?   
So but you have one point of contact and that point 
of contact is the builder and when you pay, you do not pay 
ten or eleven different subcontractors, you pay one builder, 
10 
one person, who then will deduct their project management 
fees and pay these other, you know, specialists.  So that is 
typically how the industry works and it is no different in our 
case as well.  Chair, I hope I clarified. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   So I do not want – again, this guy has made a 
billion rand, no.   It is never like that.  The bulk of it is paid 
to the specialists, it is never sitting with us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You described the manner in which 
20 
Blackhead did business at FS1509.  Would you go there 
please? 
MR SODI:   I have got it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   FS1 or FS1.1, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is FS1.1.  I am sorry, Chair. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 49 of 92 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We can go through the detail, if 
you like, but I understand this to be consistent with my 
earlier question to you, Mr Sodi, that a budget would be 
developed by the relevant department, you would ensure 
that the project was completed on time within the budget 
and you would have, as your profit, the difference between 
the budget as agreed and the cost of executing the project 
by Blackhead Consulting CC and you say in paragraph 40: 
“By virtue of the aforegoing, Blackhead Consulting 
10 
CC contracted with the department in question and 
it in turn subcontracted the various third parties 
referred to above.” 
That is what I was putting to you. 
MR SODI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That was the practice, it seems.  
MR SODI:   And this is, Chair, certainly referring to right at 
the beginning before the company grew to what it is today, 
when it was still, you know, a CC and …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just by of summary, Mr Sodi, it 
20 
may be necessary to come back to it as we go through the 
detail of the information you have now given us and our 
own investigators’ researches into the finances but it 
seems that for the asbestos contract at least Mr Mpambani 
was able to unlock opportunities to obtain a high value 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 50 of 92 
 
contract, correct? 
MR SODI:   Okay, so Chair, we are going back to that 
unlocking opportunities.  As I said previously, that he was 
instrumental in making sure that we get appointed, that his 
role was to, you know, engage with the relevant officials as 
he had said, you know, take the proposal and submitting 
and so forth.  That was his role.   
 
With regard to the high value contract, I had 
explained here before that the ultimate fee that we 
eventually settled on with the department was to a large 
10 
extent based on the fee that we got in Gauteng.  There was 
the realisation that because the Free State is [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Sodi, I do not want to interrupt 
you unnecessarily but your answer – I am really not looking 
to deal with the amount that is made, that is a matter of 
record already, it does not bear repeating. 
MR SODI:   Ja, so I suppose what I am trying to deal with 
is your statement that Mr Mpambani’s role was to unlock 
the project …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you said that happened. 
MR SODI:   For a high value project.  So I was dealing with 
…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, no, no, I did say high value but 
we know that evidence, we have dealt with it exhaustively 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 51 of 92 
 
over days. 
MR SODI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But if you – I cannot stop you 
answering I am just suggesting politely …[intervenes] 
MR SODI:   No, no, no, I – ja, okay, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That when you go …[intervenes] 
MR SODI:   I mean, if we are on the same page then I am 
happy, I just do not want to make assumptions that I 
understand what Mr Pretorius …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, we are not going to submit, I 
10 
can assure you, anything that is not based on evidence 
already given. 
MR SODI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay? 
MR SODI:   That is fine, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But what is a feature of the 
asbestos contract which is repeated, certainly in the Free 
State, 
in 
the 
building 
contract 
and 
in 
the 
Estina 
arrangements and contracts is that these contracts were 
entered into having avoided or having not followed proper 
20 
competitive bidding processes.  It seems that the failure to 
follow a proper competitive bidding process in the asbestos 
contract is not an isolated example, certainly in the Free 
State, it happened more than once, it is a pattern. 
MR SODI:   Are you inviting my comment? 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 52 of 92 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja. 
MR SODI:   Chair, I certainly cannot speak for the Estina 
project nor the housing project but I can certainly speak for 
the asbestos project and I have said it previously when I 
was 
here 
that 
my 
understanding, 
which 
is 
still 
my 
understanding even now, was that there is a provision from 
Treasury Regulation 16A.6 that was utilised in our case to 
get appointed by the Department of Human Settlements.   
It has been used before, we are certainly not the 
first company to be appointed using that provision so it is 
10 
there and I think we have acknowledged, you know, here 
that it is a provision, it is made, it is there, we can rely on 
it., 
So 
with 
regard 
to 
whether 
that 
was 
followed 
properly, you know, in terms of making sure that all the 
checks and balances are complied with, all the boxes are 
ticked, that I would not have known because you would 
agree 
with 
me, 
Chair, 
that 
would 
have 
been 
the 
responsibility of the supply chain officials.   
So I certainly would not have - you know, I do not 
20 
have knowledge about what needs to be checked or what 
needs to be in place.  As far as I am concerned, we 
complied with whatever that we needed to comply with and 
that is my comment, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we will go to that.   The first 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 53 of 92 
 
point, Mr Sodi, is that it is common cause and not disputed 
by 
anybody, 
including 
yourself, 
that 
there 
was 
no 
competitive 
bidding 
process 
that 
preceded 
your 
appointment in the Free State. 
MR SODI:   Correct.. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Whether the processes actually 
used were (a) genuine and (b) lawful is a question that we 
have examined exhaustively and we are in position to make 
our submissions to the Chair on that.  It is not – it is a 
legal matter that I do not think would be fair to tax you 
10 
with. 
MR SODI:   Correct, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But what also seems to be part of 
the pattern is that money goes back to officials either in 
joint deals or in other forms and the ruling party benefits 
from these deals as it did from all the work that you did.  
Now whether there is a link or not is a matter for further 
investigation in this case but it may be a matter that the 
chair would want to comment on in due course. 
MR SODI:   Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the very community from the 
which the work comes in this form benefits from the profits 
made.  What do you say about that? 
MR SODI:   I really do not have much of a comment there, 
Chair. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 54 of 92 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But it [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
MR SODI:   Suffice to say that I have stated even in my 
affidavit that I grew up supporting the ruling party and it is 
really the only party that I knew growing up and that I 
continue to know.  I am not saying I do not know the other 
parties but it is the party that I believe in. 
 
I also believe that a lot of the opportunities that we 
have 
as 
young, 
especially 
black 
people, 
where 
opportunities that were created by the ruling party to a 
10 
large extent.  I voted in the 1994 elections because all of 
us were quite excited that the for the first time we have an 
opportunity to vote for whoever that we want as our leader 
and we did so.  It was a moment of great joy and victory, 
you know, when, you know, the results were announced.  I 
continued subsequent years during the elections to vote for 
the ANC and to support wherever possible and the 
requests sometimes, when they come – the request may 
come and say listen, we owe a service provider, for 
instance, 300 000, they catered for a function at one of our 
20 
conferences, are you able to assist?   
I may say well, I can assist but I have only got for 
instance 50 000 or I have got 100 000.  That continues to 
happen even now, Chair, and I – because I grew up in the 
movement and a lot of the people that some of them are 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 55 of 92 
 
now in leadership positions, people that I have known for 
many, many years. 
 
So the fact that there would have been some 
donation from either myself in my individual capacity or 
from one of my entities, I do not see that as strange or as 
fraudulent or as corrupt.  I do not – I certainly do not see it 
that way and you know unless someone convince me 
otherwise, but I don’t think there is any crime in one 
supporting a party of his choice.  The fact that a lot of the 
work that I get is from government I find that a bit 
10 
overreaching to create the link between my donations to 
various and the work that we get, I think it is a bit 
overreaching to put it bluntly. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well lest I be accused Mr Sodi, 
which I may well be, of generalising prematurely what I am 
putting to you is that there are indications at this stage at 
least in the asbestos story, which may be replicated in 
other business dealings between private individuals and 
government, that indicate benefit to the ruling party that 
has as you say created the opportunities that you have 
20 
talked about.   Indications at this stage, perhaps in time 
the bigger picture will be put together but I just wanted 
your views on that, thank you. 
 
Chair 
those 
are 
the 
questions. 
 
A 
further 
investigation will take place, whether that will require 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 56 of 92 
 
further evidence or not is yet another question.  It is not 
certain that it will but that’s a decision that I won’t make. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
okay. 
 
And 
there 
is 
no 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No further witnesses, the further 
witness that is the matter that has been postponed.   That 
would not have finished today anyway. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, maybe I should put a few 
questions to Mr Sodi before we adjourn so that when we 
adjourn we adjourn for the day.    
10 
 
Mr Sodi going back to the arrangement between 
yourself and Mr Mokhesi or his Family Trust it looks like it 
was a once off partnership, once off in the sense that there 
was no intention of continuing and getting other properties 
that the two of you would be involved in jointly, is that 
correct?  
MR SODI:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The other property that you told me 
20 
about where you are going into partnership with somebody 
else, you said that one has not been registered in your 
name. 
MR SODI:   As far as I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 57 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   It hasn’t. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I take there is some agreement that 
has been concluded between the two of you. 
MR SODI:   There is ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do you remember when that 
agreement was concluded?  More or less. 
MR SODI:   Again Chair I think it should have been around 
2014 maybe somewhere around there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2014, oh it has been quite a lot time. 
MR SODI:   Ja, no it has been a long time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Around – that was the same year, it was 
2015 with Mr Mokhesi? 
MR SODI:   Say that again Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one with Mr Mokhesi was it 2014 or 
2015? 
MR SODI:   No, that was 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2015.   
MR SODI:   Ja, hence I say that so that one would have 
been prior and I would have discussed it with Mr Mokhesi 
maybe during one of our lunch meetings, that is why I 
20 
mention that when he came to me with this proposition he 
was aware that I was looking at acquiring a property in 
Parys, so that one – but I can look at the dates you know it 
is not – it could have been prior to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, and you can make – furnish a 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 58 of 92 
 
copy of the agreement ...[intervenes]  
MR SODI:   Ja, certainly, certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so what you say to my proposition 
that for all intents and purposes looks like you did not 
need Mr Mokhesi, he needed you.   You could have 
invested in another property, it would just have been one of 
the properties, he is the person who really needed you. 
MR SODI:   Well ja, I wouldn’t want to Chair use the word 
need, but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   He has told me that he wanted to buy a 
10 
property where he would live and he could not raise a bond 
of more than R1million, because ABSA picked up some 
judgments you know and therefore he needed somebody to 
assist him to get a property that would be more than 
R1million and you were the person, so he certainly needed 
you. 
MR SODI:   Chair it may appear so but certainly when he 
approached me in 2015 as I stated just a little while ago, 
that information never disclosed to me that he was looking 
at acquiring a property of a certain amount but the banks 
20 
could only you know give him a loan of a million Rand, but 
that information was certainly never discussed with me.  All 
what he said to me and you know I just don’t want to waste 
everyone’s time, but I will repeat it, he said I am aware 
that you are looking at acquiring a property in the Free 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 59 of 92 
 
State. 
 
I 
have 
come 
across 
a 
potential 
investment 
opportunity, would you be keen to invest with me.   Those 
were his words “will you be keen to invest with me” and I 
said, so I asked him a number of questions about his 
potential area that he was referring to and he told me 
where it was and so forth.  I did my own research as I said 
and I said look I am quite happy that we can invest 
together.  He then said look I am able to raise a million 
Rand from the banks, are you able to raise the balance.  I 
said of course I am able to raise the balance, and that’s 
10 
what happened. 
 
But the information that he gave you Chair about 
the judgments and SARS that was news to me in fact when 
I heard it, I never knew that information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When he approached you had he already 
identified the property and did he know how much, what 
the price would be for the property? 
MR SODI:   Well the question that I asked him was what is 
– the first question I asked I said but what’s the average 
you know price for the properties in that area.  He said it is 
20 
between 
1.5 
and 
1.8million, 
so 
we 
are 
looking 
at 
somewhere more or less around there.  So it wasn’t a 
specific number, that is the discussion that we had, and I 
said okay that’s fine, I mean if it is around there you have 
got – you say that that you are able to raise a million rand, 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 60 of 92 
 
I am able to raise R650 000, so it means we need to look 
at a property that will fall within that price, within that price 
bracket, and that’s what happened, he went ahead and 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you raise the question of why he 
wanted you as a partner for this property? 
MR SODI:   Well ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why you in particular?  
MR SODI:   I just assumed because I told him that you 
know I like you now playing in the property space, you 
10 
know speculating you know, I assumed that based on that, 
that’s why he felt confident that he can approach me with 
this proposition.  My feel was that had I not disclosed that 
to him he may have gone to someone else, but he certainly 
came to me because he knew that I was certainly playing 
this space, I have got a property development company 
apart from just investing in property which builds you know, 
builds houses, from scratch, you know we acquire a piece 
of land and we develop.  We have got a number of those 
developments in the Northern Suburbs of Johannesburg, so 
20 
he certainly  knew you know that it’s something that I like 
doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did the question arise between the two 
of you when you had this discussion whether it was 
appropriate or it would be appropriate for you and him or 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 61 of 92 
 
his trust to get into this arrangement  in the circumstances 
where your company had just done part of the job that it 
was given, but was still going to do another part and I 
understand payments were still being made. 
MR SODI:   It did sir, it did, I actually ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You raised it. 
MR SODI:   I raised it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   And I raised that issue and I said look you 
know we have completed our exercise, we have completed 
10 
what we were appointed to do.  At that time Mr Mpambani 
told me that forget about Phase 2, it is not going to 
happen, you know that’s what he told me, the information 
that he got that there was no budget, there was no money 
to go to Phase 2, so it is not going to happen, so certainly 
at that point in time when I had this conversation with Mr 
Mokhesi I had that at the back of my mind that we were not 
going to – we were not going to go into Phase 2 of the 
project, we had completed Phase 1 and that was it.  We 
had been paid some of the money that was due to us, but 
20 
there 
were 
certainly 
more 
payments 
that 
were 
still 
outstanding and you know so I didn’t see anything wrong 
into this transaction, but of course later on when questions 
are being asked and I look back and I am saying you know 
maybe – maybe it wasn’t quite as smart you know decision 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 62 of 92 
 
for us to do that, you know because then it raises 
questions – it becomes questionable, someone looks at it 
but these guys have just completed a project in your 
department, yes it is completed but there’s still outstanding 
monies that are due to them, so certainly if one applied his 
mind to that properly I probably  would have said you know 
what I don’t think this is a good idea, but now I have got 
the benefit of looking back, in hindsight and say it may 
raise those – you know it may look questionable you know, 
someone looking at it might say but hold on this is 
10 
questionable, I admit that, that it may be questionable, but 
certainly it was never the intention to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the – that the – that your company 
would not be involved in – now I don’t know whether you 
said, he said your company would not be involved in Phase 
2 or whether he simply said there will be no Phase 2, what 
exactly did he say? 
MR SODI:   No, this is Mr Mpambani, the late Mr 
Mpambani, so he said to me look he has got it on good 
authority, I have always believed what he told me coming 
20 
from the Free State, because he was – he was quite 
entrenched there, he said look there is no possibility at all 
from, at least in the near future because the Department 
don’t have money to go into Phase 2, and I accepted that 
you know and I had no reason not to believe him because 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 63 of 92 
 
with everything else that he told me about the Free State 
turned out to be true, well at least most of the things that 
he mentioned. 
 
So at that point in time I – like I said I had no 
reason not to believe him, so I believed him and I thought 
you know there would be no, nothing untoward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the conversation that you were telling 
me about five years ago where you were saying you raised 
the issue of whether it was a ...[indistinct] I understood 
you to be saying that conversation you had with Mr 
10 
Mokhesi, is that correct? 
MR SODI:   That’s the conversation I had with Mr Mokhesi 
ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mokhesi ja, and I thought you were 
saying he was the one who told you that there would be no 
Phase 2? 
MR SODI:   No, no, no he was not the one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was not the one? 
MR SODI:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, it was Mr Mpambani? 
20 
MR SODI:   It was Mr Mpambani who first gave me that 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, was that prior to this discussion 
with Mr ...[intervenes]  
MR SODI:   It was prior to the discussion. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 64 of 92 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, so when you raised the issue 
with Mr Mokhesi namely you know we have just done work 
for your department, is this appropriate, what was his 
response? 
MR SODI:   No the response from both of us was that look 
there doesn’t seem to be – it doesn’t appear at that point 
in time that this will be a problem, because we had already 
completed what we were appointed to do, as I said which 
was Phase 1 of the project, and I then mentioned 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you had been appointed to do both, 
remember, not one?  
MR SODI:   Yes, ja, but remember also Chair that the 
actual appointment for Phase 1 came in the form of  an 
IPW, we never received an IPW for Phase 2 of the project.   
It was part of the submission that we made in our 
unsolicited bid, that certainly was part of that, and those 
within the SLA ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The Service Level Agreement. 
MR SODI:   Yes, also the Service Level Agreement alluded 
20 
to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the appointment letter, if I am 
correct. 
MR SODI:   I think so, I think you could be right, ja, but we 
also we understood that to give effect to that appointment 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 65 of 92 
 
and IPW had to be issued, which was not the case, it never 
happened.  So then we left it there, we certainly never 
pursued it to say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But obviously it would happen when you 
reached a stage where you were about to start Phase 2, it 
didn’t have to be given to you long before you could start 
Phase 2, in other words the mere fact that it was not given 
doesn’t mean it was never going to be given if the stage 
was reached where you were about to start Phase 2.   
MR SODI:   So Chair to answer this is how I looked at it, 
10 
we – the Treasury regulation was invoked in this case for 
our appointment to Phase 1, which is the audit and 
assistance.  We certainly didn’t do Phase 2 in Gauteng, so 
there is no way that, and I am sure we would have gotten 
to that saying it is the case, you can’t just go ahead and 
use the same regulation because the regulation talks about 
if you are appointed elsewhere by any organ of state for a 
similar job. 
 
We were not appointed to do Phase 2, and therefore 
it would have been inappropriate for that regulation to be 
20 
utilised for Phase 2, so my view at that point in time was 
that if Phase 2 had to proceed there would have to be a 
competitive bidding process for that to happen, I certainly 
would not have allowed, because I knew that you know this 
would become a problem later on, because that regulation 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 66 of 92 
 
talks about you know if you have been appointed to do a 
similar kind of work, but this obviously you know it was 
later on, after we had already submitted our proposal and 
the SLA’s, we were signing stuff like that and at that point 
in time I was like you know what if we go into Phase 2 it is 
going to be a problem, so I am glad it never went to that, 
we never got into that stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But how do you say that Mr Sodi in 
circumstances where you, that is your company or the joint 
venture, were the people who went to the Department and 
10 
said you would like to be given a job involved both parts. 
MR SODI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You knew that in Gauteng you had not 
done the asbestos removal. 
MR SODI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you knew that it was the Treasury 
regulation that was going to be used. 
MR SODI:   Yes, as I said Chair it doesn’t seem to me you 
can say what you are saying to say you were going to 
object to being given the job for the removal because that 
20 
would not be covered by the Treasury Regulation, but you 
are the one who approached the department and said you 
wanted to do among others a job on the basis of a 
Treasury regulation that had not been ,a job you had not 
done before, that on your own evidence would not apply? 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 67 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   That is correct Chair, hence I am saying that 
realisation 
was 
much 
later 
after 
we 
had 
already 
approached them and submitted our answering proposal, 
when I started looking at it and when I had a discussion 
with Mr Mpambani when he said to me but there is not 
going to be Phase 2, I remember that I said to him but it is 
actually a blessing in disguise, but this Phase is not going 
to go through because we didn’t do Phase 2 in Gauteng, so 
it is actually good for us that it stops here and not 
proceed, But it was after the fact, as I said it was way after 
10 
the fact, after the unsolicited proposals were submitted 
and the SLA’s were done and then one started looking at it 
and say but here it is a grey area that I wouldn’t want us to 
get into because otherwise it could become problematic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you were so keen, at least at the 
beginning Mr Sodi to do this part, both parts, that you  
even said you had the capacity, you had the qualifications, 
you have the experience or the accreditation when actually 
you didn’t have, is that right?  You said last time that yes 
your company did not have that.  
20 
MR SODI:   Ja, I tried qualifying that Chair by saying that 
we would approach those kind of appointments from a 
project 
management 
point 
of 
view, 
and 
then 
get 
a 
specialist to come and do the work, which is the – you 
know it is an industry practice, you know, that’s what we 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 68 of 92 
 
had envisaged that should it get there we would have to 
just be a project manager and get a specialist to do it, but 
as I have just said Chair that had I applied my mind right 
at the beginning when we submitted the proposal we 
certainly wouldn’t have included Phase 2, we wouldn’t have 
because like I said I got to – also I got to know and 
understand some of the intricacies of that regulation much 
later on, I mean I didn’t have much you know knowledge 
about it, but I got to know as you know and even now I 
mean I am still trying to familiarise myself with you know 
10 
how it works and so forth 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, last time I think you conceded I 
think quite correctly that to the extent that in your 
unsolicited proposal or in the service level agreement, to 
the extent that you said that you could do this part of 
asbestos removal and so on, or to the extent that you said 
you had the qualifications, the accreditation you accepted 
that that was a misrepresentation, am I right?. 
MR SODI:   Can I – I think I need to make that very clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR SODI:   So that we are on the same page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, you attributed to you something 
...[intervenes]  
MR SODI:   Ja, so I said that to conduct an audit or 
assessment you don’t need accreditation. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 69 of 92 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s the first part. 
MR SODI:   That’s the first part. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR SODI:   And I said that to do Phase 2 which is the 
handling and the disposal you need to be accredited. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is the part I am talking about. 
MR SODI:   Yes, and I was very – I made it clear that we 
were not accredited, we still aren’t accredited to handle 
asbestos.  This is the part that I am referring to that we 
would have had to get a specialise, someone who is 
10 
accredited to execute that but we play a management role, 
okay, but the specialist would do the bulk of the work and 
then we play the management role and this is the point that 
I just want to submit to you Chair, if I didn’t make it clear 
the first time around I just want to make it clear to you now 
that you know you could be appointed, even though you 
don’t have the qualification but you play the role of a 
project manager. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see I don’t have a problem at a 
certain level I don’t have a problem if you are looking for a 
20 
job that you want to do or business, and you – the job may 
entail something that you can’t do, if you disclose to the 
person who must give you the business that this is what 
you can do, this is what you can’t do, but you are going to 
need to bring in people who have got the expertise, the 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 70 of 92 
 
skills, so that the person who must give you a job knows 
that you actually can’t do this, you are not accredited to do 
this but here is your plan and they are happy with your 
plan you see, but the difficulty with what you are saying 
when you seek to qualify what I think you said last time is 
that you didn’t disclose that in the correspondence and in 
the service level agreement with the department, you 
actually said you have – you had the qualification or 
accreditation and I thought to the extent that last time you 
may 
have 
conceded 
I 
thought 
that 
was 
a 
correct 
10 
concession to say we shouldn’t have said that. 
MR SODI:   Ja, look Chair I mean in an ideal world in this 
industry that for me is how it should happen, when you say 
Mr Sodi for instance here is the plan, I want you to build 
me this house, okay, tell me how much you are going to 
charge me to build this house and I go and do my number 
crunching and I come back to you and say Mr Chair this 
house will cost you R5million. 
 
Okay, hardly does it ever happen that I will say well 
I am not qualified in doing electrical work so I am going to 
20 
get Mr Joe Soap, I don’t do planting, I am not qualified to 
do planting, I am going to get Mr X.  It doesn’t happen in 
the industry. 
 
So I will come back to you because I would have 
had at that point in time I would have taken out sections 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 71 of 92 
 
where I don’t have the necessary knowledge or skill or 
know-how, I would have taken those sections and sent to 
the specialist listen how much would you charge me to do 
one, two, three and then they will say Mr Sodi we will 
charge R10 or R20 and then I put my 10% mark-up, I come 
to you and now R20 is R22 because I have put in my mark-
up, but I certainly don’t disclose to you that you know I am 
going to get so and so, it becomes my responsibility as the 
one point of entry and one point of exit to manage those 
sub-contractors. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So Mr Sodi are you saying to me it is 
right, as far as you are concerned, for somebody who 
doesn’t have the qualifications to do a particular job or 
accreditation, to go around seeking a job to do, seeking 
business to do that kind of work for which he has no 
accreditation, he is not qualified, not to disclose that he 
doesn’t have the papers, he doesn’t have the accreditation 
or qualifications, as long as he is going to go and look for 
somebody who has got qualifications, is that what you are 
saying?  
20 
MR SODI:   I am not saying it is right Chair, that is why I 
said in an ideal world you know one wishes the industry, or 
it could work like that, so that if one is given a task then 
upfront you know then you tell the client but in this area it 
is not my specialist, I am going to sub-contract, I don’t 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 72 of 92 
 
have the necessary qualifications, but because we play a 
project management role it becomes our responsibility so if 
anything is wrong, if I build a house and tomorrow it starts 
leaking or it catches fire because of an electrical fault, I 
am not going to go to the electrician nor the plumber, I am 
going to go to the person that I appointed and say it is 
your responsibility as to who did that it is none of my 
business, but you were give the contract to do one, two, 
three, so I will say that, it is how – it is the industry norm, 
that is how it happens. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But now you tell me based on what 
Blackhead said to the department in regard to this, we 
have repeated that, you said we can do – we have the 
capacity, experience, qualifications or accreditation, I can’t 
remember all the adjectives, to do this job and when you 
said that you included asbestos removal and you didn’t say 
you were going to look, that somebody was going to do it, 
you accept that it was wrong not to disclose that?   
MR SODI:   I just need to add Chair that we certainly did 
not mention that we have got accreditation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   You know and we made an admission that we 
can certainly do the Phase 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Phase 1 I am not having an issue with it, 
it is Phase 2. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 73 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   So it could be that submission should have 
gone further and I will admit that, it could have gone 
further to say that if you appoint us for phase 2, which is 
the actual removal and disposal and so forth, it may be – it 
could have gone further to say if you do that then we will 
have to appoint a specialist to do that actual work.  It 
could have gone further, you know, to allude to that fact, 
Chair, but it certainly …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it right or was it wrong? 
MR SODI:   Come again? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it right or was it wrong for 
Blackhead not to disclose that it itself did not have the 
qualification or accreditation to do the second phase but to 
represent that it could do it? 
MR SODI:   Because, Chair, I do not want to ask you 
…[intervenes] . 
CHAIRPERSON:   I want you to come out because last time 
you …[intervenes] 
MR SODI:   I did come out …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] and 
20 
said…[intervenes] 
MR SODI:   I did make that con …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You should not have done that. 
MR SODI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I thought that was …[intervenes] 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 74 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   No, no, it is fine, I made that concession but I 
– but it is also important for me to explain how the industry 
works, whilst at the time …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, you explained that, I understand 
that. 
MR SODI:   Yes, whilst at the same time conceding that 
yes, it would be an ideal thing to do, to be a proper thing 
to do to say guys, here is this particular aspect, we do not 
have the necessary expertise and skill, we are going to 
have to subcontract that.  You know, it would – so I admit 
10 
that, you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept it was not proper. 
MR SODI:   No, I accept that, ja.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR SODI:   But I just wanted to first of all, just say this is 
how it happens in the industry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR SODI:   So that we are on the same page when it 
comes to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MR SODI:   But also admit that in a – that is why I used 
the word, in an ideal world, you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   That maybe this is how things could happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now Mr Mokhesi said yesterday when I 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 75 of 92 
 
asked the question whether the department would have 
given you the job if they knew that – at least if he knew 
that you did not have the qualifications or accreditation to 
do the second part of the asbestos removal.  He said 
definitely they would not have given you the job.  Do you 
want to comment on that? 
MR SODI:   Ja, I mean, I do not necessarily agree with 
that, Chair, on the basis that he could have said we are 
only appointing for phase one but to categorically say that, 
you know, I would not have appointed them, I – on what 
10 
basis because, you know, what experience and what 
accreditation would he - you know, of course, as I said, 
you do not need that in phase one.  So he could have said 
guys, I have got your unsolicited proposal in front of me, it 
talks about phase one and phase two and as you all know, 
phase two requires some accreditation, phase one does 
not, so I am going to appoint you for phase one only 
because that is what you did in Gauteng.  So I am only 
appointing you for phase one, forget about phase two.  
That is what – in my view, that is how he should have 
20 
responded to that question to say that I would only have 
appointed them for phase one but not phase two, but not 
choose – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course the question that arises if you 
seek to – if, as a department, you have need for somebody 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 76 of 92 
 
to do a job that has got phase one and phase two is 
whether you will appoint somebody who is able to do both 
parts or whether you will appoint somebody who can do 
phase one and cannot do phase two and then you must 
appoint somebody else for phase two and you do not know 
whether, if you appoint somebody else, when they come 
they might say whoever did phase one did not do a good 
job, we have to start afresh, then you might have to pay 
more.  What do you say to that? 
MR SODI:   Well, sir, my comment to that, it is very simple.  
10 
If you look at the project, what needed to be done was to 
quantify the number of houses that are roofed with 
asbestos and come with an estimate in the form of a 
generic BOQ as to what needs to happen or how much it is 
going to cost.  That is what needs to happen.  So – and 
whoever then comes afterwards, is something who says 
okay, fine, we know that in township A there are 300 
houses that are roofed with asbestos and this is – these 
are the areas that we must go to, alright?  And then they 
simply go there and they do what they have to do based on 
20 
the information they would have received from phase one.  
So it is really quantifying and giving information about 
what needs to happen. 
 
In this case we were only talking about the removal 
of roofs and nothing else.  I know that, you know, the 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 77 of 92 
 
experts when they were here, they spoke about pipes and 
gutters and so forth but in this case it was just restricted to 
the actual roofs so I would not have looked at anything 
else beyond that. 
 
So really, it is putting the horse in front and the 
cart, you know, behind the horse to say – but also, for the 
department, 
remember 
it 
is 
quite 
useful 
information 
because they need to know when they are doing their 
budgeting, what are we budgeting for and how much do we 
need as a budget because otherwise you will then plan in 
10 
the dark without having the necessary information.  But if 
you do know then you say okay, fine, we need x amount or 
this is what has been found so let us put x amount 
available and then you deal with it.  So it assists the 
department as well in that sense, you know?. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the price that was agreed upon.. 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understood you last time to say that 
was the price for the whole job namely, the whole job being 
as wet out in the service level agreement and the letter of 
20 
appointment which would be phase one and phase two.  
Did I misunderstand you? 
MR SODI:   Are you – is the Chair referring to the R850? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR SODI:   No, certainly not, Chair, I think you probably I 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 78 of 92 
 
misunderstood the R850 will in no way even touch the 
service when it comes to roof removals.  That was strictly 
for the audit and assessment so if I did not, you know, 
make myself clear, I apologise, sir.  But, you know, to give 
you a rough estimate, to remove a roof, you know, and go 
and dispose of asbestos and put a new roof, you know, 
tiled roof which is what, you know, happening in most 
cases, it will cost you anywhere in the region of between – 
I am estimating between 20 maybe and 30 000 per house, 
you know, if we are talking about the 40 square metre 
10 
houses that we are referring to but 850 certainly would be 
scratching the surface. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Lastly, in that agreement going back to 
your arrangement with Mr Mokhesi or his family trust. 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is a clause in that agreement that 
said 
the 
agreement 
should 
be 
kept 
confidential 
or 
something to that effect.  Why did you want that agreement 
to be confidential? 
MR SODI:   Ag, you know, again, like I said, I mean this 
20 
was – you know taking the record from the internet and 
just, you know, for me it was agreement between the two 
parties and one would – and I am certainly not a legal 
person but the interpretation of that was that it is an 
agreement between Blackhead and the Trust and should 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 79 of 92 
 
remain that way.  But, of course, I mean if the relevant, 
you know, authorities or whoever wants to look at it, they 
can have a look at it.  But, like I said, I mean – I think the 
lesson learned there is that some of these things leave 
them to professionals to draft them instead of going to the 
internet and thinking that we can be smart and draft these 
kind of things but it is certainly giving – for me it was 
neither here nor there, it did not mean anything. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja, 
okay. 
 
Anything 
arising, 
Mr 
Pretorius? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Sodi, on the 28 May 2014 you 
delivered on behalf of the joint venture to Mr Mokhesi and 
unsolicited proposal. 
MR SODI:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In that proposal you say: 
“We have pleasure in submitting our request to be 
appointed on a risk basis for the following: 
Assessment/audit of houses roofed using asbestos 
material. 
Handling and disposal of asbestos sheets to an 
20 
approved designated disposal site.” 
The objective of the project on page 166 of the FS8 is 
twofold: 
“Quantify 
the 
number 
of 
houses 
roofed 
with 
asbestos sheets. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 80 of 92 
 
Remove and dispose asbestos to an improved and 
accredited disposal site.” 
In short it was your unsolicited proposal that you would 
also remove asbestos. 
MR SODI:   As I said and I am qualifying it, Chair, to say 
that we would have played a project management role on 
phase two.  There is no way we would have touched 
asbestos because we knew – I certainly knew, you know, 
but you cannot touch asbestos unless you are accredited 
but you can do the audit, you can do that, it is fine. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You also knew, Mr Sodi, that you 
had not done it in Gauteng yet you bid for it in Free State. 
MR SODI:   Correct and I said, Chair, that if one had 
applied his mind properly when we did this unsolicited bid 
we would not have included that aspect.  I have already 
stated that before you, Chair, to say that much later on, 
when I started looking at it, I am like, you know, it was, 
you know, it was blessing in disguise that it never got to 
that stage because I started analysing it and looking at it 
and say this would be grey area, it would be problematic.  
20 
So I admit that, you know, it should not have been there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just one more matter, if I may, 
Chair.  In your affidavit FS1.1 399 you say that: 
“In relation to Mr Jimmy Tau you paid him an 
amount of R3 million from the proceeds of the 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 81 of 92 
 
asbestos audit in the Free State but this payment 
related 
to 
unrelated 
project 
in 
which 
Mr 
Tau 
rendered services and was paid from Blackhead’s 
account after receipt of its share from the JV.” 
The question is, did Mr Tau in his personal or any other 
capacity perform services for you or Blackhead? 
MR SODI:   As I said, Chair, we engaged Mr Tau through 
one of this entities as a business development consultant. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, that is sufficient for present 
purposes, it is not necessary to go into the detail for the 
10 
present. 
MR SODI:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The Chair, may want to know.  But 
in the questions that the investigators put to you, the 
answers to which we have received last night, one of the 
questions was: 
“Please provide further any agreement between Mr 
Jimmy Tau and/or any of his related entities and Mr 
Sodi’s and any of his entities: 
And you say: 
20 
“No further agreement exists.” 
MR SODI:   I think in answering that question, my 
understanding was the question is saying is there an 
employment contract between Blackhead and Mr Tau, that 
is why we said – okay, it could be a – that is why we said 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 82 of 92 
 
further on, Chair, that we had already provided the 
agreement entered into between Blackhead Consulting and 
his entity, so it could be a – you know? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Well, we may have to go 
back there and clarify the question and perhaps obtain a 
full answer. 
MR SODI:   Ja, that is fine but we have certainly made it 
very clear that it was not – he was not employed in his 
personal capacity and so, you know, when I read that I 
thought it is talking about him being employed in his 
10 
personal capacity and it could be a matter of language 
which I admit, you know, could be I misunderstood. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one last question that I forgot.  You 
know, I asked you about the conversation that you and Mr 
Mokhesi had about whether it was appropriate to enter into 
this arrangement and you said, if I recall correctly – well, 
you said you knew by then from Mr Mpambani that there 
was going to be no phase two because he said the 
department said it did not have money but I am not sure 
20 
that I remember whether you did tell me what Mr Mokhesi’s 
position was. 
MR SODI:   No, his position also was the same, he said 
definitely there is not going to be any phase two for the 
foreseeable future. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 83 of 92 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes in that meeting where you were 
having that discussion. 
MR SODI:   Ja, he said that was it, I mean, it is also the 
law of questions that have been asked, you know, there is 
a lot of noise, the Auditor-General and so forth so certainly 
this is it, it is not going to go further than what went wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is quite interesting because I asked 
him this question yesterday.  Initially he said – his 
response was that there was going to be no phase two or 
Blackhead was not going to do phase two, I am not sure 
10 
which one of those but later on he changed that and he 
said because this was simply a commercial transaction he 
did not think that there was a problem with the two of you 
entering into this transaction. 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I asked specifically the question, 
this issue that you mentioned earlier that there was to be 
no phase two, that did not – that is not what persuaded 
you, he said no, that did not play a role.  What played a 
role was that as far as I am concerned this was simply a 
20 
commercial transaction and I could enter into it.  At least 
that is how I understood him to be saying. 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I said to him but it cannot be a 
convincing answer. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 84 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   Ja, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because it would everybody – every 
official …[intervenes] 
MR SODI:   Correct, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They can get into these commercial 
transactions as long as it is a commercial transaction 
whereas actually the very purpose of raising issues is 
because officials are not supposed to be entering into 
commercial transactions with service providers and so on 
…[intervenes] 
10 
MR SODI:   Ja, I watched that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You watched that, ja. 
MR SODI:   I did and I am not sure why, you know... 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do you say about his evidence in 
that regard? 
MR SODI:   No, I do not – like I said, I, you know, certainly 
cannot speak on his behalf.  I cannot speak for him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR SODI:   But I was not sure why he did not come 
forthright and say that, you know, a decision was made 
20 
that there was not going to be phase two and therefore he 
did not see anything wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So your recollection is that with regard 
to both of you the reason why you felt comfortable to enter 
into this transaction was because your understanding and 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 85 of 92 
 
his understanding was that there would be no phase two? 
MR SODI:   Chair, if I knew that phase two was going to 
follow there is no way I would have entered into that 
transaction with him.  I would not have done it because 
that clearly would have just  been problematic and, you 
know, anyone looking at it would have said this is 
problematic and the only thing that gave me comfort as a 
fact was because we had completed the projects but 
someone can say but ja, you completed the project but you 
were still getting paid, you know? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   For certain payments, yes. 
MR SODI:   Which, as I said, you know, when one looks at 
it now, you know, it might appear to be questionable but at 
that point in time certainly, you know, I did not think it was 
going to be a problem.  But certainly, to answer your 
question, Chair, if I knew that phase two was going to 
proceed there is no way, I would not have done it, 
absolutely not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because it would be wrong? 
MR SODI:   Because it would be wrong – it would be – and, 
20 
you know, for me it would be inappropriate because again, 
you know, you could say well, you did this because you are 
trying to influence an official to make a decision favourable 
to you, you know, and I would not have wanted to put 
myself in that situation where there could be a perception 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 86 of 92 
 
created, you know?  There could be a perception created 
that by doing this as much as it was a legitimate and 
aboveboard commercial transaction, but it could have, in 
my view, by doing that it would have created a wrong 
perception, I think.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course -  am I right to understand 
that whatever may have been discussed between yourself 
and Mr Mpambani about whether there would be phase two 
or not and between yourself and Mr Mokhesi about whether 
there would be phase two, I am correct to understand that 
10 
there was nothing official or in writing that the department 
had sent to Blackhead or to the joint venture to say there 
will be no phase two despite the fact that our service level 
agreement with you contemplates that there would be 
phase two? 
MR SODI:   Ja, there was absolutely nothing official, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SODI:   And like I said, I mean, if there was anything 
that had to be done from the department’s point of view to 
proceed with phase two would have been the issue of an 
20 
IPW.  But at that point in time there was no communication, 
nothing official.  As I said, I had no reason to doubt what 
Mr Mpambani was telling me because in most cases 
whatever that he told me turned out to be true and when I 
when I raised it with – and I said look, this is the 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 87 of 92 
 
information that I got, he agreed with it.  He said ja, 
definitely there is not going to be a phase two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you would agree, would you not, that 
as at the date of entering into that arrangement with Mr 
Mokhesi 
anybody 
looking 
at 
correspondence 
between 
Blackhead or the joint venture and the department and 
looking at the service level agreements all they would see 
would 
be 
there 
is 
still 
an 
agreement 
between 
the 
department and the joint venture in terms of which there 
will be phase two? 
10 
MR SODI:   Chair, certainly someone without intimate 
knowledge of what was going on would have arrived, I 
suppose, at a conclusion like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So the agreement, the service level 
agreements had not been terminated in any official way, is 
that right? 
MR SODI:   At that – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because that agreement said you do two 
phases, you remember? 
MR SODI:   Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it had not been terminated and phase 
two had not been done, therefore it would – the position 
officially was there is still a job for you to do but you are 
saying that unofficially you had been told that there would 
be no phase two, is that right? 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 88 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   That is what I am saying, sir, but I am also 
saying that, you know, to give effect to the SLA and I think 
that – I think that is what the SLA say if we read it 
carefully, it does say that you will proceed to work after 
having received and IPW. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR SODI:   So, in other words, in the absence of the IPW 
you cannot do anything.  You know, nothing will happen, as 
much as the SLA is there.  So that was an instrument to 
determine whether or not, you know, one proceeds or not. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, if I may ask just one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That series of questions.  At the 
time you entered into the agreement and arrangement with 
Mr Mokhesi regarding the joint investment in the residence 
in Bloemfontein you say the work had been finished, had 
been completed. 
MR SODI:   Correct.  Yes, with regards to …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You had not yet received full 
20 
payment. 
MR SODI:   We had not yet received the full payment. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the question as to whether you 
would receive payment was a matter that was in the hands 
of Mr Mokhesi, he gave that evidence. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 89 of 92 
 
MR SODI:   Well, I… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well let me give you the evidence 
completely so that we do not continue for another hour.  
The – I do not mean that to reflect on anyone but the 
complexity of the issues involved, Chair.  Let me put it to 
you fully.   
The 
Auditor-General 
had 
already 
declared 
the 
contract invalid or irregular.  Mr Mokhesi had to decide 
whether you should continue to receive payment and it was 
in his discretion after he said an investigation that was 
10 
conducted by himself that he would have decided to 
continue the payments and these payments continued 
through the same period that you were entering the 
agreement with him.  Were you aware of that? 
MR SODI:   Chair, I was not aware about the AG findings, 
that is one.  Two, I am aware that the matter was taken to 
court by one political party in the Free State and the 
outcome of that, in my view, is what influenced a decision 
that was made by the judge that in that matter is what 
then, you know, influenced the department to make our 
20 
final payment.  That is my understanding.  It could be 
wrong but I certainly, like I said, did not know about the AG 
findings and when the matter was taken to court and it 
came out in our favour, that is why I thought, you know, it 
was on that basis that the payments were made to us. 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 90 of 92 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But, Mr Sodi, the simple point 
being put to you is that at the time you entered into the 
agreement with Mr Mokhesi, Blackhead had not yet been 
paid in full and payments continued thereafter. 
MR SODI:   Well, I mean, Chair, it is a fact that we have 
discussed.  The fact of the matter is, there was a contract 
of a certain amount between the department and the 
service provider.  It was made clear in terms of how the 
payments were going to be done and also that once upon 
successful completion of the project, the full payment will 
10 
be done.  So certainly, from our side we provided the 
service, we completed it and so we – so we dealt with one 
side of the agreement which was doing the work and 
completing it and submitting the reports to the department.  
 
Certainly no one from the department raised an 
issue about the work that we did, they were happy with 
what was submitted to them and what was therefore left 
was for them to honour their side of the agreement.   
So in my view it was not necessarily up to Mr 
Mokhesi to decide whether he wants to pay us or not, we 
20 
had a contract.  That was there.  That was very specific, 
that service provider, you will do one, two, three and upon 
completion of that, you will get paid x amount.  So even if, 
for instance, Mr Mokhesi left or resigned or whatever, 
whoever then came into that position or whoever was going 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 91 of 92 
 
to come into that position, would have had to honour the 
contract.  So it is not – there is certainly no inference at all 
that we could have tried to exert on Mr Mokhesi to pay us, 
he was obliged to pay in terms of the contract that we 
signed with the department. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Mr Sodi, for 
coming to give evidence and assist the Commission.  You 
may be asked to come back, you might not be asked, I am 
not sure, it will depend on the further investigation and 
10 
documents. 
MR SODI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But thank you very much. 
MR SODI:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will now release you, you are excused. 
MR SODI:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I take it that there was no plan to do any 
re-examination? 
COUNSEL FOR MR SODI:   Thank you, Chair, no, not at 
this stage.  I assume once we have done with the 
20 
investigation that is still outstanding then you will be in 
position to make a final decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.  Okay, we will 
adjourn now for the day.  Tomorrow there will be no sitting 
but there will be a sitting on Thursday.  I think I will hear 
29 SEPTEMBER 2020 – DAY 273 
 
Page 92 of 92 
 
the evidence of the Premier of North West as well as Ms 
Memela in the aviation work stream.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 1 SEPTEMBER 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
