 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
07 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 278 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 185 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
07 OCTOBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 3 of 185 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 07 OCTOBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Seleka, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The first witness for today Chairperson 
is Ms Nonkululeko Dlamini formerly Veleti 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And she is ready to take the oath. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Please 
administer 
the 
oath 
or 
affirmation? 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MS DLAMINI:  I am Nonkululeko Sylvia Dlamini. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS DLAMINI:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
20 
MS DLAMINI:  I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Do you swear that the evidence that 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
else but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and 
say, so help me God. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 4 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you; you may be seated Ms 
Dlamini.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Dlamini is legally represented Chair 
perhaps the Advocate could place himself on record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You can do it from where you are 
just switch on the microphone, yes. 
ADV STUBBS:  Thank you Deputy Chief Justice and thank 
10 
you Mr Seleka.  My name is Mkhululi Stubbs.  I am from 
the Johannesburg Bar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Mr Stubbs.  Chairperson for 
this witness we will use Eskom Bundle 10 and in that file it 
will be Exhibit U21. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Dlamini you – is it 
Dlamini.  I should refer you as Ms Dlamini, is that correct? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes that is correct. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes thanks.  So the file is also there 
before 
you; 
Eskom 
Bundle 
10. 
 
You 
will 
see 
the 
documentation relating to you is under U21 and that is the 
only documentation which we will refer you to.  Ms Dlamini 
you have provided the commission with an affidavit which 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 5 of 185 
 
is contained on page – and I will be referring you to pages 
– page numbers on the top left corner of the document 
which are the page numbers in black and not the ones in 
red.  So your affidavit is on page 411.  Can you see that?  
That is affidavit: 
“I, the undersigned Nonkululeko Dlamini.” 
You see that?  It starts from that page and it runs up to 
page 416.   
MS DLAMINI:  Yes I see it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You see that.  Just keep your 
10 
microphone on.  You confirm the signature to be yours on 
that page – 416? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes I confirm Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And the date is 7 October 2020? 
MS DLAMINI:  7 September. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  7 September 2020 I beg your pardon.  
You see that? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  It has just one annexure to 
it.  Chairperson may I beg leave to have the affidavit – well 
20 
it is the only document Chairperson Exhibit U21 with the 
annexure thereto?  U – indeed Chairperson.  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Ms Nonkululeko Dlamini 
starting at page 411 is admitted and will be marked as 
Exhibit U21. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 6 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Dlamini thank you for making 
yourself available to assist the commission.  Just for the 
purposes of information and to the Chairperson your – you 
have offered to assist the commission in regard to a matter 
relating to the suspension of the executives.  If you talk to 
the microphone. 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And just before we go into that 
10 
could you tell the Chairperson please what is your 
profession? 
MS DLAMINI:  Chairperson I am by profession I am a 
qualified Chartered Accountant so I trained through getting 
my junior degree at Wits University and the higher diploma 
from the University of Natal.  And I did my articles through 
Ernst and Young and then qualified as a Chartered 
Accountant.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  I see.  The particular issue before us 
the 
suspension 
of 
the 
executives 
relates 
to 
Eskom 
20 
executives who were suspended on 11 March 2015 three of 
them and the other one on 12 March 2015.  In an affidavit 
of one of those executives Ms Tsholofelo Molefe which we 
provided you with you will recall.  She makes – she states 
to this commission that on the 10 March 2015. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 7 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Seleka.  Do you want to let 
Ms Dlamini tell me first when she joined Eskom and what 
position she held at the time of the suspensions? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Indeed Chairperson.   
MS DLAMINI:  Thank you Chairperson.  So I joined Eskom 
in 2003 it was 1 October.  I joined as a Management 
Accountant at the corporate level and I stayed in that 
position for about three years.  
I 
was 
then 
promoted 
still 
within 
the 
same 
department to be one level higher in that – in the same 
10 
space 
which 
was 
basically 
a 
position 
that 
was 
consolidating on all the information from the various 
divisions of Eskom and reporting to EXCO and information 
that would ultimately get to the board of Eskom.  Basically 
financial reporting and operations of Eskom.   
Around 2006 at the beginning of 2006 I then started 
as a finance manager in the division called Group Capital 
where the whole building of the new power station – power 
stations at Eskom was being executed and I was basically 
the finance person that was supporting all the project 
20 
managers in the projects with a team of course and I was 
then consolidating again into the division information that 
would again get to the EXCO and the board. 
I was reporting at the point of starting in that role in 
2006 to a General Manager so there was a role called 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 8 of 185 
 
Finance 
Manager 
that 
reported 
to 
General 
Manager 
Finance who would be responsible for other functions 
within the division but still finance. 
She resigned from the organisation about eighteen 
months later when I was a finance manager reporting to 
her.  And – and therefore around I think about mid-2008 I 
was then promoted to be the General Manager Finance still 
for the Group Capital Program and therefore I was still 
largely responsible for what was about financials of the 
projects but I had to take other roles like supporting HR 
10 
and other elements within the division and had a broader 
team to – to support and basically reporting to me. 
Around – so that was around 2008 and 2011 I think 
it was Eskom went through quite a huge restructuring and 
transformation and in that process Shared Services was 
formed and was required to basically support the whole of 
Eskom with transactional processes basically to try and 
drive efficiencies and make sure that we standardise ways 
of doing things and work from one system.  And it was a 
Shared Services that was not only focussing on finances.  
20 
It had the finance element which was about accounts 
payable, things that are repetitive and transactional. 
It also built in fleet management.  Eskom has a very 
huge fleet across the country and we needed to basically 
consolidate 
that 
function 
to 
get 
efficiencies 
in 
the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 9 of 185 
 
procurement processes.  But also to be able to support the 
business because you would find one business with 
vehicles that they do not need while others are going to 
buy vehicles and it was about trying to get the culture of 
sharing in where – for the parts of the business that were 
in the same vicinity. 
It – the shared services centre also took care of 
some HR processes that is the hire to retire where they 
were not necessarily strategic but could be transactional.  
So it had about five functions in it. 
10 
So we set it up in 2011.  It had another element 
called Master Data Management basically to clean the data 
in the organisation. So it started in 2011 where we had to 
work with the organisation and pull the people into this unit 
called Shared Services which we achieved. 
In 2011/12/13 we were going through really the 
setup and stabilising.  But around 2014 it had fully 
stabilised and all the issues were resolved. 
And around 2014 Eskom was also going through 
quite significant financial challenges amongst others you 
20 
know besides load shedding and other issues that were a 
challenge.  And in that process including the fact that the 
tariff was just never enough to cover the financial needs of 
the business. 
So in the – in around I think it was the beginning of 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 10 of 185 
 
2014 or even earlier there was a project to – that was 
designed with the assistance of external consultants.  It 
was called Business Productivity Program.  And really it 
was 
looking 
across 
again 
the 
business 
to 
extract 
efficiencies 
and 
to 
make 
sure 
that 
whether 
it 
be 
procurement, maintenance and other stuff we were doing 
work more efficiently. 
If I recall at that point in time there was a gap of 
about 225billion in the tariff application that we had made.  
And the understanding was that the business had to extract 
10 
close to 70 billion to basically assist in closing the gap. 
So I was not part of the design of the program but I 
was then requested to take over when it moved to 
implementation phase and it reported to the Chief Financial 
Officer or the Finance Director.   
And that was the role I took over at the beginning of 
2014.  And for most of that year and it was really a virtual 
structure which reported to the board again and EXCO to 
basically track whether we were getting these savings 
because the idea was to get to 70 billion over a period of 
20 
about five years.  
And at the start it would be slow but we were 
expecting it to pick up so virtually I was managing a team 
that was coordinating the structure across the business 
and reporting that information both to EXCO and it 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 11 of 185 
 
reported 
to 
a 
board 
sub-committee 
called 
Finance 
Investment Committee on frequent intervals. 
And that was at the time I then was requested – 
that was most of 2014 and in 2015 March that is when the 
suspensions then happened.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So what was your position in March 
2015? 
MS DLAMINI:  So I was still a senior General Manager in 
the Shared Services because when I took over the 
business productivity I did not have to relinquish that role 
10 
but it was not so demanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS DLAMINI:  So I took more accountability and activity on 
the business productivity program.  So I was Shared 
Services Senior General Manager. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you report to Ms Molefe? 
MS DLAMINI:  I reported to Ms Molefe yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Yes then Ms Dlamini 
let us go right into what Ms Molefe has said and you deal 
20 
with that aspect in your affidavit.  Being that on the 10 
March 2015 you received telephone calls from Mr Koko.  If 
you could please tell the Chairperson where were you when 
the calls were received and what were your activities at the 
time of the telephone calls being received from Mr Koko? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 12 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes.  So Chair it was – it was the week of 
the 9 March so we had a finance strat session – strategy 
session where we – we went as a finance team.  So Ms 
Molefe as the Chief Financial Officer had probably nine or 
ten people reporting to her and I was one of them.  
 
So we had scheduled in time to be spending two 
days at a venue called – at the time it was called Eskom 
College I think it is now called Eskom Academy of 
Learning.  We were scheduled to spend two full days the 
9 t h and the 10 t h at the venue with the assistance of a 
10 
facilitator to go through this finance strategy session. 
 
The 9 t h – the 9 t h being the first day started late.  
We did not start early.  I cannot remember but we started 
probably close to midday so we went on for most of – well 
for the rest of the day once we stared. 
 
And we continued on the 10 t h – we started – I think 
we started on time on that day.  And we broke – we took a 
break for lunch I think it would have been around twelve 
because the program was then packed having lost a day 
the day before. 
20 
 
So we – we went for lunch and the lunch was in the 
same venue. So we had board rooms downstairs and I think 
the lunch venue you had to go upstairs.  We spent about 
an hour there. 
 
 So when we finished, we were to start you know 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 13 of 185 
 
around about one I think it was.  So we were to start and I 
received a call as we were walking back to the venue and 
we were walking in a group.   
 
Ms Molefe was there and the other team members – 
the colleagues were – we were walking together.  And in – 
I picked up the call and it was Mr Koko and he then asked 
as much as I might not report – repeat it word for word but 
he enquired where I was and I indicated I was there at a 
strategy session at Eskom College. 
 
He requested that I meet with him at Melrose Arch 
10 
quite urgently.  And my response was well we are at a 
strategy session I may not be able to leave right now.  And 
I think we had quite – it was quite a quick conversation and 
it sounded urgent. 
 
And at that moment because we were walking in a 
group and Ms Molefe was there and instinctively there was 
no conversation before that.  I then said to her, do you 
know what is happening at Melrose Arch because I have 
just received a call from Mr Koko.  And really it was to 
determine whether it was critical that I go there given that 
20 
generally when you are at a strategy session it is usually a 
period that you try not to disturb with work issues. 
 
And because in my role in Shared Services and 
Business Productivity Program I worked with all the 
executives across – across.  It was a function – well both 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 14 of 185 
 
functions required that I support the business across – so I 
did have a lot of interaction with various executives at 
different times.  And therefore, to check the importance of 
the requirement to be at Melrose Arch with Ms Molefe was 
just to assist if it would be okay for me to leave and – and 
would she know what was happening there. 
 
So that was quite a quick conversation because it 
was just as the facilitators were waiting for us to start.  
And I then did indicate to him that I – I cannot actually 
leave the strategy session right now and I have engaged 
10 
Ms Molefe.  It is not advisable that I leave.  So that was 
the engagement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Could you tell the Chairperson your – 
you say you were working with a number of executives but 
you have also earlier said to the Chairperson that you 
reported to Ms Molefe, is that correct? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes functionally Chair I reported to Ms 
Molefe because I was part of the finance team and 
generally the projects I was leading were led in the finance 
space. 
 
However 
because 
issues 
were 
around 
how 
20 
operations were run and each of the divisions had their 
own finance functions and a lot of decisions to make the 
projects successful needed executives. 
 
I did interact a lot.  I mean if you look at the Shared 
Services Centre it had a significant HR leg and it meant 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 15 of 185 
 
that I was interacting with the HR team not only the 
executives but also the general managers below. And 
basically the whole organisation. 
 
If you look at the business productivity program it 
touched on maintenance issues in terms of how efficiently 
we were to do maintenance.  It touched on primary energy 
issues in terms of coal procurement and so on.  So indeed 
I – I interacted with all executives generally in my role. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  When you say you interacted with 
them does that mean or does not that you are reporting to 
10 
them because you used the word functional reporting to Ms 
Molefe.  What would you use in relation to the other 
executives?  Is it just interacting with them? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes – so functionally I reported to Ms 
Molefe because  
1. Any leave approval on my whereabouts were under 
her leadership. 
But in terms of the delivery on the projects everybody was 
relevant and therefore I – I could be engaging an executive 
that is responsible for maintenance or even procurement to 
20 
understand how they were doing in that division in relation 
to the program that we were running.  So when I say I 
interacted it was also in line with the function of making 
sure that the projects that I was running with were 
delivered.   
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 16 of 185 
 
 
I mean in Shared Services for instance if there was 
an issue with a vehicle or fleet issue and a particular 
division had issues I had to take responsibility and make 
sure issues were resolved.   
 
If a supplier was not paid in a particular division 
and the complaint arose I had to take a lead in and 
showing that the issue is resolved.  So because the 
functions were led in finance but were – were impacting 
the whole business we – we interacted with all executives 
in that sense. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  So you are with your functional 
what? 
MS DLAMINI:  Functional executives. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Supervisor / manager. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja your functional person you report to 
you are being called at this stage in a strategy session.  
You are in a strategy session with the person you are – 
report to.  You have been called by Mr Koko you say and 
he is calling you to join him where he was?  If you nod just 
say yes. 
20 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes.  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes was he already at Melrose Arch?  Do 
you know that that was the position or was he somewhere 
with a view to also proceeding to that venue?  Is that 
something that transpired in the discussion? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 17 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:  Well not in that detail Chair but in the way 
that he indicated that it was urgent it sounded like he was 
already there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay.  Yes continue.  Oh ja 
you then – you said you did not think you could join him 
because you – you were still busy in the session, is that 
right? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes Chair.  So – because we had a full day 
session at the Eskom College I indicated that I cannot join 
your meeting because I am currently in a session.  And in 
10 
fact I checked with Ms Molefe basically to understand what 
was happening and to assess if it was something she knew 
about and whether it was something she believed I could 
leave the strategy session because Chair what would 
happen in certain instances you could be in a meeting with 
one executive but if you make an example of an issue that 
needed to be unlocked immediately and a particular 
executive needed that support it would happen that you 
leave one meeting to go – and because it was a full day 
strategy session if it was a case you can leave this for 
20 
thirty minutes and then come back because it does happen 
in strategy sessions where people have got urgent matters 
they leave and come back.  But it was to assess for me 
whether the request from Mr Koko was more important than 
what Mr – Ms Molefe required us for at the college. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 18 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and what did Ms Molefe say in 
response to you? 
MS DLAMINI:  No her response Chair was no you cannot 
go we need to be here for the day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Going back to the conversation you 
had with Mr Koko.  What did he say to you once you had 
told him that you did not think that you would be able to 
join him because you were busy in this session? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes.  Chair so I- I think in that short space 
of time I did give him feedback that I actually cannot go – I 
10 
cannot leave the meeting I am at now.  And it – to my 
recollection it was around that time when I said I cannot 
join that he actually asked that I send him my CV in the 
meanwhile. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And what did you – did you agree to 
send him your CV? 
MS DLAMINI:  So we were rushing to – to the venue at the 
time and to my recollection I did say well I can send you 
the CV but I cannot join.  But I had not assessed what it 
was about because it was – I think when I – I just reflect it 
20 
was a period of less than ten minutes from us walking from 
the venue of lunch to get into the venue of the strategy 
session and needing to start and having to check with Ms 
Molefe and go back.  So it was quite a quick conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  So you – but you did ultimately 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 19 of 185 
 
send him the CV on that day? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes – So Chair we were at the Eskom 
College and I had my laptop and to my recollection I 
forwarded it to him.  But because it was a strategy session 
Chair ordinarily you do not keep laptops and cell phones 
on.  So I – I think I tried at some point to send it because 
you would have had a tea break somewhere in between.  
So I think I tried to send it but what then happened later is 
that as we were closer to finishing the session he followed 
up having not received it.  And it might have been a case 
10 
of the network or because we were not at our workstations 
as such. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Just quickly Ma’am 
Dlamini the – you were being called from one meeting to 
the next if there is something urgent and you would come 
back.  But would this – would that be in a situation like this 
where an executive – Group Executive is calling you to 
come outside of your work premises? 
MS DLAMINI:  So Chair Eskom itself had many venues.  
20 
We were based at Megawatt. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But may I add this?  Sorry may I add 
this?  Outside of your work premises to a shopping mall or 
a shopping centre something unrelated – a premise 
unrelated to Eskom? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 20 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:  So it was a rare thing Chair it – I would not 
say it had happened many times.  So as much as Eskom 
had Megawatt Park and other venues in Sunninghill and 
other areas generally it would be – it would be you are 
called; you are in Sunninghill you are called to come and 
meet an executive in Megawatt Park or it could be in – in – 
so we had offices in Pretoria, Menlyn and so on.  But it 
was not – it was the first time that I got called to a venue 
like that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So this would have been strange 
10 
to you that you should meet him at Melrose Arch?  It would 
have been a strange request? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes.  Chair… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or unusual. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So not – not – so not straight because 
we – we were supporting executives with our functions.  
And – so maybe – and maybe that is – maybe it was a bit – 
a bit unique or different or unusual hence I decided to 
check what could be happening there and it is not a venue 
that even at my – in my personal capacity I would have 
20 
frequented that at any point in time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So when… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say you did not – you did not get 
a chance to ask him the reason for him to ask you to go to 
that venue?  Did you say you did not get to ask him that? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 21 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:  So in that – in that few minutes of 
conversation Chair I would have asked but you know it was 
– I do not think there was a straight answer to say there is 
this happening.  It was come it is quite urgent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS DLAMINI:  But as I say it was a short time and it 
sounded very urgent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ja. 
MS DLAMINI:  When I – when I say – I said I could not 
come and when I actually checked with Ms Molefe what 
10 
was happening.  So it was quite a quick conversation.  I 
did check you know.  Because generally when you are 
called for a meeting you also want to just assess what you 
need to prepare in terms of the various activities you might 
be working on.  So I did ask but I do not think I necessarily 
got a specific response. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  When he asked for your CV did 
you ask him the reason for him asking for your CV? 
MS DLAMINI:  Yes so – so Chair because of the sequence 
where – so he says come it is urgent and I say I cannot 
20 
come.   And he says; okay in the meanwhile you can send 
me your CV.  I – and I may not recall specifically because 
the conversation again was quick.  So I probably did ask 
but I do not recall a response.   
Now 
again 
for 
an 
executive 
to 
ask 
for 
your 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 22 of 185 
 
information like that was not a frequent thing but it had 
happened to me before because I think in 2009 or so or – 
no 2010 I was nominated for an Executive of the Year and 
it so happened that there was a request for me to provide 
information which was talking about my history; my career 
and it – so it is not a usual – frequent thing but it had 
happened 
to 
me 
once 
before 
and 
I 
provided 
that 
information.   
And then I realised it was for the citation for the 
award process and this was another round.  And it being 
10 
asked by an Executive it was not a usual thing but it was 
not something that was asked by a stranger of me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You say you tried to send the CV and 
you think there was... there might have been a connection 
issue.  Mr Koko followed up.  Could you tell the Chairperson, 
when you say he followed up, what does he say to you?  Is 
he following up by telephone call? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe let us put it this way.  After you 
had this conversation with Mr Koko and you checked with Ms 
Molefe and Ms Molefe said no, she needed you to be in the 
20 
session and therefore you did not go to Melrose Arch.  Did 
you and Mr Koko speak to each other later in the day? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes.  So Chair, what actually happened is.  
So I did not go at lunch time.  I went back to the session.  
And I think in between, I attempted to basically to forward 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 23 of 185 
 
the CV at the time.   
 
Then later in the day, I think the session would have 
finished around five, five-thirty.  He followed up and 
requested that we meet later in the day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He called you? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Koko? 
MS DLAMINI:   Mr Koko called again to require that we meet 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to say roundabout what time 
10 
this might have been? 
MS DLAMINI:   So it would have been Chair, as the session 
finished which was around... with... I think it was anytime 
from five-thirty onwards but before six-thirty. 
CHAIRPERSON:   After five? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And did you meet them? 
MS DLAMINI:   So I was in Midrand already because the 
Eskom ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You were? 
20 
MS DLAMINI:   I was in Midrand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   Midrand has... that is where the Eskom 
Academy of Learning is.  So we were there in the venue 
and...[intervenes]  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 24 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is where the session...? 
MS DLAMINI:   That is where the session was held. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Yes.  That is the session with Ms 
Molefe and her team. 
MS DLAMINI:   Ms Molefe and the team. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   And therefore, he did follow up later and 
requested that we meet.  And to my recollection because it 
was not even a long meeting, hardly a 20-minutes meeting.   
 
On my way from the Eskom College, home, I met him on 
10 
the way.  It might have been a café or a McDonald’s 
restaurant but it was on my way after the session. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, the two of you made arrangements 
and you met on your way home. 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you cannot remember whether it was 
at KFC or at McDonald’s but one of the two? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And how did the conversation go 
this time? 
20 
MS DLAMINI:   So in that conversation Chair, still he was 
following up that he did not receive the CV.  And because I 
had not had a comprehensive conversation...   
 
I do recall I left the car with my laptop to go into the 
venue where we were meeting and it was still about following 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 25 of 185 
 
up about the CV, which I again checked, and it seemed he 
had not received.   
 
What I do recall is that as I tried to check if I sent it, he 
did give me an alternative email address to say try and send 
it in this address and that was the conversation.   
 
And at that point I was also trying to find out what was 
happening that required this information.  And at that point in 
time, he related that there were suspensions that were going 
to happen and he was also getting suspended.   
 
And he indicated that I might be asked to act in that 
10 
role, in the role.  Because there was, not in those words, 
there was chance that the FD was also in the list of 
suspensions.   
 
Because if you just look at the Eskom role’s at executive 
level, they are very technical.  Engineers per division and 
then the support function.  The functions in the Finance, HR.   
 
So he indicated that he was getting suspended and there 
were other executives that were getting suspended.  And that 
is when it transpired.   
 
But when we had the conversation, it did not end with 
20 
him telling me who had requested that he requests my CV.  
And the fact that he also was aware that he was also getting 
suspended.   
 
And I know I tried to go there to understand, you know, 
why are the suspensions coming, what has happened.  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 26 of 185 
 
Because I was not Chair aware. 
 
 
And as much as I have not listened to all what has 
happened in the commission but I was not aware of the 
activities from the 6t h to the 10t h when I got a call.   
 
I was not aware of all those activities.  I was just 
continuing with my daily activities until I got that call from Mr 
Koko to go to Melrose Arch.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So he said he was going to be suspended 
and he said there was a possibility that the financial director 
would be suspended as well? 
10 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair and other executives as well.  But 
he... I do not think he necessarily gave me the numbers of 
how many ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, what I wanted to find out whether 
those are the only names he mentioned in connection with 
suspension, namely himself and the financial director and he 
did not mention anybody else. 
MS DLAMINI:   To my recollection. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Did you... did he indicate how 
many people were going to be suspended? 
20 
MS DLAMINI:   No, I do not recall specifically ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   ...him giving me all the names or that were 
going to be so many. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 27 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:   But I know he did mention himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   And he did mention that the finance director. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did you say he said that there was a 
possibility that you could be asked act in the position of the 
financial director? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes.  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  What else transpired during 
that conversation? 
MS DLAMINI:   Chair, that really was the focus of him 
10 
wanting to meet with... there was not much more that we 
discussed.  I think we were not in that...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MS DLAMINI:   ...venue for more than 20-minutes because 
the first part was to try and open my laptop and get the CV 
to go.  And then the other discussion was the suspension.  
So it was not a long conversation or a long time in that 
discussion.  So there was not much else that transpired. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did he tell you during this meeting who 
you were going to have met in Melrose Arch if you had made 
20 
yourself available for that meeting during the day? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, he did not.  And I did not ask either. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   Because in the discussion... you know, the 
Melrose Arch, I... it was him that called and I was not even 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 28 of 185 
 
aware who was with him.  So I did not necessarily explore 
there, how many people.   
 
But I got therefore a sense that it means the reason that 
he needed to meet me, probably is what he was going to 
discuss with me at Melrose Arch.  But no, I did not ask the 
question who was at Melrose Arch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So Ma’am Dlamini, 
we... you confirming to the Chairperson that this was on the 
10t h of March 2015? 
10 
MS DLAMINI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC:   This 
meeting 
is 
on 
the 
10t h of March 2015. 
MS DLAMINI:   Oh, yes.  Yes, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You confirm to the Chairperson, your 
meeting with Mr Koko is in the evening... on the evening of 
that day, the 10t h of March 2015.  Correct? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  You confirm that he meets with 
you, requesting you to provide him with your CV.  Correct? 
20 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And he, in the process, he tells you that 
he is going to be suspended along with other executives but 
he does not give you the number.  You say you cannot 
recall? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 29 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair not to my recollection. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But he does indicate to you that the FD 
will be one of those executives and there is a possibility that 
you might be asked to act in her position. 
MS DLAMINI:   That is correct, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   With regard to the FD, did you put... did 
he say she would be one of those to be suspended or she 
would be suspended?  Or did she... did he say there was a 
possibility that she could also be suspended?   
 
I thought earlier on you said... he said there was as 
10 
possibility that the FD could also be suspended.  Do you 
remember exactly what he said? 
MS DLAMINI:   Ja, Chair I think it was along the lines there 
is a possibility that the FD is going to be suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Did you... two things.  
One is your CV.  In that meeting now with him, do you ask 
him:  Why do you want my CV? 
MS DLAMINI:   I did Chair.  So I did because it was very 
clearly urgent in the way that he needed it.  But I did ask.  
20 
And again, him being the executive at Exco and I basically 
operated one level below him.   
 
It was not an interrogation in:  I will not give you unless 
you tell me why you need me.  I was just trying to 
understand what was happening that would require my CV. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 30 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Because you were not applying for 
a job, were you? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, not internally Chair.  I was outside. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Now, was he aware that you are 
applying for a job? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, he was not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did you ask him to source a job for you? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, I did not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So... I mean, if you are asking him:  But 
why do you want my CV?  It is not you want to interrogate 
10 
him.  It is just that you want to know where is my CV going?  
Did you not want to know? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, I did.  And I... as I indicated, I did ask 
what it was going to be used for.  So what... and what was... 
Chair, what transpired therefore is that when he indicated 
that there was an issue of suspensions and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The possibility that you could be asked to 
act. 
MS DLAMINI:   The possibility that I could be asked to act. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MS DLAMINI:   And he did not necessarily indicate who was 
asking him to collate CV’s.  Because one issue was:  Why is 
it that my CV is required?  And the indication was that there 
is a possibility that you may be asked to act.   
 
And Chair, at that moment, my thoughts would have 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 31 of 185 
 
been, it is probably a process that the board is coordinating, 
that 
he 
is 
coordinating 
for 
the 
board 
because 
any 
suspensions would be ideally handled at board level.   
 
But I was not having a direct interaction with the board 
around a matter like that.  But having... knowing that he was 
an Exco member and Exco interacted with the board, as 
much as he did not give direct responses and had requested 
though my CV, my assumption was that he was probably 
working with the board.   
 
Not in a sense that it was necessarily me that was 
10 
definitely going to act because we have heard a number of 
scenarios where the finance director left and another 
executive acted.   
 
So we had quite a capable team at different times 
because I do recall that when one director left or finance 
director left, it was a period of six months where someone 
else acted.  
 
So it was along the lines of there is a possibility.  You 
are going to be acting.  There is suspension.  So I was not 
sure if he was collating of the board various information but 
20 
there was not a direct response. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So are you saying to the Chairperson, 
you understood his request for your CV to relate to the 
possibility of you going to act in the position of FD?  You 
made that connection.  Is that what you are saying to eh 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 32 of 185 
 
Chair? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair because at that moment, that was 
the only conversation that we had.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   I was not looking for a job.  I was not aware 
of any other activity. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And are you saying to the Chairperson 
that you got the impression that he is doing this exercise, 
the collation of CV’s, on behalf of the board? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair that was the only assumption I 
10 
could make because a process would be managed at board 
level.  So I would not know who would be.  But a process 
that affects executives would be driver at board level. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And in this case, the FD is still in 
her place.  Your functional line of reporting.  She is still in 
her place.  So she has not left. 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   She was there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This, which makes it even more strange, 
20 
is it not? 
MS DLAMINI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now, I am talking about the example.  
You were saying somebody, the FD had left previously and 
somebody acted in their position.  But in this case, the FD is 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 33 of 185 
 
still there and you are told beforehand of the possibility of a 
suspension, the possibility of you acting.  All these things 
have not happened.   
MS DLAMINI:   That is correct, Chair.  They have not 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But is it not how it would work Mr Seleka?  
You would not wait until the FD is out before you look for 
CV’s.  You would look for CV’s before she leaves to see who 
is going to act because you might not suspend her if you do 
not have somebody to act.   
10 
 
So that would be my expectation that the CV’s would be 
asked for before the FD is suspended.  Because as the 
board or whoever, the authority, it would be irresponsible to 
suspend without knowing whether you will get a suitable 
person to act in that position. 
MS DLAMINI:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair they will tell us when they 
come here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because we understood that the 
20 
suspensions by the board itself had not been decided.  At 
least as of the 10t h of March 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but it is clear from what... from the 
evidence I have heard that there were certain people who 
were contemplating that the executives would be suspended.  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 34 of 185 
 
So I think they were doing their homework.  Yes.  Okay let us 
continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Dlamini, the 
meeting you had with Mr Koko, when you were at home, is it 
at Melrose Arch or somewhere else? 
CHAIRPERSON:   She said at KFC or McDonald’s on her 
way home.  I take it could not have been Melrose Arch.  Was 
it, Ms Dlamini? 
MS DLAMINI:   Ja, Chair I never went to Melrose Arch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MS DLAMINI:   Because at the time, I was asked to go.  It 
was around midday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS DLAMINI:   And it was that moment I was walking with 
the team back to the venue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  And Melrose... the KFC or McDonald’s 
that you talked about would be in Midrand or where would it 
be? 
MS DLAMINI:   Chair, it would have been around Midrand 
and I was trying to recall which one it would have been. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS DLAMINI:   Because it was just on the way.  I just could 
not figure out which one it was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, do not worry ...[intervenes]  
MS DLAMINI:   Which one ...[intervenes]  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 35 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not think it is important which one it 
was. 
MS DLAMINI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Seleka, let us make some 
progress. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Yes.  Mr Dlamini, you 
have seen Mr Koko’s affidavit.  And I want to read from the 
paragraph where he refers to you.  You will recall he says 
about you: 
“Ms Nonkululeko Dlamini was not only a colleague 
10 
but a family friend.  I called her on the day...” 
 
And the day he refers to is the 10t h of March 2015. 
“...and we met for dinner in the evening in Midrand.  
I deny that I called her to come to Melrose Arch.  Ms 
Nonkululeko Dlamini and I were very surprised when 
she was appointed the acting CFO after Ms Molefe 
was suspended.” 
 
Let us deal with ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Where are you reading from?  
Where do you find Mr Koko’s affidavit? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, it is in one of the exhibit bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, not in this bundle? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is not in this bundle.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is... I do not think the Chairperson will 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 36 of 185 
 
have it with him.  But let me provide the Chairperson with... 
ja, it is in the bundle that I do not think the Chairperson will 
have there.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think they must try and get maybe that 
bundle so that if I may need to check anything.  I might pick 
up something else that I might want to have clarified by Ms 
Dlamini.  But you can give me what you have.  What you can 
give me in the meantime if you have got a spare? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I do have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I do have, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I beg leave to hand it up which is the 
affidavit of Mr Matshela Moses Koko.  I have opened to the 
paragraph I am reading from.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So Ms Dlamini, it looks like Mr Koko 
denies that he called you and then asked you to go to a 
meeting at Melrose Arch on the 10t h.  What do you say about 
that? 
MS DLAMINI:   Chair, on the basis that the time the call 
20 
came which was around lunchtime and on the basis that I 
doubt I would have dreamt up and decided to tell Ms Molefe 
that I am being called to Melrose Arch.   
 
Because it was not something I had kind of rehearsed 
and knew that there was a meeting at Melrose Arch.  Mr 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 37 of 185 
 
Koko did call me around lunch time and requested that I 
meet with him at Melrose Arch.  So I am not sure 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So you are definite that he called you and 
that what he said to you during that conversation is what you 
have told me? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  What about what he is saying 
that the two of you did have dinner that evening, namely the 
evening of the 10t h of March? 
10 
MS DLAMINI:   Ja, Chair we met but we did not have dinner.  
It was a conversation or a meeting about...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And you said it took about 20-minutes? 
MS DLAMINI:   Ja, it was not a long meeting.  It was about 
20-minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Then he 
further says Ms Dlamini: 
“I was very surprised.  Ms Dlamini and I were very 
surprised that she was appointed the acting CFO 
20 
after Ms Molefe was suspended.” 
 
Your comment to that to the Chairperson. 
MS DLAMINI:   Ja.  So Chair, as I indicated.  My history with 
Eskom.  I started in 2003 and I started working closely with 
Mr Koko as I started in 2006 in the Build Programme.  He 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 38 of 185 
 
was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Ms Dlamini.  What paragraph 
are you reading from Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Ms Dlamini, that is the last 
sentence in the paragraph 47.  Just... Mr Koko is saying, you 
and him were surprised. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just hang on one second.  I just want to 
know because I have been looking for it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I realised that... okay alright. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay continue Ms Dlamini.  You were 
responding to Mr Koko’s assertion that the two of you were 
very surprised when you were appointed acting FD.  What do 
you say to that? 
MS DLAMINI:   Ja.  So Chair, we... as I indicate.  Even in 
the sentence that talks about knowing each other.  I have 
known him since I have started in the Build Programme.  And 
I worked with the team, he led with him and other people.   
 
So we worked together from 2006 in different roles.  And 
20 
the question of being surprised.  When the announcement... 
or rather, when we were called to act, he was not there.   
 
I actually did not see him since that evening until we 
were called in the boardroom on the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The 11t h of March? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 39 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:   In fact, I think we were called on the 12t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 12 t h? 
MS DLAMINI:   So I may confuse the dates. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   Because we were on the 10t h at the college 
and the suspensions, I think, happened on the 11t h and we 
were called in the morning of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   12. 
MS DLAMINI:   ...12 March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MS DLAMINI:   And we were called by the... I received a call 
from the company secretary, Mr Malesela Phukubje and 
indicating that the chairperson of the board needed to see us 
or see me in the board room.  And in the board room there 
was a few board members.  It was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, leave out who was there.  What 
do you say what he says?  He says the two of your were 
surprised.  Were you surprised that you were appointed as 
acting FD? 
MS DLAMINI:   So Chair, it was not a surprise because I 
20 
have heard it from Mr Koko ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   ...on the 10t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now when he says the two of you 
were surprised that you were appointed as acting FD, it 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 40 of 185 
 
gives the impression that when you got the news, you were 
together.  Were you together with him when you got the news 
that you were going to be appointed as acting FD? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, I was not Chair.  And that is why I am 
explaining how it happened because we were called into a 
boardroom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   But he was not in the office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS DLAMINI:   He was not in the office. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was not there. 
MS DLAMINI:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you talk to him on that day, on the 
12t h? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not talk to him? 
MS DLAMINI:   Ja.  On that day, the activities just rolled into 
communicating with lenders and other people.  So I was not 
with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Did he call you either on that day, 
20 
namely the 12t h of the following day to congratulate you and 
the two of you had a discussion? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, not... he did not call to congratulate 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Did you ever at any stage convey to 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 41 of 185 
 
him that you were surprised that you were appointed to act 
as FD? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you do not know where he gets this 
idea from that you were surprised when you were appointed 
acting FD or do you? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, Chair.  So I do not know where he gets 
the idea because he... all the time, he had indicated and it 
was a definite thing yet.  And therefore, from the perspective 
of it happening.   
10 
 
Obviously, it was not a comfortable period.  It was not... 
it was a nerve wrecking period because a lot was happening 
in the organisation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   But it was not a case of, you know, you have 
been appointed.  Congratulations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS DLAMINI:   We are so surprised because we never had 
that conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know when he might have got to 
20 
know of your appointment as acting FD?  Do you know when 
he might have got the news? 
MS DLAMINI:   Chair, the news became public as soon as 
that morning because the media announcement was made by 
Eskom. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 42 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   I think on the same day and or if not later 
that day or the next day.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So he might have ...[intervenes]  
MS DLAMINI:   It was public knowledge.  But given that he 
had indicated the day, two days before, I would not know if 
he would have heard it then.  He would have heard but it 
actually happened through the news or through other means. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You understand why he would be 
surprised 
that 
you 
being 
appointed 
acting 
FD 
in 
10 
circumstances where, on your version, he is the one who had 
told you on the 10 t h that there was a possibility that you 
would be appointed acting FD?  You understand the 
statement on his part that he was surprised? 
MS DLAMINI:   No, I do not Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Dlamini, just one 
last point from my part.  I have shared with you the minutes 
of the meeting of 19 March.  Chairperson, you will find that 
in the reference bundle, page 222.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did I give you back the copy you gave 
me? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, Chairperson.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Oh, I am sorry.  Let me just have a 
look before I give back.  Yes? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 43 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Reference Bundle, page 222.  That is 
Eskom Bundle 24.  Sorry, Eskom Bundle 12.  Chair, my I 
proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   May I proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  On page 224, it is a minute of a... 
this is a minute of a Special Board In-Committee Meeting 
held on 19 March 2015.  This is the Eskom Board.  And on 
page 224, which is page 3 of the minute, at the top of the 
10 
page, it reads... the paragraph says: 
“The chairperson accepted blame for the failure to 
take the board, as well as the fact that work that 
was already being done e.g. interviews, et cetera.” 
 
Then the paragraph I am referring you to is this one: 
“The people who were acting in places of the 
suspended executives were allegedly called into a 
meeting and knew beforehand that they would be 
acting.  The board needed to find out how this 
happened.  They were apparently called into a 
20 
meeting and the acting CE met with them.” 
 
Do you have any comment on this? 
MS DLAMINI:   Chair, in terms of the acting.  My knowledge 
came through the engagement I had with Mr Koko on the 
10t h.   
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 44 of 185 
 
 
I had not been in any meeting with the acting CE and I 
have not been in any meeting with any other people before 
the acting was announced.   
 
I actually was in the meeting with them for the first time 
in the boardroom when the chairperson of the board was 
relating the suspensions and requesting the acting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who would have been the acting CE at 
the time, 19 March 2015? 
MS 
DLAMINI: 
 
 
Chairperson, 
when 
the 
suspensions 
happened, Mr Zethembe Khoza was then asked to act as the 
10 
interim Chief Executive.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  For how long did you act in 
the position of FD? 
MS DLAMINI:   Chair, I acted... I think the announcement 
came out on the 12t h when we were asked.  And I acted until 
end of July but I resigned from Eskom on the 1s t of May but I 
acted as well when I was serving my notice. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Until the end of July 2015? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, those are the questions 
20 
from my side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Thank you very much, Ms 
Dlamini.  You are done definitely.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am.  [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Ja, okay.  I take it that there is 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 45 of 185 
 
nothing that counsel for Ms Dlamini really would like to re-
examine on.  Maybe just take instruction, miss.  Counsel, I 
doubt that you have any re-examination? 
ADV STUBBS:   I beg your pardon, Deputy Chief Justice.  It 
almost feel strange to be sitting whilst speaking to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. [laughing] 
ADV STUBBS:   So I apologise for that.  I do have just one 
corroborating affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV STUBBS:   But I would ask you, Mr Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV STUBBS:   Not to hand up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV STUBBS:   But to refer to Ms Dlamini as corroboration 
of her version of events about the phone call at Melrose 
Arch.  And that... I do not know the bundle or the pages but 
perhaps my learned friend might help me.  It is Ms Molefe’s 
affidavit.  In her affidavit, I believe, that she confirms Ms 
Dlamini’s version. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, she does.  She was here yesterday.  
20 
She confirmed so.  That is in order. 
ADV STUBBS:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not have to ask or re-examine on 
that. 
ADV STUBBS:   Thank you, Chair.   
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 46 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you very much, Ms 
Dlamini.  We appreciate that you came to assist the 
Commission.  You are now excused. 
MS DLAMINI:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think we should take the tea adjournment 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that you can arrange for the next 
10 
witness. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will take the tea adjournment and we 
will resume at half-past eleven. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS: 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, during the 
20 
adjournment it came to our attention that we needed to 
canvass just one last aspect with Ms Veleti and we have 
requested her to remain for a while.  She currently agreed 
and she is still here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.   
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 47 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are still dealing with that bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let her get settled first. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The oath that you took earlier on, Ms 
Dlamini, will continue to apply.  You understand that? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page was her statement again? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are still Eskom bundle. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Number 21? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Veleti – Dlamini’s affidavit is on 
page 411 of Eskom bundle 10.  Ms Veleti, an annexure to 
the affidavit is on page 417 which we would …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say, Mr Seleka, earlier that this 
was an annexure to her affidavit? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is not an annexure as such, 
Chairperson, it is a standalone document which was 
20 
provided to her by the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Oh 
because 
then 
it 
should 
be 
…[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mark it as an exhibit? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It would need to be an exhibit on its own 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 48 of 185 
 
but you might have to reflect on the need to get a 
technician or expert to come and identify what this is so 
that 
it 
gets 
admitted 
from 
cell 
phone 
providers 
or 
somebody who has the technical know-how who can say 
what this is.  We all know what it is but you need, I think, 
somebody technical to identify it and to confirm but you 
can go ahead and ask Ms Dlamini what you need to ask 
her. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Ms Dlamini, on page 417 
the 
Commission’s 
investigators 
have 
sourced 
this 
10 
information the details of which have been shared with 
you.   Could you confirm to the Chairperson that you have 
had – you have considered this document? 
MS 
DLAMINI: 
 
 
I 
have 
considered 
the 
document, 
Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The document, just for the purposes of 
the record, it contains a list of dates, of telephone calls 
that were made presumably – and I say presumably so that 
you 
could 
confirm 
that 
to 
the 
Chairperson 
between 
…[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well just indicate first what is the 
document as you understand it and who has provided it to 
the Commission?  Is the cell phone record produced by 
particular cell phone company? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is the cell phone records that would 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 49 of 185 
 
have been provided pursuant to an investigation by the 
Commission.  The …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But do we know who provided, is it a cell 
phone company? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The cell phone – it is mobile network 
operators, 
we 
see 
the 
number 
082, 
that 
would 
be 
presumably Vodacom and 083 being MTN.  Chairperson, we 
will obtain the affidavit to confirm the exact mobile 
operators that are involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, that is fine, just make sure you 
10 
obtain and affidavit from the right people who can say the 
right things for this to be admitted but I think for now you 
can ask Ms Dlamini questions on the understanding that 
this is a document provided by a cell phone company or a 
regulator reflecting or purporting to reflect calls made 
between certain numbers. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you, Chairperson.  Ms 
Dlamini, this documentation purports to reflect and we seek 
your confirmation in regard to some of the contents herein, 
telephone calls that would have been made during the 
20 
times – the dates specified on the far left which is from 9 
March 2015 to 12 March 2015 on the timestamps indicated 
telephone calls presumably having been made from a cell 
phone number 0828599334. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on.  It might be better no 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 50 of 185 
 
…[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not to mention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Publicly specify anyone’s cell phone 
number but you can indicate Ms Dlamini which number on 
the page you want to draw her attention to.  Maybe she can 
mention the last two digits of the number that you are 
particularly interested in or the numbers that you are 
particularly interested in. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair, that is – alternatively I will 
mention SCC 1, the cell number SCC1 and the cell number 
10 
SCC2.  Under SCC2, you see that Ms Dlamini? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, I see, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the SCC number 1 and SCC 
number – oh, you mean as a column? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right, as a column. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja, as a column. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In which event I will simply ask you 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you can always say count from the 
top from the first number at the top, count 1, 2, 3, 4 when 
20 
you reach 5.  That is the number I am interested in, then 
you can ask her. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So that first number, yes, under 
the column, as the Chairperson has indicated number 5 
which is the heading SCC1.  Without mentioning that cell 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 51 of 185 
 
number do you recognise the cell number, Ms Dlamini? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it number – what number is it, 5? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Column 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.  Yes, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is the number that appears as 
number 5 on the column described as SCC1. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct.  Do you recognise that cell 
number, Ms Dlamini? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, I do, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think one can say it is a number ending 
10 
with 34, is that right? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, whose number if that? 
MS DLAMINI:   It is Mr Koko’s cell number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you know it. 
MS DLAMINI:   As it is the number that I have contacted 
him on or, Chair, I know it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What time is that?  I think you must link 
20 
that – what time does it seem to – does that call seem to 
have been made? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can Ms Dlamini look at column 1, 2, 3, 
the third column under the heading SCC call time.  The 
times are listed there.  On the 9 t h, the first call is 16.29. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 52 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair.  And to the Chairperson’s 
question the call that I spoke to is on the 10 March at 
12.51.38 which was about a minute and 34 seconds. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I was – well, my – the 
number that appears at five relates to a call that was made 
at 10.38.  It looks like you went to 6 – I think it is the same 
number. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   So, Chair, 6 is the right call. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
10 
MS DLAMINI:   6 is the right call. 
CHAIRPERSON:   6 is the right one? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you look at the time. 
MS DLAMINI:   At line 6. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MS DLAMINI:   And the time is 12.51. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS DLAMINI:   38 seconds. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Okay, continue, Mr Seleka, 
20 
because we need to know which number called which 
number. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So, Chairperson, for your 
purposes, column SCC1 reflects one cell number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 53 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Throughout. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then the next SCC2 also reflects one 
cell number throughout. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I did not know that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So there is only two cell numbers here, 
Commissioner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Veleti then is – Ms Dlamini, I beg 
your pardon – then is referring the Chairperson to – now I 
am looking at the first entry under the 10 March 2015, the 
very first entry under 10 March 2015 with a timestamp at 
12.51 Tuesday.  If the Chairperson follows? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So she says to the Chairperson 
that is the call she would have received from Mr Koko.  Is 
that the first call you would have received from Mr Koko on 
the day? 
20 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us first see – now under SCC1, 
under that column, there is one number. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then under column SCC2 there is a 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 54 of 185 
 
different number. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Throughout.  The number that is the 
same number that appears throughout from the top to the 
bottom on the column referred to as SCC2, whose number 
appears under that column, Ms Dlamini, SCC2?  Do you 
know that number? 
MS DLAMINI:   That is my number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is your number? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Now, Mr Seleka, does this 
document reflect which number called which number? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Then the next column, 
Chairperson, immediately after number SCC2, the title is 
SCC person calling. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you see that, Ms Dlamini, as well? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And then the last column, it is headed 
SCC person called. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And then they give the name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So the document then, Ms Dlamini, 
reflects the calls made – should I mention the name, 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 55 of 185 
 
Chairperson, I suppose I could? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I should mention the name as it is 
reflected here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  So the document then, Ms 
Dlamini, reflects the telephone calls that would have been 
made by Mr Matshela Koko from the cell number we 
indicated 
under 
SCC1 
to 
yourself, 
person 
called, 
Nonkululeko 
Sylvia 
Dlamini/Veleti 
to 
the 
cell 
number 
10 
represented or reflected under column SCC2.  You follow 
that? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, that is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This reflects that, it seems to me, that 
there were numerous calls that were made by Mr Matshela 
Koko to you on the 10 March 2015, I think certainly more 
than six.  Do you recall whether that would be true? 
MS DLAMINI:   Chair, it does reflect a number of calls but 
when you look at column 4 which gives you the duration of 
the call, you will notice that a lot of those calls are 00, 
20 
which means there was no time of the call that we 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that you did not speak? 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 56 of 185 
 
MS DLAMINI:   So a lot of the calls indicate that there was 
attempt to call. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   But I was not reachable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS DLAMINI:   And other calls seem to be three seconds. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   Four seconds. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   And my assumption would be it might have 
10 
been going to voicemail or something. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay. 
MS DLAMINI:   So you will note that in this list of calls on 
the 10 t h indeed there is quite a number, in fact it is about 
20 something, only two calls are over a minute, it is the 
call that happened basically 6 – actually start from the top, 
it is line number 6, which was at 12.51.38 which was one 
minute 34 seconds which is with reference to the time 
when we were going back to the venue from the lunch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MS DLAMINI:   That conversation I referred to earlier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   And then if you further down you see a call 
later that is about …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   17.58. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 57 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chairperson, it is about 17.58.27 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That took three minutes. 
MS DLAMINI:   Which about three minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MS DLAMINI:   And it is around about when we finished the 
session. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that would tie up with your evidence 
that after you had finished the session the two of you were 
10 
in touch with each other. 
MS DLAMINI:   Which was the follow-up calls. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which was a follow-up call. 
MS DLAMINI:   To meet – and yes [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But this does reflect is that on the 
10 t h Mr Koko made numerous attempts to reach you. 
MS DLAMINI:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then he did reach you at – is it 
12.58?  12.51 and he reached you again at 17.58.  Those 
20 
are the only times he appears to have reached you.  The 
other times where it is only seconds you say that must 
have been when he went into voicemail. 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chair, because I do not recall talking 
to him that many times. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 58 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   But also when it is two seconds, once again 
it would not represent a conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   So I then assumed that it attempts but as I 
indicate, we were not necessarily with our cell phones and 
reachable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DLAMINI:   The whole day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Just on the 10 t h  …[intervenes] 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   My calculation, Ms Dlamini, gives me 
22 telephone calls on the 10 March. 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he tried to reach you about 22 times 
on the 10 March and there were two occasions when he 
was able to speak to you since. 
MS DLAMINI:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, that will be the evidence we 
wanted to place before you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you, very much, Ms 
Dlamini. 
MS DLAMINI:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are excused. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, the next witness is here, 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 59 of 185 
 
I will allow the assistant to just sanitise the place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who will it be? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is Mr Norman Baloyi.  Should I 
proceed 
to 
identify 
the 
bundle 
in 
the 
meantime, 
Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Should I proceed to identify the bundle 
in the meantime or should we first …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let him get settled and let us take the – 
administer the oath or affirmation. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MR BALOYI:   Norman Baloyi. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR BALOYI:   I have no objection. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give  
20 
will be the truth the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
NORMAN BALOYI:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you may be seated, Mr 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 60 of 185 
 
Baloyi. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson, Eskom bundle 
10 and under that bundle we are dealing with EXHIBIT 
U20.  Mr Baloyi, welcome.  Thank you, just keep your 
microphone on. 
MR BALOYI:   Thank you, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just housekeeping, Mr Baloyi, let me 
see whether you have the bundle I am referring to, that is 
Eskom bundle 10, EXHIBIT U20 and that is on page – you 
follow the pagination on your left, top left corner which is 
10 
the pagination in black.  They start with Eskom 10 and then 
the pagination number. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So we will disregard the pagination 
which is in red at the top right hand corner.  Do you see 
that? 
MR BALOYI:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that starts on page 302 and that is 
between tramlines an affidavit.  Do you see that: 
“I, the undersigned, Norman Baloyi...” 
20 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you see that?  That affidavit runs 
up to page 312. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I can see that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   There is a signature at the bottom of 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 61 of 185 
 
page 311, the page before. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you confirm that to be your 
signature? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, it is mine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The date is 7 September 2020, you 
confirm that as well? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, it is. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you confirm this to be your 
affidavit? 
10 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Chairperson – I do not 
think 
your 
affidavit 
has 
annexures, 
Mr 
Baloyi.  
Chairperson, I beg leave to have the affidavit admitted into 
evidence as EXHIBIT U20.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Norman Baloyi 
starting at page 302 is admitted and will be marked as 
EXHIBIT U20.1. 
AFFIDAVIT OF MR NORMAN BALOYI HANDED IN AS 
EXHIBIT U20.1 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Baloyi, 
you have agreed to assist the Commission in regard to an 
issue relating to the suspension of the executives at 
Eskom, correct? 
MR BALOYI:   I did not get the question. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 62 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have agreed to assist the 
Commission 
in 
regard 
to 
the 
issue 
relating 
to 
the 
suspension of the executives at Eskom. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That took place on 11 March 2015. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And 12 March 2015. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now a lot of evidence has been led 
before this Commission which I will relay to you so you can 
10 
confirm and we start with that a board – a new board is 
appointed on 11 December 2014 at Eskom. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The Commission has been told that 
you were one of the board members, newly appointed 
effective 11 December 2014.  
MR BALOYI:   Yes, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The Commission has also been told 
that the board went through an induction. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Process.  And maybe you could tell the 
Chairperson briefly at that induction what takes place and 
according to your recollection when was the board’s 
induction?  
MR BALOYI:   I will not recall the date but actually all the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 63 of 185 
 
workshops, strategic workshops and the strategic issues on 
the meetings were always held at Eskom Megawatt Park 
except when we were called by the Minister to Cape Town.  
So I presume it should have been in Megawatt Park, 
Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, just address the Chairperson.  
You presume…? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say the induction or induction 
workshops took place at Eskom offices? 
10 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I believe it was in Eskom offices, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   Because all activities that we always had at 
Eskom were always at the Megawatt Park. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Except when we were called by the 
Minister to Cape Town. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said you do not remember the date 
20 
when the induction took place but you remember the 
month.  Was it January 2014, was it February? 
MR BALOYI:   Uhm… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does January ’16 ring a bell as possible 
date? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 64 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   You know, I was checking my invitations this 
morning and all I could see were the invitations for 
committees and the board which happened to be cancelled.  
I will not recall exact date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   But what I know is that on the same day or 
around the second day because I was in Polokwane when I 
got a call that you have been appointed, we – the Minister 
wants to meet with you and I had to drive to Pretoria.  We 
all met there as new board members and the Pretoria office 
10 
of 
the 
Minister. 
 
So 
but 
that 
in 
itself, 
I 
will 
not 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
You 
cannot 
remember. 
 
Alright 
…[intervenes] 
MR BALOYI:   It happened not so long after. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, you know, talking of you being 
called and informed of your appointment, can you tell the 
Chairperson how did you become appointed on the board? 
MR BALOYI:   I think it was through the board nominations 
20 
and somebody nominated me to be in the board and in that 
particular day when we met the Minister the Minister said 
to me but, you see, I do not appoint people because I know 
them, I do not know you but I appointed you because I 
want – I like your skills and experience that you have 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 65 of 185 
 
acquired. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know who nominated you? 
MR BALOYI:   I think – I remember …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess you should know. 
MR BALOYI:   I will not know exactly but I think of the two 
I will not recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But do you know whether you were 
nominated or did you ever see a nomination? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes actually because I had to consent to the 
nomination. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I did …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it somebody that you did not know 
who nominated you? 
MR BALOYI:   It is somebody that I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is somebody that you know? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you cannot remember? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja because there were two people that did it 
at the same time but I can actually check my archives. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that’s strange, at that time were 
there a number of Boards on which you were serving? 
MR BALOYI:   In 2014 the one Board I can remember, I 
think they were not more than two, if they were two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 66 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   It was not a lot of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am just surprised that you – I thought 
maybe you were, you were sitting on many boards, 
therefore it might not be remembered who nominated you 
for which Board. 
MR BALOYI:   No actually because there are two people 
who usually nominate me so I would not want to mention 
their names without verifying, so among the two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, you don’t, you know their face but 
you don’t their names? 
10 
MR BALOYI:   No, no I know their names, I am saying that 
I can check shortly about who was – about who nominated 
me for Eskom Board, but they are people that I worked with 
before, they are people that – we know each other. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR BALOYI:   So I do not want to speculate who among 
the two . 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Baloyi so 
you get appointed on the Board, you go through an 
20 
induction period and you say you can’t recall exactly when 
did that take place.  Can you recall when was your first 
board meeting? 
MR BALOYI:   Because the first Board meeting that was 
scheduled for the 26 t h of February was cancelled, and was 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 67 of 185 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was the meeting of the 26 t h February 
going to be the first meeting of the Board? 
MR BALOYI:    It was going to be the first meeting of the 
Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, because prior to that there were 
committee meetings that were held. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before that? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, and I can recall that, it could have 
10 
been during the induction when we were listed to sit in 
different committees, because I – as I remember that I was 
actually was supposed to chair Audit and Risk Committee 
form the initial list that was given to us by the Chairperson 
of the Board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, so that meeting was cancelled, 
the Commission has been told that much, do you know 
what reasons were given for the cancellation? 
MR BALOYI:   There were no reasons that were given, but 
I think we were informed on the eve, or in the evening of 
20 
the meeting, around nine or ten o’clock somewhere, so it 
was an SMS from the Company Secretary. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   When was the next meeting of the 
Board? 
MR BALOYI:   The next meeting was on the 9 t h of March.  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 68 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can you please tell the Chairperson 
whether is that a scheduled board meeting? 
MR BALOYI:    I think yes it was a scheduled Board 
meeting if I remember, because we were having it for the 
first time that may not be 100% sure because actually 
during that particular meeting the main agenda was the 
issue of the inquiry. 
 
I remember that some of the Board members were 
not ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry, just clarify to the Chairperson, 
10 
what do you say may not be 100% sure?  
MR BALOYI:    No, no actually, because the meeting was 
short as far as I remember and Eskom Board meetings they 
usually take the whole day, even the committee meetings 
they usually take the whole day, but on that particular day I 
remember it was shorter meeting, it could have been a 
special meeting because in that particular meeting as far 
as I remember there was a concern by the Company 
Secretary that the Board needs to have its own meeting, 
because there have been committee meetings that the 
20 
Board hasn’t met and there’s a corporate plan that needs 
to be approved so that it can be effected on the 1 s t of April, 
and the deadline is an issue. 
 
So hence I am not 100% sure whether it was an 
ordinary meeting or it was a special meeting, but one thing 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 69 of 185 
 
is for sure is that it was a shorter meeting than the 
meetings, 
other 
people 
were 
not 
there, 
other 
board 
members were not there physically but we consulted 
telephonically or on video. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes the doctor said he called that 
meeting specially after he had attended a certain meeting 
in Durban so probably it was a special meeting. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes more likely because some people were 
on video, because the normal board meetings I mean we 
were usually informed on time and then we make ourselves 
10 
available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   And it is very rare that you’ve got some 
people being on video conference or teleconference, they 
would physically be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was discussed at the meeting of 
the 9 t h? 
MR BALOYI:   The main agenda item for the meeting was 
to set up the inquiry and the Board Chairperson, Mr Zola 
Tsotsi, he presented to us the theory or the background or 
20 
the need for this particular commission of inquiry that had 
to take place, so he said that he met with the President 
and he has also, and the President has met with the 
Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   President who? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 70 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   Mmm? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said he met with President who? 
MR BALOYI:    President Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, he said they met over the weekend 
and the meeting was on Monday, I think they could have 
met the day before, the way that I recall, but we met and 
then the President also had spoken to the Minister on the 
idea of having this type of inquiry, so like he met one or 
two occasions with the President and some of the meetings 
10 
could have been cancelled, but there was some interaction, 
because the President wants to have this particular issue 
of knowing exactly what is the state of affairs at Eskom, 
because the President had initiated through the cabinet, 
the war room and there are some reports that are not 
always accurate or whatever, so there’s a need that we get 
the true facts of them first of Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what was the reaction of the Board 
members on the 9 t h of March to Mr Tsotsi’s proposals? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, no single Board member actually 
20 
accepted their proposal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm? 
MR BALOYI:   No single board member accepted the 
proposal, because as I said earlier on that in Eskom 
there’s a volume of paper, a volume of work, even the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 71 of 185 
 
Board and the committee meetings there was always a 
volume of paper, so you could see that people are very 
busy, executives are very busy with day to day work and 
the feeling of the Board members were – was that to have 
this inquiry or this – ja, commission of some sorts, or to do 
that investigation it is going to consume more time for the 
executives because they are too much pressed and there 
are so many pressing issues and there is also a war room 
that are serving – the Boards that are serving the, the ones 
that are serving, so the feeling was that the timing is not 
10 
perfect, I mean and we still need to interrogate some 
documents, we need to interrogate some things because 
what we know now is what the executives have given us 
but we haven’t had time to interrogate this and that 
whether this is – whether it is the practice, so it was a 
feeling of many Board members that the timing is not good 
planning and then because he had mentioned the name of 
the President and the name of the Minister so there was a 
proposal that if we can meet with the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR BALOYI:   On Wednesday instead of Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, unless there is something still 
on the meeting of the 9 t h Mr Seleka I think you can go 
straight to the meeting of the 11 t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me just ask Mr Baloyi one 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 72 of 185 
 
question.   Mr Baloyi you talked about a proposal for the 
inquiry, 
that 
proposal 
according 
to 
your 
recollection 
involved the suspension of the executives on the 9 t h of 
March? 
MR BALOYI:   Actually the proposal as far as I remember, 
because there were issues of finance and so on and the 
Board chairperson said that our Minister will need to be 
consulted together with the Minister of Finance but it is 
better that we don’t speak to the Minister of Finance at this 
stage, the FD is going to deal with some of the issues of 
10 
the finances and so on, so there was no other proposal 
short of suspension, but people were just not happy with 
the issue of inquiry, ja, more especially that we were 
informed that there was already other inquiries that just 
took place, just before – during that particular time so – 
and they even executed the recommendations, so they 
extended time to execute the recommendations from the 
other inquiries of the executives.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, so you mentioned to the 
Chairperson the meeting on the – there was a proposal to 
20 
have a meeting with the Minister and that meeting took 
place on Wednesday 11 March 2015.  We understand that 
there was a couple of meetings, were a couple of meetings 
on that day, you can take us through those meetings. 
 
Firstly we understand it’s a meeting of the Board 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 73 of 185 
 
without the Minister, and then the Minister arrives and she 
has a meeting with the Board.  You can start with the first 
one. 
MR BALOYI:   Thanks Chair.  Yes we started with the 
Minister – oh no, we started with the Board meeting 
because the pressing issue was the Corporate Plan and I 
think it was being presented by the CEO, and during his 
presentation there was an interruption that the Minister is 
in and then the Board Chairperson went out and asked Ms 
Klein to take over as the Chairperson, and then we had to 
10 
wait, we had to continue until the Chairperson came back 
with the Minister, so – and then in that particular one the 
Minister did have a session, it was the second session 
actually, the board was already having their – which was 
not finished, which was going to be completed after the 
Minister has left. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What are the main features of the 
discussion at the Board meeting before the Minister arrived 
that you remember which you would like to highlight? 
MR BALOYI:   The main feature was the corporate plan. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Corporate plan? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, Corporate plan because it was 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That the CEO was presenting? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, actually yes, and it was supposed to 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 74 of 185 
 
have been the main agenda on the 26 t h of February. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 26 t h? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   And when you get to ...[intervenes]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry Chair, the stenographers are 
asking Mr Baloyi to speak louder, just drop the mic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and raise your voice sir. 
MR BALOYI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   So did you say when the 
10 
Minister arrived Mr Matona, the CEO was till presenting the 
corporate plan? 
MR BALOYHI:   Yes, they were still busy presenting, but it 
had to be stopped, so that we can attend to the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Raise your voice, I think your voice is 
quite low. 
MR BALOYI:   Okay, yes I think it had to be stopped 
because the Minister was – had arrived and was going to 
address us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay Mr Seleka?  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chairperson. So Mr Baloyi 
just tell the Chairperson on the Minister ’s arrival what 
happens in the meeting? 
MR BALOYI:    Ja, during the meeting actually the Minister 
told us that ...[intervenes]  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 75 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me say this, or carry on, carry on, 
sorry, I beg your pardon. 
MR BALOYI:    Okay, when the Minister came and we had 
to stop and attend to the Minister what I recall is that the 
Minister said to us that she has been protecting the 
executives of Eskom and that she ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   She said she had been protecting who? 
MR BALOYI:   The executives of Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The executives of Eskom? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did she say who she had been 
protecting them from? 
MR BALOYI:   No actually because there were issues of in 
– there were some issues from the war room, there were 
some, because they were providing information to the war 
room, providing information to the Board, so I think there 
was some question marks around some of the documents, 
so because I believe that the Minister was out of the war 
room and S & L because it was a cabinet related 
committee. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say you think there were issues 
relating to the information that the Executive provided to 
the war room, are you repeating what the Minister said at 
the meeting or is it something that you were aware of 
yourself, not necessarily that that’s what the Minister said? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 76 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:    No actually the main issue that she has 
raised or that happened before that is that I think it 
happened even on Monday, when we were at the meeting, 
when ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Baloyi, my question is when 
you 
say 
you 
think 
there 
were 
some 
issues 
about 
information that the executives had been giving to the war 
room, are you talking about issues that you were aware of 
or are you saying that’s what the Minister said at the 
meeting? 
10 
MR BALOYI:   Okay, actually Chairperson I am telling of 
what came to recollection because I am not sure whether 
the Minister referred to the war room issues, but what she 
said to us is that they have got – the issues of the access 
of information, there is something that the Board members 
were saying that we are ...[indistinct] some of the issues, 
so we don’t know whether the issues was that true or not 
true, because it could be the same thing with the war room 
because it was just established after us, and then the 
issue of the access of information is something that didn’t 
20 
come to the Board’s attention in a formal way, it was more 
of a speculation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is your answer to my question that 
you are not saying that that’s what the Minister said, you 
are simply telling me what you were aware of. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 77 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, it is something that I was aware of, 
because the Minister was part of the war room and then 
she was saying that she is more concerned about some 
issues ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No hang on, don’t tell me yet what the 
Minister said if you say this is not what the Minister said.   
You were aware that there were some issues relating to 
information that the executives were providing to the war 
room, is that what you are saying, at that time that’s what 
you were aware of? 
10 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How did you – what was your source of 
this information that there were issues about information 
that the executives had been providing to the war room? 
MR BALOYI:   I cannot say directly whether it was issues 
from the newspapers or issues from the Eskom media 
room, I cannot say with confidence of where exactly the 
issues were because I was not part of that war room, but – 
and we hadn’t had the Board meeting yet so those things 
that you pick from ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you don’t know where you got that 
information from? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes there was no ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you Chair.  Mr Baloyi the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 78 of 185 
 
way I heard you say was that the Board had gotten 
information which it had not interrogated so you were not 
sure whether you could rely on the information and you 
asked yourself what also about information regarding the 
war room. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Okay so but that explanation, if you 
give that explanation to the Chairperson it conveys the 
understanding that you in fact did not have before the 
Board 
issues 
regarding 
the 
war 
room, 
you 
simply 
10 
questioned what about given what I have, which I haven’t 
interrogated, what about the issues regarding the war 
room.  
MR BALOYI:   Yes, but there was no formal communication 
around that.  
ADV SELEKA SC:    Just speak louder again there was 
what?   
MR BALOYI:   Yes there was no specific information that 
was given to us about the war room, issues that we needed 
to 
be 
concerned 
about, 
but 
there 
was 
no 
formal 
20 
communication around it, it was more of speculation or 
something other people’s feelings about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, tell me the main points that the 
Minister made at that meeting which she had with the 
Board, if you remember that? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 79 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   The Minister said that she has been 
protecting Eskom Executives and she is tired of protecting 
them.  She wants to actually feedback and not protect them 
anymore because there have been issues about their work 
and she does not want to protect them anymore about the 
type of information and the type of work that they are 
doing, so she will not want to protect them anymore.  That 
was the main essence of the meeting, and then she also 
said that – when she left, because we did interrogate, we 
did speak to her about issues and so on – about our 
10 
understanding, about what she was coming for, because 
the main reason of her coming was on the issue of inquiry 
whether she is endorsing or she is initiating or she is 
supporting the inquiry that took place, because all Board 
members were not happy with it when it was presented 
...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what did she say about the inquiry? 
MR BALOYI:   She was supporting it and she said that she 
will want it, she will have an interim report within three 
months, she will want to have something from that inquiry 
20 
reported to her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Interim report or final report in three 
months. 
MR BALOYI:   It was mainly ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or just a report? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 80 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   It was a report actually, because it was 
anticipated that it will take more than three months but 
within three months there has to be something to be 
provided. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Did 
she 
address 
the 
issue 
of 
suspensions of executives? 
MR BALOYI:   Not directly as I remember, but from the 
feeling that she was saying, she was saying that she is not 
going to protect any executive anymore, so from my 
understanding is that there could be possible suspensions 
10 
of executives, from my reading of how she presented to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, just repeat that. 
MR BALOYI:   From the way that she spoke to us, she was 
endorsing the commission of inquiry and then she was also 
endorsing the issues of possible suspensions because she 
had ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh it wasn’t a commission of inquiry 
isn’t it? 
MR BALOYI:   Not a commission of inquiry, the commission 
is ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   About investigation. 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, by the President and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so are you saying that she touched 
on the suspension of executives of are you saying she did 
not address that issue? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 81 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   She said that she is not going to protect 
them and if we need anything from her we must not 
hesitate because she will not go far, she will go to the mall 
or so on, but whenever we need her during the day we are 
free to call her to come back or maybe clarification or 
maybe for information and so on, because she didn’t stay 
long with us, but from the presentation a person could 
sense that the issue of suspension is on the cards, but who 
was going to be suspended was a question mark, because 
we had to go and meet at the board meeting that had to 
10 
continue, so ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is now after the meeting with the 
Minister. 
MR BALOYI:  After the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but in terms of what was discussed 
between the Board and the Minister have you covered the 
main points? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, the main points were the endorsement of 
the inquiry and that we need not protect anyone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Mr Seleka?    
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Baloyi let’s see 
what you say about this Dr Ngubane has testified in his 
affidavit to this Commission, he says the Minister raised 
concerns about the executives, the four executives and she 
in the end said that they should step aside, and when the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 82 of 185 
 
Minister left the Board was now convinced that this is what 
the shareholder wants, the inquiry and the stepping aside 
of the executives.  What is your recollection in regard to 
that? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes actually the other thing that happened 
is that she asked the two executive directors to step out of 
the room, but before they could step out the CEO, Matona, 
said that he will want to see something before he leaves 
and then he told his story about how things are, the type of 
steps he is trying to do to rectify things or to go with the 
10 
process of work or the disadvantages that are supposed to 
be advantaged afterwards, so 
he did make a short 
presentation, maybe of two to three minutes, somewhere 
there, so and then they left and then it is when the Minister 
continued with the Board and your question is?  
ADV SELEKA SC:   The question is this, let me read what 
Dr Ngubane says to this Commission in his affidavit.  He 
says: 
“Did not direct the board to suspend the four 
executives she raised concerns of her own 
20 
against them  The concerns related to the 
War Room which she suggested complained 
was not receiving consistent information.  
The Minister then – the Minister felt that the 
presence of the four executives might hinder 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 83 of 185 
 
the investigation.” 
Then he says: 
“After the meeting with the Minister it was 
clear to the board that government and 
shareholder of Eskom required the inquiry to 
proceed and the four executives had to step 
aside whilst the inquiry was underway.” 
So I was asking is that consistent with your recollection? 
MR BALOYI:  My recollection is that only the three board 
members were – no the three executives were supposed to 
10 
be suspended. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes but my.. 
MR BALOYI:  Not four – the fourth one happened not to be. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
MR BALOYI:  He happened to be included afterwards by the 
PMG committee. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  So are you saying to the 
Chairperson you – it is consistent with your recollection that 
it was clear after the meeting with the Minister that the 
inquiry had to happen and that executives at least according 
20 
to your recollection three executives had to be suspended or 
step aside? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So he has four but you say you recall 
three? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 84 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  Yes it was three actually. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.   
MR BALOYI:  Yes it was three of that I am a hundred 
percent sure. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  May I proceed Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed.  I think it is possible 
for us to finish by one o’clock with this witness. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay let us – let us see Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let us – Mr Baloyi after the meeting with 
10 
the Minister what does the board do? 
MR BALOYI:  The board said and identified those three 
people that had to be – to be suspended.  And the board 
identified those three people except the FD.  And then the 
board said that the PMG committee – People in Governance 
Committee will be the one to deal with the processes that 
needs to take place.  And then that committee sat and I 
asked to sit into that committee.  But before that during the 
board meeting I did raise the issues of the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Baloyi.  Mr Seleka 
20 
what you can do is identify – there are a number of areas 
where his evidence is the same as the evidence of 
everybody’s it is not that evidence is not issue in terms of 
what happened. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 85 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  What happened – where his evidence is 
the same as others we do not need to spend much time on 
that but… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But where there are differences then we 
can focus on that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That helps me.  Mr Baloyi yes let us do 
that.  So you were talking about a report.  Let me ask you 
10 
specifically 
about 
that 
and 
you 
can 
explain 
to 
the 
Chairperson.  The other board members have also come 
here and said some of the board members have said to the 
Chairperson 
Mr 
Tsotsi 
said 
there 
was 
a 
report 
– 
a 
background report and they wanted him to produce that 
report.  Is that the report you are referring to? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes it is the report that I am referring to that 
prior to the suspensions we need to have right information. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  So that we can have right process to take. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So are you saying to the Chairperson 
that you made a request for that report to be provided? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I did Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And what was the response to you? 
MR BALOYI:  The response was that – that is not our report 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 86 of 185 
 
we must not worry about it.  We have to do our own inquiry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Can you recall who said that? 
MR BALOYI:  I think it is the – Doctor Ngubane. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Now take the Chairperson to 
how the name of the Financial Director Ms Tsholofelo Molefe 
was included?  You say three persons had been identified 
and there were not four but subsequently we know that the 
FD was also suspended.  Can you recall how her name was 
included on the list? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja her name was included during the meeting 
10 
of the People and Governance.  But the board… 
CHAIRPERSON:  During the meeting of? 
MR BALOYI:  People and Governance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  People and Governance. 
MR BALOYI:  Governance Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja but the board who had in those three 
people but the fourth one was not in those – the board was 
not aware about the fourth one.  I mean did not include the 
fourth one.  Because the inquiry was not about the financial 
20 
issues but it was merely about these other issues. 
CHAIRPERSON: So are you saying at the end of the board 
meeting that took place after the Minister had left there were 
only three executives that the board had  
MR BALOYI:  Identified. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 87 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Said should be suspended? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And they did not include the Financial 
Director? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then when the PMG Committee met 
after that board meeting it was at that PMG meeting that her 
name was added.  Is that what you are saying? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you remember how or who added her 
10 
name? 
MR BALOYI:  I remember Ms Mabude have been the one to 
say that because she was dealing with – she was in Audit 
and Risk Committee Chairperson.  So she said that there are 
some financial issues so she has to be also included. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Ms Mabude? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes so she was the one who suggested 
that her name should be – the Financial Director’s name 
should be included? 
20 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And did the PMG Committee then 
accept that? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes they accepted that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Was there – was there a debate 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 88 of 185 
 
about it with some members opposed to her inclusion and 
others 
wanting 
her 
to 
be 
included 
or 
there 
was 
no 
opposition? 
MR BALOYI:  I think I am the only one that could have – no 
– that actually opposed it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were against this idea? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Because it was not the idea of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because her name had not been endorsed 
10 
by – had not been approved by the board as somebody to be 
suspended? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And you advanced this argument at 
the PMG meeting? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes though I was not a member.  I was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR BALOYI:  I just asked to stay on to be part of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Because I worried about the change of events 
20 
that was so drastic so I wanted to actually observe things 
that are happening. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and what was your – what was the 
response of other members at the PMG meeting to your point 
that – but the Financial Director is not one of the executives 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 89 of 185 
 
that the board said should be suspended? 
MR BALOYI:  Actually there was no opposition.  Everyone 
was fine with that idea. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
MR BALOYI:  There was no opposition to that idea that she 
must be suspended as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There was no opposition to? 
MR BALOYI:  To the suspension proposal.  Everyone was 
fine with that idea. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With the suspension. 
10 
MR BALOYI:  Except myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the executives? 
MR BALOYI:  Of the FD. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the FD? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you were the only one who opposed? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And everyone else seems to be – seemed 
to be… 
MR BALOYI:  Supporting it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  To have no problem. 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you including Mr Tsotsi as well 
because he said he attended that meeting.  Was he not 
opposed to the inclusion of the Financial Director’s name? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 90 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  No I think – ja you may be – he may be right 
that he was not actually supporting it as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes.  I recall now thanks Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But in the end the majority… 
MR BALOYI:  Agreed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were supported that she should be 
suspended as well? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Doctor Baloyi your – 
what was your position in regard to the suspension of all of 
the executives? 
MR BALOYI:  My overall picture around it is that I could 
sense that between the 9t h and the 11t h there could have 
been lots of consultations because everyone was opposed 
on the 9t h then everyone was for it on the 11t h.  And my other 
impression is that during the breaks one board member said 
that he had another meeting the day before where he was 
called in by the DPE officials.  So – and he was informed 
20 
that these people must be suspended tomorrow.  So – and 
then it is when the idea of change of events came to reality 
that it looks like things were happening during those two 
periods. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you remember which board member 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 91 of 185 
 
said that to you? 
MR BALOYI:  It was the PMG Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who? 
MR BALOYI:  Zethembe Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was that? 
MR BALOYI:    Zethembe Khoza 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is the one who told you that he had 
been called to the Department of Public Enterprises and told 
that these executives should be suspended? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes he said he met with the officials.  I do not 
10 
know whether it was in the – in the DPE offices or 
somewhere else.  But… 
CHAIRPERSON:  He said he met with whom? 
MR BALOYI:  I am not sure where they could have met but 
he said that he met with them the day before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With the DPE people? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja he was called into that meeting 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR BALOYI:  To meet with them.  So that he be informed as 
a Chairperson of PMG. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  Did he say to you who else 
was in that meeting? 
MR BALOYI:  No he did not tell me the people that were 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 92 of 185 
 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not.  Yes.  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  So then the 
suspensions do take place.  Well just before then Mr Baloyi 
how – we know that people were appointed to act in the 
positions of those who were suspended or were to be 
suspended.  Do you know how the names of those who were 
to act came about? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes Chair during those breaks that I said that 
we had several breaks. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the 11 March. 
MR BALOYI:  Yes on the 11t h ja during the PMG meeting 
there were a lot of calls that were done to the Presidency 
office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the Presidency? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja to the Presidency’s office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja those calls were actually enquiring who 
should act – whom – must we put so and so; must we put so 
and so?  And then the report that came was that they said 
20 
we must not put this as a – as a – you must not put so and 
so; so and so.  But so and so and so and so are fine.  And it 
was actually those types of – of consultations that were 
happening so that we are in line with the office of the 
Presidency.  Yes. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 93 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was or who were making these calls 
to the Presidency? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja it was Doctor Ngubane.  Ja he is the one 
who was calling the Presidency office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know whether he was the only one 
who was making these calls on this issue – on this issue of 
who should act in these positions? 
MR BALOYI:  I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not know? 
MR BALOYI:  I do not know who was calling. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  But it is people from the President’s office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Yes and because he did say that he has got 
connections in that office and then he has to consult with 
them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  With – that they will approve so and so and so 
and so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it Doctor Ngubane who said he did 
have connections at the office of the President? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes he did say so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now was he … 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 94 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  Because actually I – he – he was referred to 
as an Ambassador. 
CHAIRPERSON:  yes. 
MR BALOYI:  So and then who could wait for him to make 
those consultations and then coming back to us with a 
report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now when he was making those calls was 
he making those calls because he had been asked by the 
10 
board or the PMG Committee to make those calls on its 
behalf or was he just making those calls on his own as far as 
you know? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja to tell you the truth I cannot recall actually 
whether he was.  It was just own initiative or it was the 
initiative of the PMG Committee.  But at those consultations 
did take place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But after making the calls was he reporting 
back to the committee?  Was he reporting back to say I have 
been in touch with the office of the President or with the 
20 
Presidency this is what they say?  Was he saying that too 
openly or was he saying that to you privately?  How did you 
come to know? 
MR BALOYI:  No actually it is something which was part of 
the meeting and I do – I did see some transcripts – the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 95 of 185 
 
transcriptions around that.  That we were waiting for his 
response. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  On the consultations – the feedback. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.    
MR BALOYI:  So it was not actually something that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was not something hidden? 
MR BALOYI:  No it was not hidden yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was transparent about it? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  It was not – there was no secrets around it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – but – so he was making reports to the 
PMG Committee to say I have been in touch with the 
Presidency they say that the people who must act are the 
following people? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you are sure about that? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I am sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay Mr Seleka. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair Mr Baloyi has referred to that in his 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  So Mr Baloyi if Mr Ngubane says to 
the Chairperson well the names for acting persons came 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 96 of 185 
 
from Mr Tsotsi what would be your response to that? 
MR BALOYI:  Actually Chairperson there were no – there 
were no – there were not specific people that were properly 
assigned to do that.  Actually it is something that I wanted to 
see from the committee on how are they arriving at who 
should act; who should not act.  Because it was a new board 
altogether and some of us were starting to know there was – 
those executives.  And some of the people – two people who 
were coming from the old board.  So it is possible that it was 
not one person who was making those inquiries or those 
10 
names.  It is possible – or not actually opposed to that 
because there were conflicting feelings around who should 
act and who should not act.  But one thing for sure is that we 
did not have the CV’s of the people in front of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not have the CV’s? 
MR BALOYI:  The CV’s of the people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not have it? 
MR BALOYI:  So that we know who would be more suitable 
or will not be more suitable. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR BALOYI:  We did not [00:19:20]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR BALOYI:  The candidates that should be acting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was there a memorandum or document 
that had been – that was placed before the members of the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 97 of 185 
 
PMG Committee which sought to tell the members of the 
PMG Committee about each one of the people that were 
being considered for acting? 
MR BALOYI:  I did not see that memorandum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  I did not – no I do not remember seeing that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja well I am not saying there was I am just 
asking because you say there were no CV’s. 
MR BALOYI:  There was no formal process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes there was no formal process. 
10 
MR BALOYI:  Of doing it – no there was no assessments of 
who – why so and so is suitable than the other. There was no 
assessment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now going back to the question of 
the names.  You say as I understand you it is possible that 
there may have been more than one person phoning the 
Presidency or obtaining names, is that right? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But with regard to Doctor Ngubane do you 
remember that there are some names that he told the PMG 
20 
Committee about as people that were being endorsed by the 
Presidency for acting or is that something you do not 
remember? 
MR BALOYI:  Actually what I remember are the three 
executives that left in December 2019 – no 2018 and those 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 98 of 185 
 
were [00:21:09] given the package.  I think they were around 
ten people that left or eleven people – somewhere there 
were nine around December 2018.  And those executives are 
the ones that I identified to as being said that they are not 
supposed to act in the CE positions.  I think there are – of 
them that I remember that these ones were out we cannot 
consider these ones. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think I am losing you now. 
MR BALOYI:  So I am … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay my question was do you remember or 
10 
do you not remember whether Mr – Doctor Ngubane at any 
stage told the PMG Committee of some of the names of 
people that he said were endorsed by the Presidency for 
acting? 
 
Is 
that 
something 
you 
remember 
as 
having 
happened? Is that something you do not remember as having 
happened? 
MR BALOYI:  He did mention them but I do not remember 
them by their names. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did. 
MR BALOYI:  He did mention them 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did mention some. 
MR BALOYI:  He did raise them – yes he did release there 
was that – suitable and those that are not suitable. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  I remember more special those who were not 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 99 of 185 
 
suitable; the ones that I said they are the ones that left – 
that were given packages in December 2018.  So they are 
the ones that I am really sure that he said that these ones 
are not the accepted or acceptable from the office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Baloyi of those who 
became appointed for instance one we know acting appoints. 
One is Ms Nonkululeko Veleti Dlamini.  Do you know whether 
Doctor Ngubane mentioned her – her name? 
MR BALOYI:  I do not remember Chair. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Do you remember one of them is Mr 
Zethembe Khoza who acted in the position of Mr Matona?  
Do you remember whether his name was mentioned by 
Doctor Ngubane? 
MR BALOYI:  I think his name came at the end when we 
could not all see the suitable ones. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  When you could not what? 
MR BALOYI:  When we could not actually find the ones that 
were pre-approved. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I see.   
20 
MR BALOYI:  Because I know that he did act immediately 
after them. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes then you will help who else acted?  
Mr Edwin Mabelane? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you be able to remember the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 100 of 185 
 
names? 
MR BALOYI:  No I will not remember the names of those that 
acted in all others but I just know the FD one and the CE – 
Group CE.  Evidently the Group CE’s are the ones that I am 
a hundred percent sure that I know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Are the ones that you are a hundred 
percent sure? 
MR BALOYI:  That I know ja.  The others I am not sure 
hundred percent. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Do you recall Mr Linnell? 
10 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I remember him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well let me – I am reminded of this 
before I go to Mr Linnell.  Mr Tsotsi on the other hand in 
regard to the acting appointments he says: 
“I stepped out of – there was a break or he 
went out for lunch or for tea whatever – when 
he came back the PMG was in session. The 
people in Governance Committee was in 
session in the meeting and he saw for the 
first time upon arrival into that meeting that 
20 
the PMG had  decided on who is going to be 
in the acting positions.  And he was asking 
but you are new board members how do you 
know these people?” 
Do you have any recollection of that? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 101 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I have got the recollection of that.  
Because it is the same question that I raised as well that I 
said earlier that you are new except that those two people 
who were from the previous board including the Chairperson. 
He did raise that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  He did.   
MR BALOYI:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what response did he get and from 
whom? 
MR BALOYI:  I do not remember the response but the 
10 
question was raised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He said that when he testified he said he 
was told that the names had been provided.  Now I cannot 
remember whether he said he was told the names have been 
provided by the Minister or by the Presidency.  But he said 
somebody said the names had been provided or approved.  
Do you remember anybody that may have said something 
along those lines in response to him?  Or is that something 
you cannot remember? 
MR BALOYI:  I cannot say with confidence because the only 
20 
person I knew who was in contact with their offices was 
Doctor Ngubane.  He is the only person I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So we are one minute away from lunch 
time.   
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 102 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it looks like we will have to continue 
with him after two. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja what I will do I will try… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you just mentioned the – Mr Linnell 
so he might have something to say about Mr Linnell so – but 
we can – but maybe we should see whether if we take thirty 
minutes from two to half past two whether that might be 
enough or not.  What is your sense of how much more time 
we need with him? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Shoo I am unable to estimate time now. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright.  I think that is fine.  Let 
us adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For lunch we will come back at two but 
during the break I think you can reflect on just identifying the 
areas 
where 
there 
might 
be 
controversy 
about 
what 
happened. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or areas where other witnesses have not 
been able to enlighten me on. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we can focus more on those 
areas. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  On that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I mean except for the role of Mr Linnell I 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 103 of 185 
 
mean we have dealt with the – except for that I am not sure 
other than his removal what else we may be needing to look 
at but you might be able to remember over lunch. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  It will be Mr Linnell.  It will be the 
removal of Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja the charging of Mr Tsotsi and his 
removal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I think Mr Baloyi should touch a little bit 
10 
on the exit negotiations with… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The executives. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And then the last is his own removal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Ja.  No I think we – we probably we 
should be able to finish within thirty minutes after two.  Okay 
alright.  We are going to take the lunch adjournment we will 
resume at two.  We adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Baloyi, you 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 104 of 185 
 
are still under oath. 
MR BALOYI:   Thank you.  Thank you, sir. 
NORMAN BALOYI:  (s.u.o.) 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just raise your voice, please. 
MR BALOYI:   Thank you, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, the voice. [laughing] 
MR BALOYI:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Mr Baloyi, hopefully we can 
go faster.  I had asked you before the adjournment about Mr 
Nick Linnell and... well, I mentioned his name and my 
10 
question is this.  Do you recall Mr Nick Linnell? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We understand that Mr Nick Linnell was 
present 
in 
one 
of 
the 
board 
meetings 
on 
the 
11t h of March 2015. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, Chair I recall. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you recall that? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can you recall what was Mr Nick 
Linnell’s involvement in the board meeting? 
20 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, he was introduced as a consultant who 
was going to assist us with cases of the suspensions and 
also of identifying appropriate Companies Act and can assist 
with inquiry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  And did... what was the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 105 of 185 
 
board’s attitude towards the introduction of Mr Linnell? 
MR BALOYI:   He was welcomed.  There was no resistance 
towards his engagement and... yes, in short. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, he was welcomed.  There was no 
resistance to his engagement? 
MR BALOYI:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was there any explanation provided as to 
where he was from and how he came to be presented to the 
board as somebody who could assist? 
10 
MR BALOYI:   Actually, it was mentioned on the meeting of 
the 9t h but the name was not mentioned because in that 
presentation by the board chairperson on the Monday, he 
said that there is a consultant that has been identified from 
the meeting that he had the day before.   
 
So this person can assist us in many ways and said can 
identify... he mentioned this involvement but not his name.  
And then the name came on the Wednesday, on the 11t h.  
Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did he say where the consultant came 
20 
from or how he came to be in touch with this consultant, 
either on the 9t h or on the 11t h? 
MR BALOYI:   No, it was not mentioned actually.  Only the 
issue of that they have identified and he is going to assist 
us.  But the issue of his full background was not given or 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 106 of 185 
 
where they met, were not given. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Was 
it 
said 
that 
he 
had 
been 
recommended by anybody? 
MR BALOYI:   It was not mentioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was not mentioned? 
MR BALOYI:   Except to say that he was with the president 
on... that was on the meeting of the 9t h that he was with the 
president.  And then he identified someone who can assist 
us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MR BALOYI:   From the president’s side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR BALOYI:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Continue Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Did... we 
understand from the evidence already presented Mr Baloyi 
that Mr Linnell had by that time already prepared a 
memorandum and a draft proposal for the board.  Were you 
aware of that? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, actually we... the only thing that we were 
20 
questioned on the 9t h was the presentation that was given to 
us without the notice.  But on the 11t h, what was already 
made available was the issue of the suspension letters.  The 
issue of the memo is something else which actually did not 
come to my attention if I remember.  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 107 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who drafted... who had drafted the 
suspension letters? 
MR BALOYI:   They were done by Mr Linnell. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Linnell? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And the board accepted that the letters 
as drafted by Mr Linnell? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, we did accept them because we used 
them ultimately and they were served to the executives.  And 
most of the content was the same content from one letter to 
10 
the other.  So it was mainly copied and pasted in most of the 
letters. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  We understand from the evidence 
and those who gave who testified before the Commission, 
that the board agreed that there will be no allegations of 
wrongdoing 
against 
the 
executives 
or 
allegations 
of 
misconduct. 
MR BALOYI:   I did not get that properly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That the board agreed that there will be 
no allegations of misconduct or wrongdoing against the 
20 
executives to be suspended. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, there was. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So can you recall what then ultimately 
caused the board to suspend these executives? 
MR BALOYI:   The reason that prevailed was to say that the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 108 of 185 
 
investigation should take this without any interference(?) 
without any... they used the word unfitted. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   They used the word...? 
MR BALOYI:   Unfitted.  So it was just to allow the inquiry to 
go on without any disturbance by an executive who was 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, was there any evidence that the 
executives to be suspended would interfere with the inquiry 
or the investigation? 
MR BALOYI:   There was no evidence that they were going 
10 
to temper with the inquiry because we did argue around that.  
And I also argued on the issue of the laptops that we do not 
need to take their laptops.   
 
We can image their laptops.  And with... we have got 
information, they can go then, the information that they 
have.   
 
So it was not the issue of their presence was going to be 
invaded because all information that is digitally, it could be 
available if needed(?) from the imaging of those laptops. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Just remember to raise your voice. 
20 
MR BALOYI:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you were saying to the Chairperson, 
one, the reasons for the suspensions to in... which is 
allegedly to interfere with the inquiry, you argued about that. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I did. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 109 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you personally raised that with the 
board. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   As what?  As not a good reason? 
MR BALOYI:   Actually, I raised the issue of their removal 
from office, not to be a good idea.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   You said the idea to remove them is not 
good? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Did 
you 
remain 
opposed 
to 
their 
10 
suspension right up to the end? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And then, in regard to 
the Tools of Trade.  The laptops you mentioned, what did you 
say about that again?  If you could repeat for the 
Chairperson. 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, I said that we do not need to take their 
laptops because the idea was that they must bring their 
laptops the following day.   
20 
 
And is said that we do not need to take their laptops.  
We can image their laptops.  And so we said that we can 
have all the information even if they can go and tamper with 
that one, it will not matter because we have got the original 
one.   
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 110 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And what was the reaction from the 
board on the laptops? 
MR BALOYI:   It was also rejected and I think they brought 
back their laptops. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you know which member of the board 
in particular rejected your proposal? 
MR BALOYI:   It was not accepted.  I will not say that there 
was a specific person who rejected it.  The idea was not 
accepted. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see.  I may come to that later on but let 
10 
me ask you this.  So the executives then gets suspended 
and 
we 
understand 
from 
their 
evidence 
before 
this 
Commission that they wrote letters to the chairperson, at 
least, of the board.   
 
Two of the executives write letters and they make 
enquiries about the terms of reference, the unfairness or 
otherwise of their suspensions, and they offered to assist the 
board in the inquiry.   
 
Were 
you 
aware 
of 
those 
letters 
written 
by 
the 
executives? 
20 
MR BALOYI:   No, I was not made aware. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Were you aware that Mr Matona had 
taken Eskom to the Labour Court and then the CCMA? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I saw the proceedings over the internet 
or something in these lines, ja. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 111 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And do you know what position the board 
took in regard to Mr Matona’s labour dispute? 
MR BALOYI:   What I know is that there was a settlement 
afterwards, actually, with all three executives.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   All? 
MR BALOYI:   All three executives.  There was a settlement 
agreement afterwards. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What about the fourth with...? 
MR BALOYI:   I think the fourth one went back after some 
months. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Mr Koko, of course? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, Dr Ngubane and Ms Klein testified 
here and said that the board wanted the suspended 
executives, all of them, back.   
 
Or that the board had no issues with them coming back 
but 
that 
the 
executives 
who 
concluded 
settlement 
agreements, did so because they are the ones who said they 
wanted to leave.   
 
It was not as if the board did not want them back.  What 
20 
did you know about what the board’s position was or what 
the board’s attitude was or what the attitude of some 
members of the board may have been? 
MR BALOYI:   Actually, there was no bad relationship 
between the executives and the board.  Actually, I think the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 112 of 185 
 
board caught the executives by surprise when they were 
suspended because there was no... there was no bad blood 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It was a new board. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes.  And they were still trying to get to know 
each other. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Yes.   
MR BALOYI:   So the decision(?) of the board was not bad 
towards them.  Ja and so everybody was caught by surprise 
as I say.  But the issue is that even when we had the 
10 
meeting on the 9t h, we were all in defence of not having the 
inquiry.  We still need to get our facts ourselves.  We still 
need to engage with the executives.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 11 t h? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, it did change completely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, h’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR BALOYI:   But the hostility between the two groups, 
there was no hostility. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, there was no hostility between the 
board and ...[intervenes]  
MR BALOYI:   The executives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the executives. 
MR BALOYI:   H’m. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 113 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Matona gave evidence here and 
said he had been unhappy about being suspended.  So 
unhappy was he that he had brought an urgent application in 
the Labour Court to challenge his suspension.   
 
And that his matter ended up at the CCMA and the 
representatives of the board asked for a postponement of the 
matter because they wanted to get a mandate, I think, they 
said from the shareholder, the minister as to how to resolve 
the matter.   
 
But that when Mr Matona met with the representatives of 
10 
the board, who I think he said included Mr Romeo Khumalo.  
I think he said it included Dr Ngubane if I am not mistaken 
as well.  I do not know if Ms Klein was there as well.  I am 
not sure.   
 
But he said that one of the representatives of the board, 
I think he said it was Mr Khumalo, told him in very clear 
terms when he talked about going back to his job that that 
was off the table, namely going back to his job at Eskom.   
 
And that they could talk about a separation package, I 
think.  But talking about Mr Matona going back to his job was 
20 
off the table.  That is what Mr Matona told me when he gave 
evidence here.   
 
And yesterday, one of the executives, Mr Marokane said 
that he wrote letters to, after being suspended, he wrote 
letters to the Chairperson, Mr Tsotsi and I think also maybe 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 114 of 185 
 
to Dr Ngubane later on.  I am not sure.   
 
But he wrote letters to try and get clarification on 
matters and his letters were ignored.  And after some time, 
he felt he was not wanted by the board anymore, the way 
they were handling this thing.   
 
And he, therefore, reached out to Dr Ngubane and said 
maybe we should talk about a separation.  But he says that 
was because he felt unwanted.   
 
He had wanted to go back but he thought that the board 
did not trust him anymore, he was unwanted.  That is why he 
10 
said, let us talk a separation package.   
 
And Ms Molefe gave evidence here also, yesterday.  And 
she said she wanted to go back but Mr Romeo Khumalo said 
to her that they should talk about a separation package.   
 
So she said that the idea of a separation package came 
from Mr Romeo Khumalo, a member of the board.  And she, 
at some stage, threatened to take Eskom to court.  
 
 And Mr Khumalo said:  Well, you do not want to sue the 
state or take on the state or something like that.  And 
ultimately, she decided:  Okay we can talk settlement.   
20 
 
Have you got something to say with regards to this 
evidence from these executives? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, I honestly could not because I was not in 
the picture by then.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, do not speculate. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 115 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   No, I am just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just ...[intervenes]  
MR BALOYI:   I do not have any and I do not have 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, tell me whether you ever heard about 
these things that were said to have been said by members of 
the board who interacted with the executives.  And whether 
you think that if they said the things that the executives say 
they said whether that reflected... they reflected the board’s 
attitude or not as far as you know... you knew. 
10 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, my understanding is that the way that the 
executives were treated because there was a long delay in 
communicating with them.  It could suggest that there was a 
changing of attitudes towards them.   
 
Like, you said that one of them said they are still waiting 
for the mandate or whatever.  So I think that mandate could 
have been the one that changed their attitudes.   
 
As I have witnessed the changing of the attitudes from 
the meeting of the 9t h to the 11t h.  It was a different set of 
people actually because ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   What had met on the 9t h at the board 
meeting. 
MR BALOYI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the board that have met on the 11 t h. 
MR BALOYI:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 116 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was like it was a different board? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, but simply put. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR BALOYI:   H’m.  So I think that could have been 
influenced by the interaction they had with the other offices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   H’m.  But in general, when we spoke after the 
suspensions, all board members agreed that they were that 
way, it was done the suspensions, it is now how you suspend 
executives.   
10 
 
Ja, because the image was created out of nowhere and 
there was no time to reflect where we are doing the right 
thing or not.  Everything just came at a bit of light.  Ja.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  Did the board not reflect on the 
question of why they should pay the kinds of amounts that 
they paid to these three executives in terms of their 
separation agreements, settlement agreements? 
MR BALOYI:   I am not sure how they negotiated that 
because I was not in the picture by then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, have you left by then? 
20 
MR BALOYI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  No, that is fine.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Baloyi, in regard 
to the laptops.  I... you say you had indicated that it was not 
necessary to take away the laptops.   
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 117 of 185 
 
 
May I find out from you whether you were aware of these 
emails exchanged, that I will refer you to in the same bundle 
that you have.   
 
Chairperson, the same Eskom Bundle 10.  But now I 
refer to emails in Exhibit U15.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, would you not just tell me the page 
number if it is the same bundle? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will do so.  Certainly, Chairperson.  
These are ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I have not admitted any Exhibit 
10 
U15 as far as I remember. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that will be... the exhibit relating to 
Mr Marokane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can you tell me the page number? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The page number is 193.  There are a 
couple of pages.  Let me give them to you, Chairperson.  
From 188. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From one, eight...? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   188. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If Mr Baloyi could be assisted quickly.  
Mr Baloyi, these are the annexures.  As you go there to Mr 
Anton Nienaar’s affidavit to this Commission.   
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 118 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   To his affidavit, he has attached the 
following emails exchanged between him, Ms Venete Klein, 
Ms Elsie Phule.  
 
You will see from the emails there on page 188, there is 
an email from Ms Vente Klein, Saturday, March... 14 March 
2015 at 09:28 a.m. to Ms Elsie Phule.  Urgent Feedback 
Please, is the subject line.  And email reads: 
“Hi, Elsie.  I see from the collections from the cards, 
laptops, et cetera that we did not collect from the 
10 
CE.  What was the reason for that?” 
 
And the email immediately above that on 18 March 2015 
at 09:11, Ms Elsie Phule writes: 
“Anton, as discussed, please confirm whether the 
laptop has been collected from CE.” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I do.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then there is an email at the top of the 
page from Ms Venete Klein, 18 March 2015 at 15:31 p.m. to 
Ms Elsie Phule, cc’d Anton Nienaar, Venete Klein and Shaun 
20 
Maritz.  Again, the subject line:  Urgent Feedback Please. 
“Anton, given the significance of this matter, I would 
like your confirmation asap.  Regards.” 
 
And that was sent from an iPhone. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 119 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Were you aware of this communication? 
MR BALOYI:   No, I was not aware. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was this communication reported to the 
board? 
MR BALOYI:   I do not remember at all.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  So you then mentioned to 
the Chairperson that four... three of the four executives 
concluded separation agreements with Eskom and one of 
them returned.   
 
Do you know the reasons why the one who returned, 
10 
being Mr Koko, was accepted back from suspension? 
MR 
BALOYI: 
 
 
Yes, 
actually 
from 
the... 
after 
the 
suspensions, actually, it came to my attention that the issue 
of the suspensions were somehow initiated(?) by Mr Koko.   
 
And also hearing the evidence that I have heard so far, 
more specially about the meetings of the 10t h, I happened to 
believe that it could be true that everything that was 
initiated, it was planned and it was and it was a project to 
exit.   
 
So that is my impression of it.  Because I doubt if, when 
20 
the other ones were approached or they were approached, 
whether the same approached was done to him.  I doubt it.   
 
Unless, if there could be some evidence that an 
interaction that were done between the other executives, 
were also done to him.  It is something that maybe can make 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 120 of 185 
 
us believe otherwise.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, Ms Daniels has provided evidence 
to this Commission.  She says she was present in all of the 
meetings where the delegation from the board negotiated 
with the four suspended executives.   
 
She says in her affidavit and before this Commission 
that: 
“Negotiations 
with 
Mr 
Koko 
were 
completely 
different from those of the other three executives.” 
MR BALOYI:   I can believe that. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But was the board given the reasons 
why Mr Koko was accepted back? 
MR BALOYI:   I was not in the picture by then. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You were not in the picture by then? 
MR BALOYI:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Were you still at Eskom 
when the board decided to bring charges against Mr Tsotsi? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I was. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can you recall what those charges 
were? 
20 
MR BALOYI:   The charges were him using or utilising the 
services of Mr Nick Linnell as a consultant without the 
necessary approval by the board.  And also for leaking the 
document, actually there was a leaked document about 
things that had to unfold.  That particular leakage, where 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 121 of 185 
 
he is talking about things that the board did not agree, the 
proposals that he has done he wrote the as if the board 
has agreed to those proposals.  So those were the main 
charges against him.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Let me quickly go to the 
reference bundle because it might help us expedite this 
aspect.  The reference bundle – they will assist you with 
the reference bundle, Mr Baloyi.  Chairperson, page 226 in 
the reference bundle.  Page 226, Mr Baloyi, those – are 
you on that page? 
10 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That page contains the minutes of 
Eskom board in-committee meeting of 30 March 2015 at 
20h00.  Present, I see that you were there, Mr N T Baloyi.  
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The purpose of the meeting appears on 
the next page, page 227, paragraph 7.  Paragraph 7, page 
227.  Are you there, Mr Baloyi? 
MR BALOYI:   I am in 227 but there is no paragraph 7. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, concentrate on …[intervenes] 
20 
MR BALOYI:   I have got …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean item 7? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Item 7, yes.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Matters for approval. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 122 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   7.1: 
“Proposal to remove the Chairman of the Board.” 
Page 227, black numbers on the left hand corner.  It is on 
the right, the relevant page is on your right, not your left.  
Have you got page 227?  Look at the black numbers at the 
top.  Have you got page 227? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I am in 227. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, go down – can you see the 
numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 up to 7.1 on the margin? 
MR BALOYI:   There is no numbering.  I cannot see the 
10 
numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has he been given the right bundle? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, he had gone two more pages 
further. 
MR BALOYI:   Okay, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Item 7, do you see that, Mr Baloyi? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   “Proposal to remove the Chairman of  
the Board.  At this point Mr Tsotsi joined the 
meeting in his capacity as a director.” 
20 
Do you see that? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If you turn the page.  There are 
charges there identified as Charge 1.  Can you see at the 
top of the page?  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 123 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes and then Charge 2, towards the 
end of the page. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I see. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Charge 3, 3.1.  Next page, charge 4 
towards the end of the page. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Charge 5, right at the end of the page.  
MR BALOYI:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And those were the charges brought 
10 
against Mr Tsotsi.  
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And mainly, as you say, the first two 
charges is for him using Mr Linnell, that he procured the 
services of an external consultant Mr Nick Linnell to 
provide 
consulting 
services 
to 
the 
company 
without 
following the company’s prescribed procurement processes 
or informing the board of his actions.  
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What is your comment on that charge, 
20 
Mr Baloyi?  
MR BALOYI:   Actually I did question this in a number of 
emails that I wrote to the board before we charged him 
because there was no – it was a contrary evidence 
regarding this because when the idea was conceived or 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 124 of 185 
 
was presented on the 9 t h, there was no disapproval around 
that because Nick Linnell the consultant who was brought 
in on the 9 t h, no one objected to that, they only objected to 
the procurement processes that were to be used as a way 
of speeding up the process and not followed the normal 
process in terms of appointing service providers and then 
we also accepted Mr Linnell on the 11 t h so the board 
members 
were 
supposed 
to 
have 
disagreed 
on 
the 
engagement of Mr Linnell on that first day.  No, on that 
first day or the second day that we met but nothing was 
10 
opposed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, quickly with Mr Baloyi.  
In 
your 
bundle, 
Mr 
Baloyi, 
you 
have 
provided 
the 
Commission with various emails.  I want to refer you in 
particular to page 364.  I could in fact just read the emails 
to you because those are your emails, just to save time. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   For the record I will mention the page 
numbers.  364 there is an email from you on 23 March 
2015 at 18.47, Norman Baloyi, and you write: 
20 
“Please note that not everyone was in the board 
meeting after Nick had already presented and the 
proposal, as far as I remember, was not rejected by 
anyone and this needs verifying, the audio.  I have 
asked 
the 
company 
secretary 
to 
do 
such 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 125 of 185 
 
verification.  I am saying this to ensure that the 
board is well-covered at all angles.  There is 
nothing personal or blame game.  It is to make sure 
that we are not found wanting because these types 
always end up in court and transcripts may be 
requested hence we also need to be cautious and 
prove due diligence.  Thanks.” 
Do you see that? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I see that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who are you writing to there, Mr 
10 
Baloyi? 
MR BALOYI:   I am writing to the board members. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You turn the page – oh, rather, page 
back to P363. 
MR BALOYI:   H’m.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   There is an email at the bottom of the 
page, from you, I believe, Ntbaloyi@hotmail.com.  Is that 
correct?  
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I see. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You write to Markp@blts.co.za.  Can 
20 
you tell the Chairperson who is that? 
MR BALOYI:   This was the... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who is MarkP? 
MR BALOYI:   It is the lawyer that was asked to assist us 
with the process. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 126 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   MarkP? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Are you certain that is MarkP?  It is 
not Mr Mark Pamensky?  H’m?  Or where are you?  No, at 
the bottom of the page.  Sorry, Mr Baloyi. 
MR BALOYI:   Oh, okay.  Ja, he is the board member, ja. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
And 
then 
you 
cc’d 
Naidooverushni@gmail.com, 
venetekleininc.co.za, 
Baltman.ngubane@gmail.com, 
10 
Khozazw@eskom, 
romeokumalo@vodacom, 
Chwayitam@yahoo, 
Nasias.c@vodamail and Patnaidoo.co.za.  So you said 
those are the board members? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I think were all covered, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And he subject line is: 
“Backup of notice meeting, removal of director(2)” 
It is an email also of 23 March 2015 at 26.20: 
“True, the honest thing is that needs presentation 
20 
was well-received and there was every reason to 
endorse him.  I wish this part is not recorded.  Even 
it is recorded the board can always rescind in 
proper decisions but most of all we need to ask a 
labour specialist if we can add because my little 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 127 of 185 
 
labour knowledge is that you can always add a 
charge/allegation 
as 
long 
as 
there 
is 
still 
a 
relationship before the final decision is made.  
Thanks.” 
You specifically are saying there that Mr Nick Linnell’s 
presentation was well received.  Tell the Chairperson what 
are you discussing here with the board members or as the 
board members, Mr Baloyi? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes actually …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say tell me, Chairperson?  I 
10 
think you said tell me, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, tell the Chairperson. 
MR BALOYI:   Thank you.  Thank you, Advocate.  Yes, 
actually here we were somehow debating the charges, that 
this charge does not hold any water because we agreed to 
engagement of Nick and we are – I mean, he made a good 
presentation and we all received it and we also made use 
of his documents so …[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Whose – sorry, Mr Baloyi, whose view 
was it that the charges do not hold any water? 
20 
MR BALOYI:   I cannot tell exactly because what happened 
is that there were people who were liaising with the 
company lawyers that we appointed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you understand my question? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 128 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who held the view that the charges 
that seems to be formulated here do not hold any water?  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he was referring to a particular 
charge. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, actually each of the particular – I 
cannot say that so and so came with this particular charge 
because what I was trying to say is that there were people 
who were assigned more especially from the People in 
Governance who were assigned to liaise with the lawyers 
that we appointed to assist us with this process. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, we understand that.  Let me 
ask you the question differently.  What was your view in 
regard – what is the view you are expressing in these 
emails? 
MR BALOYI:   The view I am expressing is that the 
charges that we are putting forth are fictitious charges, 
they are not real, they are not tangible or we cannot back 
them with evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying that in regard to all the 
charges that were preferred against Mr Tsotsi or are you 
20 
referring to only some? 
MR BALOYI:   Actually, most of the charges, if I can say, 
because some of them were coming from the other ones as 
a way of inferences.  So but the main charge was – were 
those two charges that I spoke about, about the consultant 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 129 of 185 
 
commencing the work without authorisation, commissioned 
the media statement, you know, so – because even in the 
other ones there was the commission of the media 
statement. 
 
Actually, in one of the – in that particular media 
statement, there was evidence that that particular proposal 
was leaked from the department not from the Eskom side 
so – and then it was about what we are going to be doing 
in the next few days or months in relation to this and it was 
more of a proposal that the Chairperson was speaking 
10 
endorsement or amendment from the board.   
So it happened to be leaked and that leakage, we 
could not prove that he was the one who leaked it to the 
media and it was only in one media house, it was not in all 
major media houses, to show that he was not the one who 
was responsible of leading it.   
So hence I said that these two were actually 
somehow formulated in order to form a basis to remove 
him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that will be charge 3 which says: 
20 
“The director authorised the commission of a media 
statement in relation to the inquiry into the affairs 
of the company.” 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Charge …[intervenes] 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 130 of 185 
 
 CHAIRPERSON:   That media statement, had it not been 
drafted in either the board meeting or in the meeting of the 
PNT committee and had members of the board not made 
their own contributions to this media statement as far as 
you remember? 
MR BALOYI:   No, actually …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it not prepared by Mr Linnell, Nick 
Linnell and the members of the – either the board or the 
committee were making contributions as to what should go 
into the statement or not or was that a different statement? 
10 
MR BALOYI:   No, actually it was not the media statement 
per se but it was a proposal document.  I do not who, 
whether it was prepared by Mr Linnell or it was proposed 
by the Chairperson but this media statement – no, that 
particular proposal, it went to all board members about how 
are going to unbundle the processes of inquiry and so on.   
 
So it as supposed to be discussed by the board and 
approved by the board or for the board to amend that is 
why we can use it in unbundling the process but the issue 
of the leakage because the allegation here was that he is 
20 
the one who commissioned that release of that document, 
something that we could not even prove. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Baloyi, I think Mr Tsotsi’s response 
to the board is captured on page 229 and he explains 
something along the lines of what you are saying the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 131 of 185 
 
statement got into the public domain without him being 
aware of that but he will deal with it when he comes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And to the extent, Mr Seleka, to the 
extent that how – what happened with regard to certain 
charges appears in a transcript of the meeting.  We might 
need to go over the whole thing because one can read 
there and see what the attitude of the members of the 
board was to a particular issue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But where it is not covered then we need 
10 
to cover it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Mr Baloyi, the issues are set out 
in detail there in that minute of the board meeting which 
you attended.  It may be covered in due course in more 
detail 
with 
other 
witnesses 
but 
ultimately 
the 
board 
decided to level these charges against Mr Tsotsi. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Were you still there when the board 
had 
a 
meeting 
with 
Mr 
Tsotsi 
at 
which 
meeting 
…[intervenes] 
20 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, I was there.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...as we understand Dr Ngubane and I 
think another board member were asked to separately 
speak to Mr Tsotsi in order to get a separation agreement. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I was there. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 132 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that ultimately resulted in Mr 
Tsotsi tendering his resignation. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can you remember whose idea it was 
that Mr Tsotsi should be charged?  Who came up with this 
idea in circumstances where it seems a lot of things that 
he was charged with were things that the board seems to 
have had no objection to before. 
MR BALOYI:   I do not know exactly unless if I prepared 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Cannot remember. 
MR BALOYI:   I needed to be prepared, ja, it is a question 
I needed to have prepared but if I can find the answer I 
can forward the answer today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is just that it is something strange. 
MR BALOYI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have never heard of a board of 
directors charging the Chairperson or even another board 
member, I have never heard of that, but maybe it does 
happen but it all looks very strange and, of course, he 
20 
gave evidence here - Mr Tsotsi - that about two months – 
about six weeks or so before he had been called by the 
Minister of Public Enterprises who complained that he was 
– 
she 
had 
received 
complaints 
that 
Mr 
Tsotsi 
was 
interfering in operational issues and she told him to stop 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 133 of 185 
 
that otherwise she would find somebody else to do the job 
that Mr Tsotsi was doing and he says on the same day, 
which I think he says was around the day of the State of 
the Nation Address in 2015, early February, he says on the 
same day he received a call from Mr Tony Gupta.  I cannot 
remember whether it was just a call or whether they 
actually met but he says Mr Tony Gupta complained to him 
that …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was a meeting, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, it was meeting, yes, thank you.  He 
complained to him that Mr Tsotsi was not assisting them 
and Mr Tsotsi understood the reference to them as a 
reference to the Gupta family and that Mr Tsotsi said Mr 
Tony Gupta said that they were the ones who had put him 
into this position and they could take him out of that 
position.   
So about six weeks later then the board seems to – 
or six to seven weeks, eight weeks, the board seems to 
20 
adopt an attitude that he should be charged, he should be 
removed but some of the – at least some of the charges 
appear quite strange when one looks at the minutes or the 
transcript of the meetings of the 11 t h.  So that is why I am 
interested in knowing who came up with the idea, but you 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 134 of 185 
 
say you cannot remember. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, but it is something that I can verify. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR BALOYI:   Ja and I can come back to you today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine. 
MR BALOYI:   Because I would not want to drop a person’s 
name without evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  If you do remember just 
be in touch with the legal team and – ja.  Okay, Mr Seleka.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Baloyi, your 
10 
emails trail might refresh your memory but you will have a 
look at that. 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have mentioned that you were not 
at the – you owned the picture on the picture, can you tell 
the Chairperson what do mean by you are not on the 
picture when some of these questions were asked? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja because the same thing that was done to 
him was done to me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which is? 
20 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, that actually I questioned …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Put on your microphone.  It just went 
on now. 
MR BALOYI:   No, no, is that I did question certain 
transactions, it was actually the IT tender which I was 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 135 of 185 
 
expecting that it will be concluded at a certain period 
because my background is mainly IT so – and there was 
just a board tender which I think it started at 2 billion and 
then it went to 4 billion after its expiry and that was 
extended, 
extended, 
extended 
until 
it 
went 
4 
point 
something billion and there was a process of getting a new 
service provider. 
So 
I 
went 
to 
call 
the 
Chairperson, 
the 
new 
Chairperson or Acting Chairperson, which was Dr Ngubane, 
to enquire if that particular transaction has been concluded 
10 
and his response was very – because he was the 
Chairperson of the Tender Committee because I did write 
emails to the IT executives about what was happening. 
And I also did ask Mr Koko because IT was 
reporting to him, I guess, about these issues of these 
extensions of the tender and that has been continuing.   
 
So – and without any – without any feedback, it 
happened that – I mean, Dr Ngubane was very negative 
around giving me the answer whether he awarded or not 
awarded that particular IT tender.   
20 
So and then I called Mr Koko around it, so – to ask 
whether it was concluded.   He said yes, it is concluded by 
the Tender Committee some weeks or whatever prior.  So I 
said but I thought that it was going to also come to the 
board.  He said no, it is within the mandate of the Tender 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 136 of 185 
 
Committee to approve so it is already approved, something 
which Dr Ngubane did not tell me and he was the 
Chairperson of it. 
And then I questioned – I mean, that the authority 
for that particular tender it was within the executives’ 
mandate authority, so why did it not conclude at the 
executives’ authority instead of going to dah, dah, dah 
and, you know, to the other committee and there was not 
response around that. 
And then my feeling that I wrote to the board is that 
10 
we need to be careful because it looks like we may end up 
being the ones to be blamed when we approve things that 
were supposed to be approved by the executives because 
this particular transaction is within the mandate of the 
executives.  So where they needed to have concluded them 
themselves. 
 
So I did question those type of things to the board.  
So and it also happened that during my conversation with 
Mr Koko, I asked him if he is not going to join the – no, no, 
I did congratulate him about the court case that he had 
20 
then to have won for Eskom and so on and then also the 
issue of the Labour Court or CCMA whether he is going to 
follow the same road.  So – and then he said he is thinking 
around those lines but he will need some suggestions or if 
I know some good lawyers and so on, so he did make a 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 137 of 185 
 
follow up around it, I think in the evening, to say that I 
must write to him and my proposal of who I think he should 
consider. 
 
And actually when that thing came to him the 
following day he wrote to the Chairperson, wrote to the 
Minister to say that I am confused because I am in a good 
standing with the Board, and I got this advice and asked 
him to asked him to put it in writing so that you’ll see that 
it was the communication between myself and Mr Baloyi 
but myself I don’t want to fight with the Board, I want 
10 
everything to come to a rightful conclusion and so on.  So 
– and then they used that against me to say that I am 
working against the Board and then they are going to do 
their processes without my involvement because by that 
time I was in Pietermaritzburg and then I phoned them that 
I’m in Pietermaritzburg I have got the toll gate slips that 
can prove that I’m not around can you wait until I come 
back.  So, they didn’t want to so everything just happened 
like that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    So, you are saying this was during Mr 
20 
Koko’s suspension? 
MR BALOYI:    Yes. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 And 
he 
writes 
a 
letter, 
after 
communication with you, he writes it to the Chairperson of 
the Board? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 138 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, and also to the Minister. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And also, the Minister? 
MR BALOYI:    Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that the letter – Chairperson just by 
reference contained on page 373. 
MR BALOYI:    Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And, can you tell the Chairperson, in a 
nutshell, what does he say to the Chairperson and the 
Minister in regard to you? 
MR BALOYI:    He says that I must go to CCMA and that 
10 
the Board will not propose that submission to CCMA and 
that he should not rely on the processes that were initiated 
by the Board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He should not? 
MR BALOYI:    He should not rely on it because it will take 
long. So, in essence, saying that I am encouraging him to 
go the legal route, in short. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, were you advising him as he 
alleged in the letter? 
MR BALOYI:    I did say to him that he can successfully 
20 
interdict this because of the way that suspensions done.  It 
was in – not in line with the law because everything was an 
emergency of a sort, the procedures were not followed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, he didn’t do that, instead he wrote 
to the Board – I mean to the Chairperson and the Minister. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 139 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:    Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Complaining about you. 
MR BALOYI:    Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And as a result of this, you were, 
ultimately removed from the Board. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I see in the letter that he says you 
congratulated him on the Eskom vs. Westinghouse matter.  
I don’t know whether that was the Constitutional Court 
judgment or the High Court judgement, do you remember, 
10 
do you remember which one it was? 
MR BALOYI:    The Constitutional Court if I remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if he was talking about the 
Constitutional 
Court 
one, 
he 
should 
know 
that 
the 
Constitutional Court did not deal with the merits and I know 
it because I wrote the majority judgement.  It did not deal 
with the merits, whether there was – there were problems 
with procurement or not, that’s all I can say, okay let’s 
continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Mr Baloyi it’s a very 
20 
strange letter in the sense that, that paragraph says, 
"I sent an email to Mr Baloyi, now I’m reading the 
bottom paragraph on page 373, I sent an email to 
Mr Baloyi, advising him that I will be pursuing his 
advice and ask him to recommend an appropriate 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 140 of 185 
 
lawyer for me and he complied”, 
 
So if you he advised you along the lines he’s 
saying, that he will pursue the advise, isn’t it strange that 
he was, at the same time complaining about your conduct 
to the Board or to the Chairperson and the Minister? 
MR BALOYI:    Ja, actually it is more – it is contradictory – 
it’s actually a contradiction because you can see there isn’t 
any consistency and there’s no honesty in both – I mean 
you cannot write the same thing and the same thing say 
that – and the same things are not actually in line with one 
10 
another. So, there was an element of contradiction and 
even our discussions actually.  The content that this letter 
is having, it was something that was cited by – it was not 
something that I said, I mean…[intervenes]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, you should tell the Chairperson. 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, I did actually make the advice but the 
content has been added somehow, somewhere. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So are you saying…[intervenes].  
MR BALOYI:    But in short is that the letter is not 
consistent, ja because on top he’s talking about advice, 
20 
that I informed him about 1, 2, 3 and then he said he’s 
agreeing then he’s saying he doesn’t want to, you know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see, so you are saying, in any event, 
the letter itself – the contents of the letter are not strictly 
reflective of your conversation with him? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 141 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:    No, no they’re not at all. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You’re saying this was used against 
you to remove you? 
MR BALOYI:    Ja, ja it’s the only thing that was used. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who removed you? 
MR BALOYI:    As I said that they had a meeting without 
my presence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who’s that? 
MR BALOYI:    The Board, they had the meeting without 
my presence, saying that I was supposed to have been 
10 
there or get a representative or whatever and I said to 
them that I – I informed them in advance that I’m not 
around and I’m coming on this date please wait until I 
come back, just one week. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I don’t think the Chairperson will hear 
you. 
MR BALOYI:    Okay, sorry, so it was just an emergency 
that was created to deal with it in my absence, yes, so – 
and then – because when we – I finally went to meet with 
the Minister the whole discussion around our conversation 
20 
with the Minister, it was about me talking to the Executive 
who is suspended.  So – and ultimately at the end the 
Minister said that what I needed to have done would have 
been to inform Board members not to communicate with the 
Executives 
and 
that 
was 
what 
I 
was 
expecting 
the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 142 of 185 
 
decisions of the Minister to be because it was not about 
the content it was not about whether this one is right or 
this one is wrong it was about communicating with the 
suspended Executive …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the Board had never made a 
resolution that Board members should not communicate 
with the suspended Executives, had it, it had not? 
MR BALOYI:    No, no there was no communication. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, by talking to a suspended Executive 
you had not gone against any decision of the Board? 
10 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja what had been done was that the 
Executives had been told not to communicate with people 
in the company which I assume would be staff. 
MR BALOYI:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so did the Minister point out which 
decision of the Board or which rule or policy you had 
broken? 
MR BALOYI:    No, actually what – in our discussion, at 
the end of our discussion he said that it was supposed to 
20 
have done that directly to the Board, not to communicate 
with the suspended staff and also even when she wrote the 
letter 
to 
me 
the 
only 
thing 
was 
for 
me 
to 
have 
communicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why would she be – why would she be 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 143 of 185 
 
involved in matters of whether the Board – members of the 
Board talk to Executives of Eskom, as Minister, why would 
she get involved in that? 
MR BALOYI:    I was surprised, hence my only expectation 
from her was to have given a warning that you must not do 
it again from now on because seeing that, because when 
she wrote me that letter I think I’ve written to her five or 
six times to persuade her to change her mind around that 
and then – but there was never correspondence back, there 
was never a response around that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hm, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So Mr Baloyi the Commission, the 
Chairperson understands you to be saying, the Minister 
actually appreciated that there was no directive at the time 
and when you were at the meeting she’s saying, I should 
have made a directive, put it in place and prohibited Board 
members from speaking to the suspended Executives. 
MR BALOYI:    Ja it is exactly that, as you put it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did she put in place, that directive? 
MR 
BALOYI: 
 
 
 
I 
don’t 
know 
because 
the 
only 
20 
correspondence I got from her was that particular letter 
from her. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What letter was that? 
MR BALOYI:    It was the letter to say that you are no 
longer going to be a Board member. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 144 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But are you aware, prior to her giving 
you the letter of removal that she put in place a directive? 
MR 
BALOYI: 
 
 
 
No, 
I 
didn’t 
actually 
get 
any 
correspondence around that, I don’t think it was ever given 
to the Board members. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The decision of the Board to remove 
you, what is the reason that they gave? 
MR BALOYI:    It was mainly to have communicated with 
the suspended…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
They 
said 
because 
you 
had 
10 
communicated with a suspended Executive? 
MR BALOYI:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And was – do you know whether that was 
in the minutes or that’s what they told you? 
MR BALOYI:    It was not in the minutes it’s what they told 
me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s what they told you? 
MR BALOYI:    Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did they point out where they had 
made 
a 
decision 
that 
Board 
members 
should 
not 
20 
communicate with the suspended Executives. 
MR BALOYI:    No there was no…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
There 
had 
never 
been 
such 
a…[intervenes]. 
MR BALOYI:    No there was never such a directive or a 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 145 of 185 
 
rule. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, relative to your question, 
Mr Baloyi you could turn to page 376, it appears to be a 
letter 
from 
the 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
Board, 
interim 
Chairperson of the Board, Dr Ngubane, to yourself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, has it got a date 7 April 2015, it’s 
addressed to you Mr Baloyi and the heading is – the 
subject, meeting of the Board of Directors for your 
removal, 
10 
“We refer to the notice of Directors meeting which 
you received on Tuesday 7 April 2015”, 
 
Now, the letter is written on the 7 t h of April right, 
“Pursuant to the notice, the Board met, and the 
resolutions 
contained 
therein 
were 
adopted 
unanimously.  Please be advised that you are 
suspended as a non-Executive Director of the 
company with immediate effect. Your position on the 
Board shall become vacant on the letter of the 
Minister ’s 
concerned 
to 
your 
removal 
being 
20 
received, within 7 calendar days of 7 April 2015 or 
the expiry of the time of filing an application for 
review in terms of the Companies Act or the 
granting 
of 
an 
order 
by 
the 
Court 
on 
such 
application.  Please be advised that you have a 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 146 of 185 
 
duty of confidentiality in relation to all matters 
which came to your attention in your capacity as a 
non-Executive 
Director 
of 
the 
Board. 
You 
are 
required to keep confidential all such matters and 
that the company will hold you liable and seek 
appropriate 
redress 
including 
anything 
for 
damages”, 
 
I guess that’s supposed to say, should, it says 
would, 
“Should you breach your duty of confidentiality.  
10 
You are further advised to refrain from any further 
communication with Eskom, it’s Directors and its 
employees”. 
 
Where 
is 
the 
one 
where 
– 
where 
are 
those 
resolutions 
that 
were 
attached 
to the 
notice 
of the 
Directors meeting? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It would seem to be page 377, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which is between tramlines a notice of 
20 
directors meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   They’re giving a notice there, 
“Notice is hereby given that a meeting of the Board 
of Directors will be held”, 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 147 of 185 
 
 
And the proposed resolutions are set out from the 
middle of the page. 
“Resolution one, removal of Director. 
Reasons for the resolution.   
The Board is of the view that Mr Baloyi, the 
Director, has neglected or has been derelict in the 
performance of his functions as a Director as 
provided for in Clause 1310.3.3. of the MLI read 
with Section 71 (3) (b) of the Act.  The Board 
believes that the Director has not acted in good 
10 
faith and for proper purpose nor has he acted with 
the degree of chair, skill and diligence that may 
reasonably be expected of a person carrying out the 
same functions in relation to the company, as those 
carried 
out 
by 
the 
Director 
for 
the 
following 
reasons”, 
Then the reasons follow, 
“The Director has committed one or more acts of 
misconduct involving dishonesty towards the Board 
in that, through his actions and/or omissions he has 
20 
exposed the company to certain risks as numerated 
below. 
 
You 
have 
engaged 
with 
and 
made 
confidential disclosures regarding the purported 
intentions of the Board to at least one of the 
suspended Directors of the company.  In breach of 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 148 of 185 
 
your 
fiduciary 
duties 
you 
have 
threatened 
to 
disclose 
information 
relating 
to 
the 
Board, 
alternatively about and concerning the Board in 
order to embarrass the Board.  You have sought to 
mislead one or more of the suspended Directors in 
regard 
to 
the 
Board’s 
indentions. 
 
You 
have 
threatened to pursue certain litigation to advance 
an improper 
agenda and 
put 
the company to 
unnecessary expense”. 
Mr Baloyi then they carry on, I suppose you – I don’t know 
10 
did you receive this notice? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I did receive it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When did you receive it, I think it’s date 
the 4 t h of April, when did you receive it? 
MR BALOYI:    It could have been the same day but it was 
the date when I was not in Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh did you say that you could not attend 
because you were in Maritzburg. 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, Pietermaritzburg yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you communicated with them and 
20 
asked them to …[intervenes]. 
MR BALOYI:    Ja I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Change the date of the meeting. 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And they refused. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 149 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:    Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who did you communicate with, was it 
the company secretary or the Chairperson? 
MR BALOYI:    I think both, if I’m not mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:    Because in the whole board I think I might 
have written to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, did you suggest a date for the 
meeting? 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, I said that I’m coming in less than a 
10 
week. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Less than a week? 
MR BALOYI:    Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, did you indicate that it could be – 
the meeting could be on any date from a certain date or 
what did you say?   
MR BALOYI:    Yes I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And how much time was there between 
the date of 7 April to the date from when you would be 
available? 
20 
MR BALOYI:   It’s less than a week, I said immediately.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and what reason was given for not 
accommodating you? 
MR BALOYI:   No, they only said that if I was not going to 
be available they were supposed to – I was supposed to 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 150 of 185 
 
send a lawyer to go and present to them that I’m not 
available on that day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were telling them before the date of 
the meeting or were you telling them after. 
MR 
BALOYI: 
 
 
Immediately, 
no 
I 
wrote 
to 
them 
immediately. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:    Ja it was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They said you should send a lawyer? 
MR BALOYI:    They said to me I should have sent a 
10 
representative to come and ask for postponement or 
whatever but it was the very same thing that they did to Mr 
Tsotsi because you can’t give – these things, I mean, the 
MOI says that you must have at least ten days of notice 
and here you can see that it’s three days, it’s from the 4 t h 
to the 7 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Just to 
finalise, Mr Baloyi, so you say you are, as you were 
explaining to the Chairperson, you think your removal is 
20 
linked to you questioning certain transactions? 
MR BALOYI:    Ja, actually from what you could have 
noticed 
that 
actually 
everything 
emanated 
from 
there…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From the? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 151 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:    From the IT tender. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:    Everything emanated from there because 
the – Dr Ngubane was chairing it and…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the T-Systems transaction? 
MR BALOYI:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR BALOYI:    Everything emanated from there, so hence 
there was uncomfortability around whether they’ve done 
things right or wrong and I was surprised that the auditors 
10 
could not find anything as well, around that. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Who 
were 
the 
auditors, 
do 
you 
remember? 
MR BALOYI:    I think it was SNG. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:    I think so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why do you say everything emanated 
from your question the T-Systems tender? 
MR BALOYI:    No, because it is the one that made me to – 
the enquiry I made to Dr Ngubane it was around whether 
20 
everything 
has 
been 
concluded 
and 
instead 
of 
him 
responding to that, he just shouted at me and I was 
shocked because that was the first time that we were 
communicating 
after 
the 
departure 
of 
the 
previous 
Chairperson and I was asking in good faith to check 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 152 of 185 
 
whether we have concluded because my worry was the 
continuity extension as it was already above R4billion and 
that was extended.  So – because if you can see the 
emails that I wrote, after the departure of Mr Tsotsi, I think 
I wrote around the first four days that I’ve questioned 
these transactions and I’m not getting satisfaction with the 
responses.  So, there’s something that I was concerned 
about that will make this issue of these transactions to be 
as proper as possible and then I also suggested that, can 
we meet the following week that we discuss this and 
10 
instead of meeting the following week to discuss all this, I 
just happened to get this particular letter which was not, 
actually factually correct as well, in terms of the notice it 
was not factually correct because you could see that there 
were manufacturing of these particular allegations they 
were not actually factual. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Seleka just take Mr Baloyi to 
each one of those allegations against him and let him give 
a response to say what he has to say about each one of 
them. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you Chair.  Mr Baloyi that’s 
back on page 377, that notice of directors meeting, the 
reasons are set out from paragraph 1.1 below.  
“The Director committee one or more of the acts of 
misconduct involving dishonesty towards the board 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 153 of 185 
 
and that through his actions and/or omissions he 
has exposed the company to certain risks as 
numerated below.  1.1  You have engaged with and  
made 
confidential 
disclosures 
regarding…[intervenes]”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before you go to 1.1 maybe let 
him say what he has to say about that introductory part.  
What do you say about that part Mr Baloyi, where the 
notice says you had committed one or more acts of 
misconduct involving dishonesty towards the Board in that, 
10 
through your actions and/or omissions you had expose the 
company to certain risks? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, actually it is not correct because there 
was 
no 
misconduct 
from 
my 
side 
and 
there 
was 
no…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Did 
you 
do 
anything 
involving 
dishonesty? 
MR BALOYI:   No, nothing, actually there was nothing at 
all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay then you can take him to the 
20 
specifics. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So 1.1 says, 
“You have engaged with and made confidential 
disclosures regarding the purported intentions of 
the Board to at least one of the suspended directors 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 154 of 185 
 
of the company”, 
 
Now 
I 
must 
say, 
Mr 
Baloyi 
that 
confidential 
disclosures are not specified but what is your comment on 
that, did you make disclosures of a confidential nature? 
MR BALOYI:   No, there was nothing confidential, actually 
it was – they were referring to the letter that was written by 
Mr Koko, the one that I said that …[intervenes].    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just repeat that, they were referring? 
MR BALOYI:  They were referring to those information that 
was written in the letter…[intervenes].   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   From Mr Koko? 
MR BALOYI:    Yes, everything emanated from this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR BALOYI:    Ja so…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, they were taking what he was saying 
as true? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, but you maintain that you never 
disclosed to Mr Koko or any suspended Director anything 
confidential? 
20 
MR BALOYI:    No, there was nothing confidential in that 
Board, there was nothing that was private or secret 
because the issues of the suspensions – I mean, we didn’t 
have the Board meeting to talk about the issues of the 
suspensions. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 155 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:    After that, we didn’t have any – and I was 
not in [indistinct] in any committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, 1.2 Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Well I can go to 2, Chair, I 
had a question there about the intentions of the Board 
whether you said anything about the intentions of the 
Board to Mr Koko, do you know what are the intentions of 
the Board they’re referring to? 
CHAIRPERSON:   They don’t even say what intentions. 
10 
MR BALOYI:    Ja because actually, what we all knew was 
that the – and it’s what the Executives were told, that we 
want to do this inquiry then after that you won’t come back.  
So – and we even told them so there was – that’s why I’m 
saying that there was no intention of them not coming back 
or whatever the intention was that they will come back.  Ja, 
so there was nothing that was specified. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1.2? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   1.2 says, 
“In 
breach 
of 
your 
fiduciary 
duties 
you 
have 
20 
threatened to disclose information relating to the 
Board, alternatively about and concerning the Board 
in order to embarrass the Board”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know what they were talking 
about here? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 156 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:    Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ever threaten to disclose 
information relating to the board or up on the board. 
MR BALOYI:  Nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know anybody to whom you may 
have made this threat?  Did you ever make that threat along 
these lines to anybody whether to a member of the board or 
to somebody from outside? 
MR BALOYI:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because the way it is phrased formulated it 
10 
is as if you said to the board or a member of the board; I am 
going to disclose A, B, C, D. 
MR BALOYI:  No I think what I might have said was – could 
have been to say that the issues of these particular tenders 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The TC Systems tender. 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR BALOYI:  If he can go to the media. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR BALOYI:  If he is going to embarrass the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To embarrass the board. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so which is different from what they 
are saying here. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 157 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course if there were wrong things 
about that tender then you know the board should not be 
wanting to sweep them under the carpet. 
MR BALOYI:  Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1.3 – Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  1.3 Mr Baloyi reads: 
“You have sought to mislead one or more of 
the suspended directors in regard to the 
board’s intentions.” 
10 
Now did you know who are they referring one or more of the 
suspended directors? 
MR BALOYI:  No actually they are different to the same 
directors who was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Koko. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the only one you can think of. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja he is the only one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you – you actually do not know. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you – you are – that is the only one 
you can think of. 
MR BALOYI:  He is the one they were referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 158 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  Hence it was the very same conversation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And did you understand what they meant 
that you were trying to mislead him or sought to mislead 
him? 
MR BALOYI:  No.  No because of the factual incorrect things 
that he wrote in the conversation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  There is no – correct – well not 
correct but what I am asking you is, did you understand – did 
you understand – not understand.  Is it clear from this letter? 
MR BALOYI:  No it is not.  It is vaguely.  Actually it was not 
10 
written by lawyers.  I could see that it was written by Doctor 
Ngubane. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You mean the lawyers can be clear in 
their writing? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja okay.  1.4  
“You 
have 
threatened 
to 
pursue 
certain 
litigation – you have threatened to pursue 
certain litigation to advance an improper 
agenda 
and 
put 
the 
company 
to 
an 
20 
unnecessary expense.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know what they were talking about 
here? 
MR BALOYI:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you ever ask them or anyone of them; 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 159 of 185 
 
what are you talking about here you people? 
MR BALOYI:  No I did not actually ask about their… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You never got the chance. 
MR BALOYI:  Hm because I was asking them to wait until I 
come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But you – did you ever threaten to 
pursue any litigation at all? 
MR BALOYI:  No I think it was the issue of if they continue 
in my absence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
10 
MR BALOYI:  Ja if they continue with this process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you threaten to… 
MR BALOYI:  And it was not about the tender. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you threaten to go to court if they 
proceeded in your absence to remove you? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did threaten that? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I did mention that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you suspect that is what they may be 
talking about? 
20 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if that is – if that is what they are 
talking about would you have had an improper agenda in 
resorting to court? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I was .. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 160 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you have had an improper agenda in  
going to court about this issue? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I was going to have a proper agenda to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I said improper – it says improper. 
MR BALOYI:  No not improper – no, no, no.  It was not 
improper around everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR BALOYI:  There was nothing improper. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes but Mr Baloyi how is this a reason to 
10 
remove you when the reasons to remove must emanate 
outside of the calling of the meeting.  You understand what I 
am saying?  How does this become a reason to remove you 
if the meeting is actually sought to be convened for reasons 
outside of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure if I also understand. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So if you say I am asking for more time 
please stop the meeting from considering what is alleged to 
be dishonesty on your part.  How is this then part of a notice 
that is calling you to that meeting to remove you? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure if I understand. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  He does not follow Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just try again a formulation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So you are saying to the board please 
give me more time because I am not around.  So they are 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 161 of 185 
 
calling you to a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Actually he is saying change the date to 
another date when I am available. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes that is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So they already have the reasons why 
they want to remove you. 
MR BALOYI:  Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So how does your request on the day 
they notify you and you are saying to them, no change the 
10 
date becomes also now a reason why you should be removed 
when you say well if you do not – if you do not extend the 
meeting date I might go to court. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay now I understand. 
MR BALOYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me put it this way.  Mr Baloyi to the 
extent that number 1.4 seeks to condemn you or remove – to 
be used to remove you because you threatened to go to 
court if they did not change the date for the meeting.  Are 
you able to understand how they could use that to remove 
20 
you? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I understand your – I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  But 
can you 
understand their 
reasoning? 
MR BALOYI:  That intention cannot be used as a reason. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 162 of 185 
 
Even number 1.2 that I have threatened to disclose. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  They cannot remove a person because he says 
– said he has threatened to disclose.  I mean. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he has not threatened to disclose 1.4.  
He is threatening to pursue litigation.  And you explained 
that you threatened to pursue litigation if they did not agree 
to change the date of the meeting.  So the question is 
whether now when they take that and use that as part of the 
reason why you should be removed are you able to follow 
10 
their logic? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja I can follow their logic because they were 
trying to make allegations as many as possible.  They were 
also trying to see to it to check which one may stick which 
one may not stick.  So let us make as many allegations as 
possible so that one may stick. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They throwing at you as many allegations 
as possible. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
20 
MR BALOYI:  Because in general is that when we were – 
when we did the proceedings of the previous Chairperson Mr 
Tsotsi I did indicate where we are violating the memorandum 
of incorporation.  That we are not in compliance actually we 
are supposed to give him at least ten days of notice.  And 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 163 of 185 
 
there we are giving him a few days. So we are not even 
compliant.  And even this – it was not in compliance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Because I mean it was three days or 
something.  So they were continuing to violate the MOI that 
it was audit approved to be in use.  So – and for your 
information is that maybe if I could have made but I think I 
did make them available the emails I wrote about the first 
four days.  But actually remember Mr Tsotsi when he left on 
the 30t h. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  And then the first four days [talking over one 
another]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are the emails – are there emails that are 
not here which are relevant to… 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What we are talking about? 
MR BALOYI:  Exactly.  Because I think the – but I did send 
them through but I cannot see them here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay maybe they will tell you where they 
20 
are. 
MR BALOYI:  But they have got the subject of saying the 
first four days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What are some of the important things you 
– you said in those emails? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 164 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  No I was saying that the treatment of the 
board Chairperson I mean for example when I called and he 
shouted at me it was the first glitch that he ever done to me.  
I mean we never had such before.  It just came as a surprise 
to me.  I mean it was within the four or three days of him 
being the acting Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  So it came as a shock that he could respond 
to me in such a harsh way.  And then I do not know maybe it 
is because of the transaction that I have questioned because 
10 
he was supposed the one to approve it as the Chairperson of 
the tender committee.  So – and then I – also would have 
mentioned certain violations of some corporate governance.  
But I did write that in the letter to the Minister.  I think I 
wrote around twenty pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Twenty something – twenty-four pages. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja that is... 
MR BALOYI:  Where I indicate that all those issues that we 
are 
experiencing 
as 
a 
new 
board 
under 
the 
new 
20 
Chairmanship after Mr Tsotsi has left.  So the very few days 
there was very strange.  The behaviour was – from the 
chairperson was very strange.  It was inconsistent with how 
he used to be before he was the chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Mr Seleka. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 165 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The representations to the Minister Mr 
Baloyi page 385 check whether that is what you are referring 
to?   
MR BALOYI:  3? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The other emails that he is talking about 
we do not have? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The other emails we do not have.  We 
have emails but they do not bear reference to the issue Mr 
Baloyi is referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh then maybe if he could later on do an 
10 
affidavit and… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Attach them and deal with them and make 
the points he wanted to make. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Is that – page 385.  Page 385.   
MR BALOYI:  Yes it is here. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  These your representations to the 
Minister? 
20 
MR BALOYI:  Ja the 22 pages yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I see that from page – page 396 Mr 
Baloyi you seem to deal with these allegations we have gone 
through in that notice of the board to you.  And you address 
them under paragraph 6.2. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 166 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry just to get this right.  Your 
representations Mr Baloyi to the Minister are dated 15 April 
2015 and they start at page 385 and go up to 406 is that 
right? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  These representations 
related to the – your removal by the board?  Did they relate 
to your removal for the – from the board? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja why I must not be removed ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  But after the board had made the 
10 
decision? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright. Continue Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So as I understand the board made a 
resolution and presented it to the Minister? 
MR BALOYI:  Hm.  In my absence yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So the Minister was the one 
ultimately going to remove you? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So you are making representations to her 
20 
why she should not remove you? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And in your representation you deal with 
the grounds upon which the board made its resolution? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 167 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And that specifically appears from page 
496 paragraph 6.2.  You see that? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Are you on that page? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes I am. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  6.2 is the board: 
“On 7 April 2015 consider the following breaches of fiduciary 
duties which were never discussed with me on 3 April 2015 
SES Committee meeting.” 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And you list them 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 which 
bear. 
MR BALOYI:  The same ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Their reflection to .. 
MR BALOYI:  The one… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is a reproduction of those?  You have 
engaged with and made confidential disclosures regarding 
the purported intentions.  Which is the first one it has got all 
of them [00:15:22].  So you then address the Minister on 
each one of them in your representations. 
20 
MR BALOYI:  6.3 actually – ja I commented on 6.3. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Just raise your voice? 
MR BALOYI:  I said I commented on 6.3.  I said that this 
clearly and obviously proved that the board had realised that 
I have the prospect of challenging and winning against their 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 168 of 185 
 
decision of removing in the court of law because of the 
conditions of the Company’s Act 76 Section 4A5C as they 
know I am a [?] director against the suspension of the four 
executives.  They twisted their allegations so that they 
removed me based on what is contained in 6.2 something 
that was never tested to be true but a conclusion was made. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm.  And I see that if you turn the page 
to page 399 at the bottom of the page you specifically deal 
with the issue of confidentiality.  And under breach of 
confidence you say: 
10 
“It is Mr Koko and Doctor Ngubane and not 
me 
who 
disclosed 
the 
confidential 
information that took place between Mr Koko 
and myself.  Doctor Ngubane wrote to each 
and every member individually the letter that 
was written about me by Mr Koko.” 
Well you could refer us – let us see.  If you – I see you seem 
to refer to a paragraph number and you make a comment on 
a bullet point.  So let us quickly start at page 397 under 
paragraph 
7 
Violations 
of 
Corporate 
Governance 
and 
20 
Company’s Act.  Are you there?  So you say; let me please 
indicate the law how Corporate Governance was violated in 
this regard.  The obvious role of the chairperson. Then your 
bullet point follows.   
“The acting Chairperson failed to play a 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 169 of 185 
 
conciliatory role as a Chairperson when 
confronted with the letter from Mr Koko 
instead he took the advisory letter from the 
lawyers read it out to the board members and 
believed it as a definite breach of fiduciary 
duty without first testing it.” 
As the acting Chairperson I believe you are referring to Mr – 
Doctor Ngubane? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes.  It is him ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  7.2 you say: 
10 
“The Chairperson is obliged to use his or her 
power appropriately” 
Sorry just before that the word first testing it are you saying 
this letter was not given to you in order to respond to the 
allegations made by Mr Koko? 
MR BALOYI:  Actually what happened is that they did that – 
they got the letter Mr Koko. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  They asked for a board meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
20 
MR BALOYI:  Where we went there and then I – he said that 
he received the letter from the lawyers.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Who said that? 
MR BALOYI:  Doctor Ngubane.  That he got the letter – the 
opinion letter from the – from the lawyers so that he was 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 170 of 185 
 
saying to them that I talking to the suspended executive.  I 
breached fiduciary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just speak up – speak up Mr Baloyi. 
MR BALOYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not following what you are saying. 
MR BALOYI:  No, no he was saying that he got a letter of 
the opinion – the legal opinion from the lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was saying that? 
MR BALOYI:  Doctor Ngubane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About what? 
10 
MR BALOYI:  That for me to have spoken to  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Koko. 
MR BALOYI:  Mr Koko ja it was a breach of fiduciary duty 
because I was talking against the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but before they… 
MR BALOYI:  So the issue… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before they decided to call you to a 
meeting where they intended removing you they had not 
asked you to respond to Mr Koko’s letter and hear what you 
have to say before they could weigh up and see whether 
20 
they should believe what Mr Koko was saying or they should 
believe you, had they? 
MR BALOYI:  There was this social and ethics committee 
that I had engagement with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 171 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  There was Ethics and Social – what – Social 
and Ethics Committee where – where we had discussions 
about that.  And then it was supposed to – I think we – I did 
have a meeting with them to explain exactly what I said.  
That some of these things that are written are not true.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the Ethics Committee – Social and 
Ethics Committee. 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did ask you to explain – to respond to 
what Mr Koko had said? 
10 
MR BALOYI:  Ja it was mainly about the content of the 
letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes about the content. 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you – you explained what had 
happened? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the decision to… 
MR BALOYI:  What is true and what was not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The decision to call a meeting happened 
20 
after that? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the 
Ethics 
– Social and Ethics 
Committee would have gone to the board and told them what 
your response was to Mr Koko’s letter? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 172 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the allegations that – of Mr Koko made? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so when they called the meeting they 
have had – they had had the benefit of your version and Mr 
Koko’s version. 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR BALOYI:  Actually the meeting – no, no, no.  The 
meeting of the board happened I think it was Thursday.  And 
10 
then they said that I must meet with that committee and I 
think it was maybe the following day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After they had made a decision? 
MR BALOYI:  No, no.  Actually when the letter was received 
they made an urgent special board meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR BALOYI:  Where I was informed that there is this 
particular letter that we received from Koko and then we 
need to – I have requested the lawyers to check whether 
there is a breach of fiduciary duties.  I got the legal opinion 
20 
it says there is a breach and then we must do some fact 
finding with the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just switch on your microphone you have 
switched it off. 
MR BALOYI:  So that I can explain exactly what happened.  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 173 of 185 
 
So  
CHAIRPERSON:  So the question is simply whether by the 
time the board gave you a notice of the meeting of the 7t h 
April where they intended to remove you as a director 
whether by the time they sent you that letter you had been 
given a chance to put your side of the story in response to 
what Mr Koko had said in his letter. 
MR BALOYI:  Oh yes, yes we did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had got that opportunity? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you had used it? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  The lawyers they used is it 
Thompson Wilks? 
MR BALOYI:  I do not know because I asked for the legal 
opinion that they did not want to give it to me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  They did not give you the legal opinion? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja they did not.  So I do not know which ones. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well I see a letter is written to you by 
20 
Thompson Wilks. 
MR BALOYI:  They were the ones that we were using during 
[mumbling] Mr Tsotsi. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  They used those during Mr Tsotsi? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 174 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  How far are we from finishing Mr Seleka 
with him? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Baloyi then your representations to 
the Minister are there – to the Minister yes.  And is there any 
particular one you wish to draw the Chairperson’s attention 
to?  I have read some of them where you say confidentiality 
of information was in fact not disclosed by you but by Doctor 
Ngubane and Mr Koko. 
MR BALOYI:  Hm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well given the ultimate decision by the 
10 
Minister it would seem that your representations did not fly. 
MR BALOYI:  We can say so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you in these representations say that 
your 
removal 
was 
connected 
in 
any 
way 
with 
your 
questioning the T Systems tender? 
MR BALOYI:  I think so.  I believe so actually. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
MR BALOYI:  I believe so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not sure? 
MR BALOYI:  No I believe so. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You believe that you did? 
MR BALOYI:  Ja it was the main thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no but the question I am asking is not 
whether you believe so but whether you included that in the 
representations? 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 175 of 185 
 
MR BALOYI:  Oh yes I did yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did include it in the representations? 
MR BALOYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know whether the board responded 
to your representations to the Minister before the Minister 
took a decision? 
MR BALOYI:  No the – because the processes actually are 
usually like the board will first meet and they write the 
recommendations to the Minister.  And then the Minister will 
just call you for the [00:27:00] to come and present yourself 
10 
and then the Minister will make the decision based on your 
presentation.  So the board will not have had this because 
they did not get one prior to writing to the Minister.  And 
there was no more – there was no engagement with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you did not give the board a copy of 
your representations? 
MR BALOYI:  I – no I did not give the board it is only the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you also do not know whether the 
Minister sent them a copy to enable them to respond to what 
you had to say before she made the decision, is that right? 
20 
MR BALOYI:  No I do not know the in between processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not know.  Okay.  I see that in the 
Minister’s letter dated or appearing at page 407 signed on 
the 20 April 2015 I see that she refers to the meeting that 
she had with you on the 14 April in respect of your – she 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 176 of 185 
 
says your presentation.  And then she says among other 
things Section 762Aii she does not there say of which Act 
provides that a director may not use his position to obtain 
information to knowingly cause harm to the company.  Then 
she says by advising the suspended executive to approach 
the CCMA as well as threatening to make public the 
information you obtained you have acted contrary to your 
fiduciary duties to the company.  So the first part of that last 
sentence I have read seems to say it is wrong to say to an 
employee you may go to the CCMA if you are aggrieved. 
10 
MR BALOYI:  Yes she is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that how you understand it too? 
MR BALOYI:  She is saying so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought – I thought employers advise 
employees all the time when an employee gets suspended or 
dismissed they are advised of their rights you can go to the 
CCMA if you are aggrieved. 
MR BALOYI:  Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or you can go and appeal if you are 
aggrieved.  I thought that is just something that gets done? 
20 
MR BALOYI:  Exactly actually normally I mean whenever you 
dismiss a person you need to give them of their right that 
they have got the right to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR BALOYI:  Seek … 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 177 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it looks like the Minister thought – the 
Minister and the board thought that to the extent that if you 
had said that that would have been wrong.  Okay then they 
say this by threatening to make public the information you 
obtained.  You have acted contrary to your fiduciary duties.  
You do not... do you know what she is talking about there? 
MR BALOYI:   No ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What information she is talking about? 
MR BALOYI:   No.  Actually, I think it was copied and 
pasted.  It was corrected ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was copied and pasted from the board’s 
resolution? 
MR BALOYI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  She says further, seven...  
“...764(i) of the Companies Act 71 (2) and (8) allows 
directors 
to 
take 
reasonable 
diligent 
steps 
to 
become informed about matters in order to exercise 
the 
powers 
and 
functions 
of 
a 
director 
of 
a 
company.” 
 
Sub-section 
5 
goes 
on 
to 
set 
out 
the 
extent 
20 
contemplated in that: 
“A director is entitled to rely on one or more 
employees of the company in order to obtain 
information, opinions or thoughts or statements. 
It is my understanding that an executive placed on 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 178 of 185 
 
suspension falls without the employees whom a 
director may contact.” 
 
Then she says: 
“It is my view, by communicating with a suspended 
official, you have breached a fundamental principle 
of trust between yourself and the board, whereas 
the information that you sought to obtain and further 
contact with other employees of the company, 
should have been obtained through the interim chief 
executive. 
10 
You 
have 
admitted 
to 
divulging 
confidential 
discussions of the board with the suspended official, 
which 
for 
me 
raises 
concerns 
about 
ethical 
boundaries 
which 
should 
be 
observed 
by 
all 
directors.” 
 
Did you admit divulging confidential discussions of the 
board to a suspended official? 
MR BALOYI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR BALOYI:   No ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you admit to the minister that you had 
divulged 
confidential 
discussions 
of 
the 
board 
to 
a 
suspended official? 
MR BALOYI:   No, there was nothing to... there was nothing 
confidential.  As I have said that the issues of the suspended 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 179 of 185 
 
executives was never discussed after they were suspended.  
We never had the board meeting where we discussed them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   So there was nothing that was ever discussed 
at the board about ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
She 
says 
here, 
you 
admitted 
...[intervenes]  
MR BALOYI:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
...though 
divulging 
confidential 
discussions ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR BALOYI:   It was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to the board.  Did you ever admit 
...[intervenes]  
MR BALOYI:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that you have done that? 
MR BALOYI:   I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR BALOYI:   The good part of it is that, that meeting was 
recorded. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR BALOYI:   So hence I asked ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the meeting with the minister? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was recorded? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes.  As I asked your investigator to also get 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 180 of 185 
 
hold of that particular recording. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  We have the transcript. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No. we do not have it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, but have any attempts been made to 
get it or not really? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I do not think it has yet been made.  No, 
not yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  So I think attempts should be made 
to obtain it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The recording. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then she says in the last paragraph: 
“I have considered the board’s recommendation 
together with the presentation you have made at the 
meeting and in terms of Clause 13.11.3.7.2 of 
Eskom’s Memorandum of Incorporation, I hereby 
exercise my right as shareholder and inform you that 
I consent to the board’s recommendation to remove 
you as a non-executive director with effect from 
22 April 2015.” 
 
Well, that is here decision.  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Are there still outstanding issues to 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   There is one important question.  Let me 
see whether Mr Baloyi knows the answer to this.  Mr Baloyi, 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 181 of 185 
 
do you know who replaced you at the board after you were 
removed? 
MR BALOYI:   I do not know but I know there are people who 
came on board afterwards because there were obvious 
changes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you know the appointment of Mr 
Leonardo ...[intervenes]  
MR BALOYI:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Giovanni? 
MR BALOYI:   [No audible reply]  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You do not know? 
MR BALOYI:   No, I do not know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But do you know of his appointment on 
the board?  Not that you know him. 
MR BALOYI:   Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But of his appointment to the Board of 
Eskom? 
MR BALOYI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you hear who was appointed after you 
had left, who was appointed in your position? 
20 
MR BALOYI:   Ja, that point, I do not know.  But I have 
noticed the appointments. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The Chairperson cannot hear you. 
MR BALOYI:   No, I have noticed the appointments but I do 
not know who ...[intervenes]  
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 182 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was people you did not know? 
MR BALOYI:   I did not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was somebody that you did not know? 
MR BALOYI:   Yes, I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay was there somebody who replaced 
Mr Tsotsi as a director?  Do you know whether somebody 
was appointed to replace him as a director?  I know that in 
terms of chairperson, Dr Ngubane became the acting 
chairperson or interim chairperson. 
MR BALOYI:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was there somebody who was appointed 
as a director? 
MR BALOYI:   I do not know, actually. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not know? 
MR BALOYI:   No 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So there was no appointment of any 
person to replace Mr Tsotsi before you were removed? 
MR BALOYI:   No, there was no one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  That is all Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I had a question a minute ago but it 
seems to have gone away.  Did you ever get to know more 
about who owned T-Systems and who had an interest in T-
Systems whether during your time at Eskom or after? 
MR BALOYI:   I did not get to know the people or the 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 183 of 185 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You never got to know who owned that 
company or who ...[intervenes]  
MR BALOYI:   I just know it as a German company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As a German company? 
MR BALOYI:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have no further questions, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you very much Mr Baloyi for 
coming to give evidence.  I thought we were going to finish 
10 
much earlier but the circumstances did not permit.  But there 
were some important issues you needed to deal with this 
afternoon.   
 
But thank you very much for making yourself available.  
If you are able to get the correspondence that you talked 
about, the emails.   
 
Please, make contact with the legal team so that maybe 
you could put up an affidavit where you deal with those 
emails and attach them and comment on them.   
 
And then we will take it from there.  Thank you very 
20 
much for coming to assist the Commission.  You are now 
excused. 
MR BALOYI:   Thank you, sir.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, what is... what is our situation? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, tomorrow we have one scheduled 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 184 of 185 
 
witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And on looking at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The witness scheduled, specifically 
scheduled for tomorrow, should be fairly brief. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is the company secretary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or former. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If the Chair permits, we could due to 
time constraints start with Mr Venete Klein in the morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or we could start now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, if we have only... otherwise, if we have 
only witness tomorrow, I think we would have enough time.  
Is Ms Klein available to come back tomorrow? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I have not canvassed that at all.  I 
see actually has postponed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   If she nodding where she is?  Ja, she is 
nodding.  Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No.  Thank you of that.  So I think let 
us adjourn her evidence to tomorrow. 
07 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 278 
 
Page 185 of 185 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  We 
will now adjourn for the day and we will continue tomorrow at 
ten o’clock. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 8 OCTOBER 2020 
  
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
