 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
26 JANUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 331 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 167 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
26 JANUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 3 of 167 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 26 JANUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning DCJ.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we are ready to proceed 
however the Minister the relevant Minister is represented 
by Counsel Mr Moerane and he asked for an opportunity to 
address you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr – the Minister is represented by 
10 
Moerane? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  By the way he is virtual.  Mr 
Moerane. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry no I have got it wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Ntsebeza. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Moerane is present virtually 
indeed and is able to address you if required later; that is 
my instruction I have just received.  My apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The Minister is represented by Mr 
Ntsebeza. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Ntsebeza.  If – if you are 
comfortable to address me from where you are it is fine but 
if you need – want to go to the podium you can go to the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 4 of 167 
 
podium.   
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Can I do it from here? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  That is fine.  That is fine.   
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Good morning Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Ntsebeza. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Withstanding my name is Ntsebeza 
Dumisane Ntsebeza and I am instructed by Maluleke Seriti 
Makume Matlala Incorporated and the instructing attorney 
here is Mr Nhlelo Mtlala of that practice.   
 
As we have indicated we are for the Minister and… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the Minister of State Security? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Minister of State Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry to interrupt Chair but if 
social distancing is provided for perhaps we could ask or I 
could ask my learned friend to remove his mask so we can 
or I can certainly hear him.  I would be grateful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I am just not sure whether you know 
there is enough social distancing between the person 
behind him and the person in front of him as well as his 
20 
instructing attorney. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well they have duly scattered so 
Chair it would help. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you comfortable Mr Ntsebeza? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  I – I… 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 5 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of – in terms of the mask? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Well no I mean. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  I did not want not to put it on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  When the norm is that to be put on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no it is just that sometimes when 
you are speaking the transcribers cannot hear; sometimes I 
cannot hear; sometimes I can hear. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, ja. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  No thank you Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman 
as I said well I think I properly place myself on record.  I 
am instructed by the firm of Maluleke Seriti Makume 
Matlala Incorporated and Mr Nhlelo Matlala sitting next to 
me here is my instructing attorney. 
 
We represent the Minister.  The Minister is the 
Minister in charge of the State Security and the witness – 
the acting DG in the Department of State Security is – is 
somebody who is in the Ministry in which she has got 
20 
executive authority. 
 
Now the Minister was keen and is still keen that in 
the interest of National Security she should be satisfied 
that even as she wants to cooperate with the commission 
in its work she does not do so in circumstances where 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 6 of 167 
 
National Security will be compromised. 
 
She understands that you know in terms of the 
constitution 
and 
relevant 
legislation 
Section 
209 
establishes you know the – yes a security the intelligence 
community and Chair her function is to make sure that 
nothing happens that compromises that state of affairs. 
 
May I hasten to add Mr Chair that the Minister is 
quite conscious of the fact that any power and duty that 
she may have in order to protect the National interest 
cannot and should not extend to her protecting the 
10 
unearthing of criminality? 
 
If anything because of the position she holds in the 
executive she wants to assist this commission in doing so. 
 
Now we – as we were consulting yesterday she 
advised us that she would need to consider whatever it is 
that is own Director General – her own Director General is 
going to be testifying now. 
 
And what she told us yesterday was that she was 
none the wiser.  In fact we could have consulted on the 
basis of what you know the consulted if processes you 
20 
know resulted in and whatever else there would be that 
would give us an indication as to what the testimony 
00:06:55 but as of yesterday that was not available to us. 
 
She phoned me at about eight o’clock – half past 
seven thereabouts and she advised me that she has just 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 7 of 167 
 
been served with an application.  Even though it was our 
intention to work as we always do throughout the night so 
that by now as she told us that that was the view of the 
commission by now we have papers for a substantive 
application where we will be making a prayer of one or the 
adjournment of these proceedings pending the filing of 
those papers which would address whatever it is in the 
affidavit of Mr – of Loyiso. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Jafta. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Mr Jafta.  You will kill me 00:08:17 
10 
because we know each other for a long period of time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no I see you. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You remember the first name then the 
surname. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Better than the surname. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Ja.  I suppose it is because I usually 
address her by her [African language].  Yes. 
 
Now without being facetious about how things are 
20 
the Minister ’s concern and I say so very guardedly and 
advising arising – arises from what it would be that the 
testimony would be about.  And that was so up to when the 
- you know we – we left chambers yesterday and then she 
sent me an affidavit from Mr Jafta which I have read. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 8 of 167 
 
 
She still when I phoned her this morning she still 
was keen that we should consult because there are issues 
that she wants to avoid in that. 
 
As I stand here I am not aware wherein that 
affidavit there are issues that she would like to raise that 
is the testimony. 
 
Second thing I am not aware what extent they have 
00:10:12 to what this commission is all about. 
 
And therefore my – that is why I am in a position 
where it is a chicken and then the egg. 
10 
 
If we do not get the adjournment that we need in 
order for us to put before the commission on affidavit what 
it is that she would like could join issue with in the affidavit 
for Jafta I am disabled to address your Chairman as 
sufficiently as I would otherwise. 
 
That is the one end of the provision.  The other of 
course is that we appreciate and I appreciate and I think 
my client does appreciate that the life of the commission is 
not – is not forever and the – we are looking at what 
remedies would be available to her if there was no 
20 
adjournment – if the commission insists on working but well 
when preparing papers – once you are doing your papers 
you know there are going to be proceedings and then she 
will say, oh why – what is the point then you know because 
my fears have not been accommodated. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 9 of 167 
 
 
I would have loved a decision where before Mr Jafta 
testifies I am in a position to have put in writing under oath 
before the commission the essence of what it is that I feel 
would not be in the best interest of National Security if you 
and I can testify. 
 
That is  - that is in a nutshell. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I am going to hear what Mr Pretorius 
has to say and what Mr Moerane might have to say on 
behalf of Mr Jafta.  But as you say you make this request 
for an adjournment from a very disadvantaged position 
10 
because all you are able to say is that the Minister says 
she has certain concerns that relate National Security.  But 
you do not have any details. 
 
She received the affidavit around eight o’clock last 
night.  One would have thought that that was enough time 
for her to read it and to be able to say to you at least here 
are the concerns they relate to the following paragraphs in 
Mr Jafta’s affidavit and these are the concerns which –
which would put you in a good position at least and me to 
assess whether any claim that what Mr Jafta may be saying 
20 
in his affidavit might compromise National Security whether 
there is a proper basis. 
 
I have read Mr Jafta’s affidavit and I am not the 
Minister of Security from my own point of view I did not 
pick up anything that struck me as something that could 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 10 of 167 
 
possibly adversely affect State Security nor National 
Security.  
 
But as I say I am not Minister of… 
 ADV NTSEBEZA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  State Security.  She may be in a better 
position to understand certain things and – and so on.  So 
– but let me hear maybe what Mr Moerane has to say 
before I hear what Mr Pretorius has to say and then we 
take it from there.  Thank you. 
ADV MOERANE:  As the Chairman pleases. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I mention again you said you are live 
and I am sure the Minister is alive to the fact that as things 
presently 
stand 
the 
commission 
has 
serious 
time 
constraints.  It has got to finish its work by end of March.  
That is not a date we – we are choosing it is an order of 
court.  It is an order of court.  If we are to get more time 
we have got to go to court to get an extension.  We are 
about to launch an application to do that but the time that 
we will get is not intended to be time for leading – the 
leading of oral evidence but for the preparation of the 
20 
reports.  All oral evidence must be finalised not later than 
March.   
 
And everybody knows that last week we lost a 
whole week.  So every hour counts with us.  So there are 
those serious constraints and again from my side I 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 11 of 167 
 
appreciate and I think Mr Pretorius also appreciates that 
when it comes to matters relating to Intelligence there is a 
certain level of sensitivity and there are certain matters 
that may need to be protected. 
 
But at the same time I think from what you have 
said the Minister and I and the – that would be the stand of 
Mr Pretorius as well looks like we are on the same page 
that to the extent that there may be corruption and 
criminality within the State Security Agency within the 
Intelligence Committee that must be exposed. 
10 
 
So it is a question of where do you strike the 
balance in identifying the legitimate issues relating to 
Intelligence that need to be protected while being able to 
expose corruption.  That – I think from what you have said 
it looks like we are all on the same page on that. 
 
It is a question of how do we identify those things 
that need to be protected legitimately and – and leave 
corruption to be exposed without any hindrance.  Ja.  
Okay.  Mr Moerane  
ADV MOERANE:  Morning Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes good morning Mr Moerane I hope you 
have been hearing us. 
ADV MOERANE:  Yes, yes Chairperson I have been 
hearing what has been going on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I just want to… 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 12 of 167 
 
ADV MOERANE:  Chair I confirm that I – that I appear on – 
for the witness Mr Jafta together with my learned colleague 
Mr Ndabele. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MOERANE:  I just have two things to say with regard 
to the application and the first one is that Mr Jafta is – is 
not aware how – and he does not believe that he is giving 
evidence today may in any way endanger or compromise 
National Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MOERANE:  And the second thing that I am instructed 
to say on his behalf is that he is keen to discharge his 
responsibility to the commission by giving evidence today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MOERANE:  Those are our submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair this morning my learned 
friend Mr Ntsebeza and I had a discussion as is the ethical 
practice between Counsels such discussions remain off the 
record.  But as we stand here I think it is necessary to 
20 
have clarity as to why the postponement is sought and 
what application is contemplated in due course. 
 
Because that application may – it is now apparent 
have no prospects of success in which case the application 
for postponement would not have much merit.   
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 13 of 167 
 
 
I just place that on record to say that if the 
intention of the Minister is to bring an application that it is 
apparent now to you Chair has minimal or no prospects of 
success then there is no merit in the – what may be termed 
the interim exigency of a postponement to facilitate that. 
 
The second point I want to make Chair is that the 
commission has a mandate.  It is a statutory mandate and 
it must follow that mandate. 
 
Statutory 
it 
is 
obliged 
to 
lead 
evidence 
in 
accordance with the Terms of Reference of the commission 
10 
and in open.  That is not a desired imperative or an 
exercise 
of 
a 
discretion 
by 
yourself 
Chair 
it 
is 
a 
constitutional and it is a statutory imperative arising from 
the Commission’s Act. 
 
If there is or should be an application to avoid or do 
it in a different way that application may have of course be 
brought in due course.  The question is whether now a 
postponement is warranted to achieve that position. 
 
Great care has been taken by the Director General 
in consultation with the commission to ensure that the 
20 
interests be legitimate and I stress the legitimate interests 
of State Security will be protected in the evidence to come. 
 
There is no question of method; legitimate method 
or the identity of operatives being released.  Any reference 
to anything that happens beyond the borders of the country 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 14 of 167 
 
has been redacted. 
 
Of course we might have gone too far in that 
respect because if a foreign country and this country 
collude in an unlawful act we are judged by the standards 
of our constitution not theirs and – but in any event that 
question does not arise.  You will have noticed that any 
reference to a foreign country has been totally redacted in 
all the documentation.  So that could never be a cause for 
complaint. 
 
It may be Chair that the real concern of the Minister 
10 
and I stress it may be is less about the criminality line as 
you have made very clear and as I understand my learned 
friend’s position to be the Minister in no way wishes to 
prevent evidence of criminality, corruption or the like or 
abuse of constitutional principles not being presented in 
the open before you.  There is another concern. 
 
If that concern is the sensitivity of the information 
that is for the DD – DG to decide.  The DG has statutory 
powers.  He has statutory powers to declassify information 
and to release information and does that in an exercise of 
20 
a statutory duty. 
 
The evidence now I can say so from here and the 
evidence that Mr Jafta will give will clearly be that he has 
considered very careful the concerns that may be raised 
about the legality of what he says and is satisfied having 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 15 of 167 
 
considered the position and having redacted quite a great 
deal of evidence that the evidence before you is not only 
proper but it is his duty to give to you in his evidence. 
 
 I must say I have – and this I have not informed my 
learned friend about because I have only got instructions 
now from Mr Jafta that two Sundays ago he advised spoke 
to the Minister telephonically advised her and asked for an 
appointment saying he would give evidence and that 
meeting only occurred yesterday. 
 
But that meeting has taken place.  Two weeks’ 
10 
notice was not given to the Minister.  The – their 3.3 
position I will deal with separately. 
 
So in short Chair we have a mandate to present 
evidence.  The commission has a mandate to deal with the 
evidence. The law says and the constitution says it must 
be done in open.  That position can only be disturbed on 
proper application.  There is no evidence before you that 
that position can be disturbed by in camera application or 
the like. 
 
Clearly if that must be brought in due course so be 
20 
it.  But then the duties of the commission to conclude its 
evidence must be weighed up against the prospects that 
will occur or the outcome that will occur if there is a delay. 
 
If there is a postponement now for papers to be 
filed we will lose the week.  We simply cannot afford to 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 16 of 167 
 
lose the week.  And that is not a matter of your preference 
Chair it is a matter of statutory and court import.  We are 
obliged to finish our evidence within a limited amount of 
time; we cannot afford to lose the week.  Those are our 
submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Ntsebeza.  I just want to give you a 
chance to respond to what both Mr Moerane and Mr 
Pretorius have said in their addresses to me but I just want 
to say it seems to me that having received the affidavit 
around eight o’clock last evening the Minister has had 
10 
enough time not only to read the affidavit but to be able to 
instruct you to say here are my problems or areas of 
concerns in Mr Jafta’s affidavit. 
 
That after ten this morning she has not given you 
those instructions to say, here are my concerns in Mr 
Jafta’s affidavit that in my view compromise or may 
compromise National Security.  It does not count in her 
favour. 
 
But you might want to address that.  Yes.  Oh your 
microphone – just switch on your microphone ja. 
20 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  We are a team of pre-counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  And – and we are ably assisted and 
instructed by the attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 17 of 167 
 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Now the – my two juniors are not here 
precisely because they are working on the papers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  They were rushing against the time that 
was indicated by the court. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  In the interim there are certain I would 
not call them instructions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  But  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some remarks. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Some remarks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Where the Minister for instance says, 
the acting DG raised in his affidavit Section 12 of the 
Intelligence Services Act as being problematic in that he 
says it creates an opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice - just raise your 
voice. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  If I may she – she says you see Mr Jafta 
20 
raising his affidavit Section 12 of the Intelligence Services 
Act as being problematic in that it – he says it creates an 
opportunity for the Minister to this right to enter the 
operational terrain to recruit to handle agents or recruit 
members the Agency and to instruct members of the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 18 of 167 
 
Agency’s Fund Operations conducted by the Minister and 
persons in the Ministry acting in his or her behalf. 
 
My probe is that it is probably based on factors 
where 
the 
section 
has 
either 
been 
abused 
or 
misrepresented or misinterpreted. 
 
And then she says… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your voice is going down. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Then she says this section should not 
be read in isolation or the PFMA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I should stop you there. 
10 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It seems at least from what you have 
read from her remarks that she has sent to you it seems 
that at least what you have read so far is not necessarily 
something 
that 
compromises 
National 
Security. 
 
She 
wishes to put her side and understanding of maybe certain 
matters that Mr Jafta deals with including what a certain 
section means or what the corrects interpretation is. 
 
So that is different from National Security as I see 
it.  She will be given an opportunity to – to file an affidavit 
20 
or give evidence about any matters that you know Mr Jafta 
raises that she may be entitled to respond to.  That is 
separate. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  I hear you Mr Chair.  The problem there 
is that if – which is why the nature of this application is 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 19 of 167 
 
one of indulgence because it can go one or two ways. As 
the Chair indicated you can get an application for instance 
I did say if Thursday is a bridge too far we would be 
prepared to let the papers be filed instead tomorrow.  And I 
do not think we would lose a week by Friday we will be 
able to argue – we will – all of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By then we would have lost a whole 
week. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  It is not as worse as it could have been 
if we had said we are only going to serve on Friday. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I can tell you once we have lost this 
week it is difficult for me to think where we would fit in this 
evidence again within the lifespan of the commission 
between now and end of March. 
 
I have already scheduled a number of witnesses up 
to about mid-March.  There is a long list of outstanding 
witnesses and I do not know where to fit them in.  I was 
telling Mr Pretorius yesterday that we – we might have to 
intensify having day and evening sessions.  Actually I think 
I have asked somebody to look at the Covid Regulations 
20 
and see whether we can – we can – there is any exception 
that would allow us to sit beyond nine o’clock whether we 
should ask the President to amend the regulations to allow 
the commission to sit beyond nine o’clock to try and fit in 
all these witnesses and implicated persons that we must 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 20 of 167 
 
hear.  
 
So – so you would have seen already last year 
second half of the year many times I would be sitting 
during the day and when we finish at four or five o’clock 
another team comes and I sit until seven, eight, nine.  So 
we are under tremendous pressure. 
 
So if we lose this week I do not know where I could 
fit every – this very important evidence.  But I come back 
to the question – I come back to the question.  It seems to 
me that the Minister has had enough time from eight last 
10 
evening to read the affidavit of Mr Jafta and be able to 
instruct you to say, these are the areas in his affidavit that 
in my view compromise National Security.  And I cannot 
see why she would not have been able to do that up to 
now. 
 
And from… 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Except that my – my juniors are working. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Ja as we.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well and of course I would have imagined 
20 
that if she said to you last evening I would like you to ask 
for an adjournment obviously first question is what are the 
grounds for asking the adjournment?  If she says this 
evidence will compromise National Security okay we will 
need to have that or to hear what is the problem.  And if 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 21 of 167 
 
she did not tell you last night one would have expected you 
had to tell you quite early this morning so that by the time 
you stand here you are able to say, it is not in the papers 
yet because the papers are being prepared but I know what 
is going to be in the papers and what is going to be in the 
papers is that the following paragraphs in Mr Jafta’s 
affidavit in the view of the Minister compromise National 
Security. 
 
That is the basis for a postponement.  As far as you 
are aware you are not aware of that part.  Maybe your 
10 
juniors have wherever they are working on the papers or 
are already aware but you the one who should – who 
should have been informed because you were the one who 
was going to move the application. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Mr Chair can I seek an indulgence or 
can we have a stand down? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Because I would like to give some 
instructions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For ten minutes only.   
20 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:  Ten to fifteen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No objection. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 22 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I am going to stand the matter down 
for let us say up to twenty past – up to twenty past ten on 
my watch it is eight minutes past.  Ja and then we will 
resume.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue.  You may be seated.  
Yes, Mr Ntzebeza. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   [Microphone not switched on] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   [Microphone not switched on] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   [Microphone not switched on] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Ja, okay. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Ja, I will get used to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Ja, Chairman.  When we adjourned, we 
were indicating to the Chair why it is critically important for 
us [microphone not working – speaker’s voice disappears.]  
20 
Because already – I will address later on the question of why 
we did not deal with it last night. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   You know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 23 of 167 
 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   But there are critically important points 
that we would like to raise and that is innovation to just the 
factual basis.  We believe, as is commanded by the act, that 
there should have been a consultative process.  In fact, in 
terms of Section MO, the DG is enjoined ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just complete ...[intervenes]  
ADV NTSEBEZA:   The MO ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to say of what act. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   ...of the Intelligence Act ...[indistinct] 
[Speaker is unclear.] 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, may I interrupt? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For the sake of the record.  I am 
informed that the transcriber is having difficulty in picking up 
my learned friend’s voice.  So either he should come to the 
podium ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think so. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...or to stand much closer to the 
microphone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he maybe he should ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
And 
speak 
a 
little 
louder 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Your choice Mr Ntzebeza. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   I will ...[indistinct] nearer to the 
...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 24 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   If – because of the...  [laughs] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Perhaps he should come to the 
podium. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, he seems much more comfortable 
where he is.  It is your choice whether you ...[intervenes]  
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Well, unless my attorney who is going to 
be able ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, to be scribbling.  Ja.  Well, maybe you 
can be there.  Just raise your voice and we will – the 
transcribers will tell us if they still cannot hear you. 
10 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Am I audible now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, they say it is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is a loudspeaker. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Oh, okay.  Alright, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Yes.  Now, the plea we are making 
Mr Chair for indulgence to be able to commit on paper what 
the basis is that the minister is uncomfortable about in the 
matter proceeding today to hear the evidence of the DG is 
because already from just what has been said between us, 
20 
there is a dispute of fact, which therefore falls upon the 
parties to ventilate those issues in the manner that had been 
suggested, come on paper.   
 
Let us have the benefit, full benefit of what you are 
saying.  Reasons on this whole question of whether or not 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 25 of 167 
 
there was a consultation.  In the brief period that you gave 
us, indulging us with an adjournment Mr Chair, we have 
established that there was a foundation.  There was no 
consultation 14-days ago.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And how does that compromise National 
Security, the absence of consultation? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   The consultation is a process that is 
required in terms of the legislation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV 
NTSEBEZA: 
 
 
Because 
some 
of 
the 
issues 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What does the section read?  Let me just 
me hear.  I do not – I am sure there is a file that has got all 
the legislation that we have.  Registrar?  Or maybe you can 
just quickly read the section Mr Ntzebeza. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   The section from my notes is Section 
10(4) of the Intelligence Services Act 65. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It says there: 
“There should be consultations between the DG and 
the minister if there is going to be what?” 
20 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   It says: 
“The 
National 
Security 
Intelligence 
collection 
matters, sources of information and the identity of 
members 
of 
the 
agency 
are 
protected 
from 
unauthorised disclosure.” 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 26 of 167 
 
 
And C says: 
“The ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Repeat and raise your voice. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   The National Security ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Can I have the file that has 
got that act?  Because we have got that file.   
REGISTRAR:   [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, the section is at page 117, 
black numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Yes, Mr Ntzebeza. 
10 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Thanks Mr Chairman.  Now 10(4) over 
that Mr Chairman.   
CHAIRPERSON:   It is 10 sub-section ...[intervenes]  
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Four. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And which sub? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Sub-section A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja?  
“The Director-General must, as far as reasonable 
possible, take steps to ensure that National Security 
Intelligence, 
intelligence 
collection 
methods, 
20 
sources of information and the identity of members 
of the agency ...[intervenes]  
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Are protected ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   “...unauthorised disclosure.” 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 27 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It says nothing about consultation.   
ADV NTSEBEZA:   And then right at C. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Oh, no, no.  I want to read all of the 
sections I want to rely upon.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV NTSEBEZA:   A of that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Read one at a time and tell me what – how 
it advances the minister’s case. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   It...  Well, the point here is that the DG 
10 
who is enjoined by that section to ensure all of those things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the paragraph A says the DG must 
ensure that the – certain things, certain – National Security 
Intelligence, intelligence collection methods, sources of 
information and the identity of members of the agency are 
protected from unauthorised disclosure.  Who has the power 
to authorise disclosure?  Is it not the DG? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Well, I... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   I do not understand? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am saying, who has the power to 
authorise disclosure? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So what this point did is unauthorised 
disclosure. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 28 of 167 
 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there must be someone who has the 
power to authorise disclosure. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  An authorised disclosure is not 
prohibited. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   No, it is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   But the point I am making is that the DG 
being the Executive Officer in the Ministry Of Intelligence 
10 
pose a duty to the Minister to disclose.  I mean, to have a 
consultation with her as to whether she can be comfortable 
that those, you know, imperatives ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that may be the minister and the DG 
but it looks like we – you have moved from relying on saying 
that Mr Jafta’s evidence or the Minister has moved from 
saying Mr Jafta’s evidence may or will, I am not sure which 
one, compromise National Security.   
 
To now saying there is consultation which did not take 
place which is just a procedural thing.  And obviously, it may 
20 
be that during the consultation she would be told information 
that she could think might compromise security.  But 
obviously, that is separate from the process.  At this stage, 
you are talking process as I understand it.   
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 29 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So I am suggesting that that might 
between the two of them but not the Commission. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Yes, but the Commission can also not 
proceed when it is clear that some of the – this dealings that 
the Minister does have ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Where is the provision in Section 10(4) 
that talks about the consultation between the minister and 
the DG? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   No, there is not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not see it. 
10 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   There is no injunction there that they 
must have consultation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   But if you read that, you know, together 
with Section 12(1) of that act where the Minister made do or 
request to be done, all things done, all things which are 
necessary for this – efficiency or attendance component 
functions of the Intelligence Service.  If you read that, then 
you read it with the section.   
 
Then the submissions is being made that when the DG 
20 
comes to testify in a commission, an open commission about 
matters in relation to which the Minister, let alone the 
Minister having to consult with the President, is unaware of.  
Then – as I say, I do not want to make the argument on my 
feet. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 30 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   I need to cultivate it by way of, you know 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I am going to try and get us to end 
of this argument.  As things present stand.  Firstly, you said 
the Minister had a concern that Mr Jafta’s evidence, I do not 
know whether she was saying will or may, compromise 
National Security.  Nothing that you have said so far appears 
to me to support that.   
 
I have read Mr Jafta’s affidavit.  I cannot see any – I did 
10 
not see anything that I think would be said to threaten 
National Security.  Either Mr Pretorius or Mr Murano has said 
Mr Jafta is satisfied that there is nothing in his affidavit that 
threatens National Security.  And the Minister has not said 
anything through you that seems to support that.   
 
The argument then moved to – in terms of the act, there 
was a consultation that was supposed to take place between 
the DG and the Minister and I was referred to Section 10.   
 
In Section 10, there is no reference to any consultation 
that should take place between the Minister and the DG 
20 
before she comes and testifies.  Even if there was, I would 
be inclined to think that is a matter between them.   
 
And you have now referred to Section 12(1) and says the 
Minister may, subject to this act, do or cause to be done all 
things which are necessary for the efficient superintendent’s 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 31 of 167 
 
control and function of the agency.   
 
Nothing there says anything to me that supports any 
notion that Mr Jafta’s evidence may threaten National 
Security.   
 
I would like to give you the next five minutes to address 
to me any other argument that you may have wish to 
address.  I will give you ten minutes if you complain that five 
minutes is too little.  So that I can make a ruling.  But so far 
everything – nothing that has been said seems to support the 
Minister’s concern about National Security.   
10 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   As the Chair pleases.  Chairman, I will 
only this point with respect to consultation and that is the 
factual inquiry.  The Minister wants to record to the extent 
that there is a submission that there was a consultation 
between her and the DG 14-days ago.  That is the thing.  
[Speaker’s voice trails off – unclear]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think – I do not know if – I did not 
understand Mr Morane to say there was a consultation 14-
days ago.  I understood that Mr Jafta had called the Minster.  
I understood the point that was being made as if the purpose 
20 
of the call was to arrange a meeting with the Minister.  That 
was my understanding.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   As far as that goes Mr Chair.  The 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 32 of 167 
 
Minister – in the application we would hope to make which 
has been the subject matter of our discussions here - would 
like to inform you that she did write letters to the DG 
precisely because she wanted to be appraised of what it was 
that she was coming to testify about so that she can see to 
what degree it – while she does not become obstructive to 
the work of the Commission nonetheless takes into account 
the penny skills such as they may be.   
 
Now from what you would read, if you grant us the 
intentions, you would be told that in her letter of the – there 
10 
is a date.  The Minister wrote to the DG to which he has not 
responded.  And with your permission Mr Chair, the letter it 
can be discovered in ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Does the letter say anything about 
supporting 
the 
concern 
that 
Mr 
Jafta’s 
evidence 
may 
threaten National Security or compromise it? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Those are exactly what she had wanted 
to have this consultation with Mr Jafta.  If I may, you know 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But she wanted to find out?  She has had 
20 
an opportunity since eight p.m. last night to read the affidavit 
of Mr Jafta and form a view whether there is anything in that 
affidavit that she thinks may compromise National Security.   
 
With the time that you have had, I take it that she has 
not been able to say to you:  Here are paragraphs in 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 33 of 167 
 
Mr Jafta’s 
affidavit 
that 
in 
my 
view 
threaten 
National 
Security.   
 
Because if she had told you that, surely, that would have 
been the first thing you would have told me.  So I suspect 
that she has not told you that. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   For purposes of testifying here.  In 
relevant parts, for instance, she says:   
“I reiterate the request in my letter dated 20 August.  
As a matter of urgency, I request you to provide me 
with the following...” 
10 
 
And this has not been responded to. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
But 
my 
concern 
Mr 
Ntzebeza 
is 
...[intervenes]  
ADV NTSEBEZA:   I am getting there.  I am getting there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...before she got the affidavit.  She got the 
affidavit yesterday, last night.  She has not been able to say:  
Here are my concerns in this affidavit.  It is this paragraph 
and that paragraph.   
ADV NTSEBEZA:   But one of the concerns is what I am 
proposing to you Mr Chairman. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   And that is.  She would – she wanted to 
find out from the DG, for instance:  
“I would like to get from you a list of all current and 
former members that had been implicated by the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 34 of 167 
 
Commission.   
I would like to get a list of all current and former 
members that have been requested to appear before 
the Commission.   
Their dates of appearance, affidavits submitted to 
the Commission and/or subpoenas.  Documentation 
from the Commission pertaining to each case.   
I 
request 
the 
above 
with 
the 
interest 
of 
endeavouring to safeguard National Security and 
interest. 
10 
My request is further empowered by Section 12(1) of 
the Intelligence Services Act 65 of 2002 as amended 
which states that the Minister may subject to this 
act, drew a cause to be done all things which are 
necessary for the efficient superintendent’s control 
and functioning of the agency.” 
 
Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I hear what it says. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Yes, Chairman should - may well take 
that...  You know, you have not said anything to me that says 
20 
National Security is going to be ...[indistinct] [Speaker’s 
voice trails off – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   But she says to her own DG:  Let me 
have it.  Let me consult.  Let me be sure ...[intervenes] 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 35 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But she ...[intervenes]  
ADV NTSEBEZA:   But I will decide my own responsibilities 
...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   ...obligations and human functions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   ...[indistinct] constitution.  If you allow 
me to do so.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   And you can allow me to do so if you let 
10 
me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Are those your submissions? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Well, there is just the mundane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   There is a submission that we will not 
make that, even when she got the affidavit, it was last night.  
It was an unsigned affidavit.  And I do not know to what 
extent that ...[indistinct] [background noise interference – 
cell phone ringing.]  Because the affidavit was unsigned.  
And...   
20 
 
Now, His Lordship has asked pertinent questions about 
what did she do at eight o’clock ...[indistinct] [Speaker’s 
voice trails off – unclear]   
 
She was going to be there but there was no way we 
would have wanted ...[indistinct] [Speaker’s voice trails off – 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 36 of 167 
 
unclear]  And I have made the submission because I have 
been, like I said ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja.  Chair, once again.  My learned 
friend is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:     His voice drops. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If he can speak into the microphone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   I made the submissions without being 
facetious.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   There is a curfew that is currently in 
operation.  And by nine o’clock we are rushing.  In fact, I left 
my chambers at twenty past eight.  And it is not because she 
was laying on hands.  That is why I keep on reading to you 
Whatsapp messages but Whatsapp messages can never 
substitute for a proper consultation.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   So that we may even answer those 
questions which is His Chairmanship has asked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   And it is in that process where say to her 
but the law says.  And we may end up saying that there is 
only one narrow way.  That is one narrow approach.   
 
We discussed all the other approaches and this is our 
basis for seeking to get the indulgence to make sure that 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 37 of 167 
 
your concerns is being addressed by a testimony or by...   
 
We are not saying Mr Jafta must not testify.  Not by a 
long shot.  We are even prepared, as we said to file our 
papers by no later than tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are those your submissions? 
ADV NTSEBEZA:   Those are my submissions.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, you know, it is precisely 
because I am very alive to the sensitivity of National 
Security and matters relating to National Intelligence on that.  
I have really allowed as much time as I have to hear what 
10 
the Minister has to say what her concerns are.   
 
And once you said to me her concerns relate to National 
Security, immediately I said:  Well, I must hear because the 
Commission certainly would not like to do anything that 
would compromise National Security.  But obviously, there 
has got to a factual basis.   
 
It seems to me that there has been enough time from the 
time that she got the – Mr Jafta’s affidavit last evening, after 
this morning, for her to have been able to say my concern 
that Mr Jafta’s evidence may threaten National Security is 
20 
based on the following which is in the affidavit.  1,2 ,3, here 
are the paragraphs that I consider.  That has not been done.   
 
And you have made reference to certain other points 
including Section 10(4) and 12(1).  I do not think that they 
assist in any way.   
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 38 of 167 
 
 
So 
as 
things 
stand, 
I 
am 
going 
to 
dismiss 
the 
application.  I am not preventing you if later on you have 
substantive papers that showed or rectified or remedied the 
deficiencies that are there now.  To bring that application 
and I would look at it at this stage.   
 
But as things stand and on what you have told me in 
your address, there is nothing that would justify the 
adjournment of the proceedings and the hearing of Mr Jafta’s 
evidence.  So the application is dismissed.   
ADV NTSEBEZA:   As the Chairman pleases. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, I hear you and I do not want 
to reopen the argument but I do think it is important to put 
certain sections of the act on record in support of the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And this issue of consultation 
because it may affect the future conduct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Section 12(1) on which my learned 
20 
friend and the Minister appeared to rely is very clear.  It 
says that: 
“The Minister may, subject to this Act, do or cause 
to be done all things necessary for the efficient 
superintendent’s control and functioning with the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 39 of 167 
 
Agency.” 
But she has subject to the provisions of the Act.   
Section 10(4) which is important, Chair, places the 
power to take steps to ensure that issues named by my 
learned friend and listed in this section are protected from 
unauthorised disclosure rests solely in the hands of the 
Director General and I solely.   
And then Section 27, which is also important, says 
that: 
“The disclosure of classified information or material 
10 
by former members...” 
And there will be former members who will testify. 
“ is entirely a matter in the charge of the Director 
General.” 
So any powers afforded to the Minister under Section 12 
are subject to the direct exclusive powers of the Director 
General in those sections. 
“There 
is 
a 
provision 
for 
consultation 
when 
directives and regulations to are issued by the 
Minister and the minister ’s own regulations…” 
20 
Perhaps not this minister, but a minister ’s own regulations 
make it quite clear, okay, and this is very important for the 
proceedings that: 
“A document that continues to meet classification 
requirements must be continue to be protected from 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 40 of 167 
 
unauthorised disclosure.  A document must be 
declassified if it no longer complies with the 
standards for classification.” 
But most importantly, Chair: 
“Classification may not be used in instances 
to conceal violations of law…” 
That is criminality. 
“…inefficiency or administrative errors. 
(b) 
Prevent embarrassment to a person and/or 
organisation, prevent or delay the release of 
10 
information that does not require protection 
in the safety or interests of the Republic of 
South Africa any other information that does 
not fall within and the prescribed category. 
So the powers of the Director General are unqualified in 
regard to evidence and releasing evidence, firstly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And secondly, the scope for 
classification is in fact very narrow.  And fortunately, those 
are secret regulations. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, we have lost two hours but it 
was necessary that I hear  what the – what counsel for the 
Minister had to say so but now let us proceed.  The 
registrar must administer the oath or affirmation. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Chairperson? 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 41 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who?  Oh yes, ah huh? 
ADV MVUMBI:    Chairperson, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV MVUMBI:   Chairperson, earlier on at your chamber 
when I availed myself I had certain issues that I wanted to 
raise with Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MVUMBI:   And I feel that those issues, they are not 
raised, it will not be at the best interest of my client. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MVUMBI:   And probably some of my learned 
colleagues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Chairperson, I think it is very much 
important that we do ground check and I am glad my 
learned colleague started in terms of these proceedings to 
make his submission.   
Even though our issue is not closely related to the 
issue of my learned colleague but for somehow they have 
got characteristics. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do you want to just remind me 
which – who is your client?  Obviously I do not want you to 
disclose the identity if you are supposed to use a pseudo 
name. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Yes.  Chairperson, yesterday, Chairperson, 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 42 of 167 
 
we when we were placing ourselves on record we had 
housekeeping to do in terms of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay. 
ADV MVUMBI::   But that was done, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MVUMBI:   And for the purpose of record in fact I 
must say I am Advocate Mvumbi I am on brief from P G 
Maseka, I am not alone, I am with my attorney of record, 
Palesa Maseka.   
Chairperson, 
we 
have 
agreed 
with 
Advocate 
10 
Pretorius in terms of the name to be used going forward 
with our client and for the purpose of record that name will 
be Dorothy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Dorothy? 
ADV MVUMBI:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV 
MVUMBI: 
 
 
Chairperson, 
if 
I 
may 
proceed, 
Chairperson I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Dorothy or just Dorothy? 
ADV MVUMBI:    Ms Dorothy. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Dorothy.  Okay, alright. 
ADV 
MVUMBI: 
  Chairperson, as I was 
saying, of 
paramount importance that we do not ignore the rules of 
this Commission and at the time wherein the rules are 
changing the Commission must see it of importance that all 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 43 of 167 
 
legal teams are being involved and we are in solidarity 
there together and we are trying to assist the Commission 
the best way possible. 
 
Chairperson, if this Commission is saying it has 
constrained time the Commission must involve each and 
every legal representative that is available to represent 
their implicated parties in this Commission.   
By so doing, this while minimise the situation of 
these two hours that has been lost this morning and 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to start by telling me what 
the issue is and then you can elaborate? 
ADV MVUMBI:   Now the issue is yesterday Chairperson 
introduced the witness, which is the ADG, Acting Director 
General.  Now that came as a surprise for many of us.  I do 
not know if there were others in secret who were aware of 
that situation but we then went to write a letter.  
As soon as we get to our offices we come together 
and we say our minds.  We wrote a letter which till now the 
secretary of the Commission – in that letter with attention 
20 
to Chairperson – have not responded to us and I do not 
know if, Chairperson, is also informed of the letter that we 
have written. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the issue?  What is the letter 
about?  Tell me what is the issue. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 44 of 167 
 
ADV MVUMBI:   The letter is about should the Acting DG 
today be coming here and testifying or giving evidence 
which implicates not just my client but any other person 
without having proper notice in terms of Rule 3.3 served 
on.  That, we believe it will be of prejudice to our client. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but as things stand you are not 
saying you have a client who is implicated by the DG’s 
affidavit and your client has not been given a 3.3 notice, so 
…[intervenes] 
ADV MVUMBI:    Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   …the issue has not arisen.  The legal 
team is aware of the rules of the Commission and they 
always ensure that Rule 3.3 notices are issued or where 
they are not issued and there are reasons, those are 
stated.   
So unless you say your client is implicated in Mr 
Jafta’s affidavit but he or she did not receive or she did not 
receive 3.3. notice …[intervenes] 
ADV MVUMBI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not have – unless you say that 
20 
you do not have a complaint. 
ADV MVUMBI:   No, I do agree with Chairperson on what 
Chairperson is saying but be that as it may be, we stand 
here not informed of what the affidavit …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but if you are not implicated you are 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 45 of 167 
 
not going to be informed. 
ADV MVUMBI:   But, Chairperson, if …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   If he is not going to implicate you, why 
should you be informed? 
ADV MVUMBI:   Chairperson, having looked at the 
situation 
that 
happened 
yesterday 
and 
my 
learned 
colleague is going to also address Chairperson on this 
issue, 
the 
same 
thing 
yesterday 
was 
made 
clear 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, let us talk about this one.  What right 
10 
do you have to be given a 3.3 notice if you client is not 
implicated? 
ADV MVUMBI:   The DG sits at the highest structure in 
terms of administration of the SSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What does that have to do with why you 
should be given notice? 
ADV MVUMBI:    My client, Chairperson is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   She thinks she will be implicated? 
ADV MVUMBI:   We have – Chairperson, it sounds – I 
know, I know, I know and we are trying to work with Chair.  
20 
It sounds like we are maybe not being reasonable but if we 
do 
not 
raise 
this 
issue 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, no, this particular point has no 
merit.  Is there another concern? 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 46 of 167 
 
ADV MVUMBI:   Chairperson, I thought we must just stand 
up and make that – and place that on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, you have placed it on 
record. 
ADV MVUMBI:    In case in future we need to raise it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, you have placed it on 
record. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius, proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, Dorothy …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I am sorry, somebody else wants to 
say something.  
MR NTSEBEZA:…(inaudible – microphone switched off] 
CHAIRPERSON:    Sorry, I think you are too close to me 
for social distancing.  I think try to be somewhere else.   
MR NTSEBEZA:…[inaudible] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, Mr Ntsebeza was fine. 
MR NTSEBEZA:…Ja, thanks, Chair, I was saying I will be 
failing my clients and in fact the Commission itself if I do 
not put this on record.  It is common cause that our clients 
20 
were not provided with a…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you are saying – oh, you have a 
number of clients? 
MR NTSEBEZA:…We have a number of clients, that is 
correct. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 47 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NTSEBEZA:…None of them were provided with a copy 
of the DG – or rather, a Rule 3.3 notice or the copy of the 
DG’s …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But are they implicated? 
MR NTSEBEZA:…It would be easy, Chairperson, for us to 
say they were not provided because they are not implicated 
but then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do they think they would be implicated? 
MR NTSEBEZA:…But then yesterday, Chair, when we 
10 
learnt that the DG would be testifying we asked the 
evidence leaders whether – in fact, why we were not 
provided with any Rule 3.3 and whether any of our clients 
have been implicated.   
They could not deny or confirm, nor deny same 
leaving us to our own devices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But unless you …[intervenes] 
MR NTSEBEZA:…This is concerning, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, unless you say to me, Mr – the 
witness’ affidavit reveals that your client is implicated but 
20 
your client was not given a Rule 3.3 notice, I do not think 
that is any concern relating to being given a notice really 
has any merits.   
MR NTSEBEZA:…Chairperson, you …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Unless I misunderstand what you want to 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 48 of 167 
 
say. 
MR NTSEBEZA:…Clearly.  We have already indicated I do 
not have that statement …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you are [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
MR 
NTSEBEZA:…And 
for 
that 
matter, 
Chairperson 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not entitled it until you are 
ready to [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR NTSEBEZA:… That is correct. But we have asked the 
10 
Commission, we have asked evidence leaders whether any 
of our clients would be implicated and the kind of – we do 
not get any response.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
NTSEBEZA:…If 
anything, 
we 
are 
treated 
with 
contempt. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, being treated with contempt, if it is 
true, would not be acceptable but until you hear evidence 
that implicates your client you should not worry about 
anything. 
20 
MR NTSEBEZA:…But, Chairperson, with regards to at least 
one 
of 
my 
clients, 
this 
kind 
of 
conduct 
is 
not 
unprecedented.   
We have a client who has been implicated by at 
least three witnesses and during – before those witnesses 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 49 of 167 
 
were called we were never given any notice.  So the 
Chairperson must understand the situation that we have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you talking about some time back? 
MR NTSEBEZA:…Well, it is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or about this week? 
MR NTSEBEZA:…Well, it is not this week but it is evidence 
relating to State Security Agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NTSEBEZA:…So there is that commonality.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Look, let us say the legal team knows 
10 
the rules of the Commission, they do the best they can to 
comply.   
I accept that sometimes they do not comply but I 
think that if they know who your clients are, even if – I do 
not know how to – how you handle the issue of pseudo 
names when you talk to them but if they know who your 
clients are they will be able to tell you whether they are 
implicated or they are mentioned and normally they would 
– you would get a Rule 3.3 notice.   
If you have not, I think if you are going to sit 
20 
around, you will wait until you hear whether Mr Jafta 
implicates your client.  
MR NTSEBEZA:…You see, Chair, we cannot – we have no 
reason to accept and, with respect, the legal team’s bona 
fides, and this is informed by at the very least what 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 50 of 167 
 
happened yesterday.   
We were told that for instance the statement or the 
report by Dr Mufamadi would be as soon as it is placed on 
record we would have provided with copy thereof or access 
thereto.  It has never happened. 
 
If anything, Chairperson, the evidence leaders are 
treating us as spectators. The impression that we get is 
that if this was court they would prefer us to sit in the 
gallery.  We are not treated as legal practitioners in the 
same manner as they are.   
10 
 
So we have no reason to accept their bona fides.  If  
anything, found themselves to be male fide.  
So we wonder, I mean, given the experience that we 
have had, that three witnesses that implicating my clients – 
our client did not get any notice and we were promised 
subsequent to that testimony of one of those witnesses 
that we would be given a copy of that witness’ affidavit.  
That was in August.   
We are still waiting for the same affidavit today, so 
cannot accept their bona fides.  So it is quite clear… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NTSEBEZA:……that there is a concerted effort on the 
part of the evidence leaders to deny us what is due to us.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay …[intervenes] 
MR NTSEBEZA:…So unless if we can get a guarantee that 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 51 of 167 
 
our clients today are not going to be implicated then there 
is no point for us being here today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, just – were those your 
points? 
MR NTSEBEZA:…Those were, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then I can – ja, Mr Pretorius, do you 
want to say anything? 
ADV MVUMBI:   Chair, before Mr Pretorius may be given 
an opportunity to reply …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry, Chair, can I have an 
10 
opportunity to answer one by one rather than an army of 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes because you – ja, it is going to be 
better.  Mr Pretorius is going to respond to this one first 
and then if you are going to – when you stand, when you 
rise, you are going to say it is the same, you wanted to add 
something, let us deal with it at that stage.  Let us just 
deal with this one. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Chair, I take cue from you. However, as 
my learned colleague said, already almost submitted, to an 
20 
extent our applications and reasons are almost the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Bar the fact that they are different on the 
basis that we hold different instructions.   
I cannot take further argument raised by learned 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 52 of 167 
 
colleagues of being treated otherwise and also having male 
fide.  But mine is also predicated on the different 
argument, maybe taking cue and a plea from my colleague 
to then address you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Let me stand down for now and then I will 
advocate my point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you.  If that mic can 
be switched off?  Ja, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In relation to the first “application” 
10 
I did not understand it to be an application but merely a 
complaint.  Dorothy is not implicated by the evidence of Mr 
Jafta and that is the end of that story. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   My learned friend was told, and I 
quote, in answer to a query: 
“If your client was to be implicated your client would 
have received notice.” 
Precisely in terms that you have outlined, Chair.  That 
deals with the first application. 
20 
 
Second application, I am not going to accept the 
invitation to litigate through insult and invective, I think it 
is unbecoming of colleagues to do that, I will stick to the 
facts.  
 
None of the clients of my learned friend who 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 53 of 167 
 
addressed you second are implicated by the evidence of Mr 
Jafta.   
If I am in bad faith and I am not being honest before 
that will be clear and my learned friend is free to take 
whatever steps he may wish to do but it is offensive of that 
to be made before the facts are known, that accusation to 
be made before the facts are known.  So both applications 
are without merit.   
As to historical complaints, if those are raised with 
us in writing in a proper forum, I will raise them with the 
10 
secretariat and we will answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The issue of Mr – the high level panel 
report, he raised the issue that they were promised that as 
soon as [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He was given that.  According to 
my instructions he was given that at the beginning of 
evidence.  Well, certainly one person was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but he can get it on the link. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it will be available on the link.  
I do not know, Chair, what technological issues arise about 
20 
uploading evidence, it is not an easy matter but it will in 
due course or has been uploaded on the website. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the end of our remit, is to 
in fact ensure that the instruction is given to do so.   
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 54 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The execution of that is not within 
our hands. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, obviously it does not assist 
him if he is told the legal team gave instructions, whether 
those instructions are carried out, the legal team does not 
know …[intervenes]…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, my instructions …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Because 
his 
complaint 
is 
the 
Commission is not giving me, so we need to – somebody 
10 
needs to make sure …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, if I may just intervene, the 
affidavit is on the website, the report is on the website, 
was uploaded last night. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the Commission? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Website of the Commission? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, then you should be able to get it 
there as soon as you can. 
20 
ADV MVUMBI:   [inaudible – mic switched off] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright, it has been cleared 
that your cleared that your clients are not implicated, Ms 
Dorothy Is not implicated.  I think counsel at the end there 
still wanted to say something, let us here. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 55 of 167 
 
ADV MVUMBI:   Thank you, Chair, and to an extent I think 
maybe I am answered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are covered. 
ADV MVUMBI:   But I do not want to leave in that pool of 
confusion because we stand here for different clients.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but if you are covered I am happy 
because we are losing some time. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Yes, Chair, I am …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But obviously if there is still something 
that you need to address you must address, if it is 
10 
important. 
ADV MVUMBI:   Yes, mine might not even be an 
application but a clarification from the Chair and this 
comes from almost to the same reasons what my learned 
colleagues have advanced and I hear the predicament that 
Mr Pretorius might have because his most of the day 
standing here arguing points but supported by a particular 
structure.   
I want to place it on record, Chair, that he has not 
so far – and I have not heard him probably because I was 
20 
stopped to say whether or not my client is implicated.   
And I am also guided by the Chairman who is going 
to say if you did not receive a notice, therefore it can be 
presumed that you are not implicated but I do not take 
comfort because on the past experiences and with to an 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 56 of 167 
 
extent the Chair has conceded to the fact that some 
witnesses and ever to the team has been able to tender 
evidence without such notice been given and that is not 
also unfounded of what has transpired yesterday. 
For 
instance 
I 
have 
guided 
the 
Chair 
before 
yesterday to a notice that was given to us on three 
projects, 
it 
was 
almost 
three 
pages, 
that 
was 
not 
significant, but when Dr Mufamadi gave testimony he gave 
a lengthy – which is obvious from affidavits it might be 
expatiated by oral, to an extent Mr Mufamadi then said and 
10 
to the evidence leader ’s comments an propositions that 
were put to the witness, to the extent it was implied that 
my client, in particular whom I am representing, the 
Minister, for that particular time had at least transgressed 
his powers, had at least done something that has not been 
founded, certain allegations of misconduct to an extent of 
corruption has been [indistinct] 24.06.   
To the conclusion of the evidence of Dr Mufamadi it 
was agreed that yes, will be expatiated by the evidence of 
the DG.  That is what then we got to know that the DG is 
20 
coming tomorrow.  
So I will not then sit here and think that without 
even an undertaking and immediately when I left here I 
wrote a letter to the contact person that I have been 
provided with.  Until today, what I was responded to was 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 57 of 167 
 
that we have taken your correspondence to the team, will 
revert.   
That leaves me and my client hanging to an extent 
that we cannot even make any election of whether or not 
do we sit here and become observers, as my learned 
colleague called it spectators. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes …[intervenes] 
ADV MVUMBI:   Not only that, Chair, if I may finish this 
point? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MVUMBI:   I know – I am sure and we are all alive to 
the fact that the Commission has a lifespan, very short, but 
we are almost the accounting authority to the parliament 
joint committees and implications were made that during 
that time we were almost asleep and we did not execute 
those functions and that is the proposition that – at least 
the narrative that has been [indistinct] 25.24.  There is no 
way from where I am sitting that the DG to an extent if I 
listen to my senior addressing this, to the extent that the 
affidavit was – of the witness was quoted to an extent of 
20 
including the powers and separation of powers which 
became an issue yesterday.   
 
So there is no way that I can therefore assume that 
my client will not by implication be dragged into answering. 
 
Not only that, Chair, finishing the point, the other 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 58 of 167 
 
point that I – Chair has instructed us and I stood on this 
point yesterday.  Chair, we were directed to consult with 
the team and to an extent give you what will be the way 
forward.  Nothing, with respect, I can say out of that 
consultation came out. 
 
We came before the Commission yesterday not 
being sure, we have correspondence that we have given 
after receiving the 3.3 notice.   
We were ignored, literally ignored.  So we came in 
having not been able to know whether do we elect to 
10 
participate or bring an application. And, Chair, when my 
learned colleague made submissions, suggested that if 
there is a need for you to make any substantive application 
we will hear it and that is how we somehow concluded the 
morning.   
We still are not sure today and I am seeking your 
indulgence on this one because it might be an [indistinct] 
26.55 point, that we need to hear from you, Chair, by 
yesterday I was heavily implicated, my client, that is, so I 
seek your indulgence within the timeframes that the 
20 
Commission has to know because we indeed received the 
notice, we at least to a minimum knew what was going to 
be but we thought because of the engagement we will know 
what steps will be taken.   
But until now we have not had any responses, it 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 59 of 167 
 
therefore leaves us with no alternative but to file an 
application, one. 
Two, to cross-examine the witness that [indistinct] 
27.31.  So I seek your directive on that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, I think what should happen is 
while Mr Pretorius leads the evidence of Mr Jafta, members 
of his team should meet with you and with whoever else 
among the lawyers wishes to find anything from Mr 
Pretorius’ team.  Let there be discussions outside the 
venue.   
10 
Ask whatever questions you want to ask, they 
should do the best they can to answer them.  Maybe at the 
end of that discussion you will be satisfied with the 
answers, maybe you might not be, but I am sure it will 
achieve something. 
I think while Mr Pretorius leads Mr Jafta, that is 
what should happen.  Mr Pretorius, what do you think? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, that can happen, Chair, 
engagements have taken place, correspondence has been 
sent. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Correspondence 
has 
been 
answered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   My concern is that the rules are 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 60 of 167 
 
clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   My learned friend’s client received 
a 3.3 notice or 3.3 notices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And has capacity and rights in 
terms of the rules to answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is not for us to give legal advice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In relation to what the party should 
or should not do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The rules are clear, if my learned 
friend wishes to file an application under 3.4 to cross-
examine or to put up a version, he must do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is not our job to interfere in that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will continue with Mr Jafta’s 
evidence but one or more members of Mr Pretorius’ team 
20 
should have a discussion with you and whoever other 
lawyers among the lawyers who may want to ask some 
questions or whatever, talk to – let them talk. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will put that in motion, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 61 of 167 
 
MR NTSEBEZA:…Thank you for that directive, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you.  Okay, at long 
last, let us get going with Mr Jafta’s evidence, he has been 
sitting there for a long time waiting.  Yes, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Has he been sworn?  May he be 
sworn? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh by the way yes, please administer 
the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR JAFTA:   Loyiso Mhlobo Thando Jafta. 
10 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR JAFTA:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that all the evidence 
that you will give will be the truth, the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth?   If so please raise your right hand 
and say so help me God. 
20 
MR JAFTA:   So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you may proceed. 
LOYISO MHLOBO THANDO JAFTA:  [duly sworn, states] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Jafta you 
have before you an affidavit, the cover page is marked 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 62 of 167 
 
Exhibit YY3, do you see that?  The cover page we’ve just 
looked at. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you go through to page 52 of 
Exhibit YY3 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Pretorius let’s – you want to 
first announce that we will be using bundle SA – or SSA 
Bundle 02 most of the time? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, same one as yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, same as yesterday.   Yes, you can 
10 
then proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right so Bundle SSA02 if we go to 
Exhibit YY3, page 52 is that your signature there Mr Jafta? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes it is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Your affidavit then which begins at 
page 35 is that the affidavit you have submitted to the 
Commission? 
MR JAFTA:  Yes it is.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And are you satisfied that the 
contents are insofar as you are aware true and correct?  
20 
MR JAFTA:   Absolutely ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, it does have certain 
annexures which go through to page 29, we will probably 
not refer to them in any detail but Chair may Exhibit YY3 
be admitted on the record. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 63 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Loyiso Jafta which 
starts at page 35 will together with its annexures be 
admitted as Exhibit YY3. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Jafta you are the Acting 
Director General and Accounting Officer of the State 
Security Agency, is that correct? 
MR JAFTA:   That’s correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In preparing this affidavit and in 
interactions with the Commission you have had the benefit 
of legal advice from senior and junior counsel and an 
10 
attorney. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes that is correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 4 you make some 
comments about the considerations that informed you in 
the preparation of this affidavit, could you place that on 
record please.   You can read it if you wish but in your own 
words would be preferable.   Paragraph 4. 
MR JAFTA:   Can I read it? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes you can read it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can read it ja. 
20 
MR JAFTA:    
“I limit this affidavit in terms of its contents to 
narrow issues of the State as I am conscious of the 
need to respect matters of national security, that a 
General of the Agency is compelled in terms of 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 64 of 167 
 
Section 10[4] of the Intelligence Services Act 2002, 
Act 65 of 2002, to as far as reasonably practical 
take 
steps 
to 
ensure 
that 
National 
Security 
Intelligence, 
Intelligence 
connection 
methods, 
sources of information and the identity of members 
of the Agency are protected from unauthorised 
disclosure.  Consequently all information contained 
herein and matters that I deal with at this stage and 
the identities of the persons involved are that are 
already in the public domain.” 
10 
That is paragraph 4. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When did you become Director 
General, or Acting Director General of the SSA? 
MR JAFTA:   On the 17 t h of April 2018. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remain Acting DG or are you 
already DG? 
MR 
JAFTA: 
I 
remain 
Acting, 
but 
in 
essence 
the 
responsibilities are not for acting. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no I accept that when you are acting 
you have the same powers as the full DG, I was just 
checking whether ...[intervenes]  
MR JAFTA:   Yes I am still acting Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are still acting, ja okay.   
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 65 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As you say you became the acting 
Director General on the 17 t h of April 2018. 
MR JAFTA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You would then have familiarised 
yourself I presume with your powers under the Intelligence 
Services Act and you would have called for information 
concerning the activities of the State Security Agency? 
MR JAFTA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What did you discover or what did 
you become aware of? 
10 
MR JAFTA:   It is a bit of a process, I am going to take a 
bit of time but not too long, a lot of time.  One of the things 
I 
became 
aware 
of 
immediately 
after 
assuming 
responsibilities of being Director General of the State 
Security 
Agency 
was 
that 
the 
systems 
for 
proper 
management, 
particularly 
of 
the 
finances 
and 
their 
expenditure were not adhered to.  One of the things I 
believe in is that any organisation one of the indicators for 
determining the health of an organisation is to follow the 
money.  It is to a degree what that ...[indistinct] money 
20 
doesn’t lie.    
 
So one of the things that immediately became 
apparent was that there was quite a number of officials of 
the State Security Agency who were registered in the if you 
will in the register of debtors, in other words members who 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 66 of 167 
 
owe the organisation money and these were fairly large 
amounts of money, often running into millions of Rands, 
and I could not but seek to understand how it could be that 
members would owe a State organisation so much money.   
 
It then became apparent in the explanations given 
to me that in fact the systems for corporate governance 
both in respect of the management of financial resources 
and the prosecution of operations was done parallel to the 
prescripts that were there and that obviously led to me 
discovering that as a matter of fact the monies were being 
10 
expended often or in some cases on projects that were 
outside the boundaries of our legal mandate.    
 
There 
were 
also 
commitments 
that 
we 
had, 
obligations that we had to several parties and then when 
you want to understand but why do we have this obligation 
to this person you then realise that as a matter of fact if 
the constitution might have been disregarded in the pursuit 
of those operations. 
 
I will go into it with a bit more detail, but Chair what 
became very clear was that the constitution and the law of 
20 
the Republic as it applies to the State Security Agency and 
other entities of the State whilst I don’t know how to put 
this politely but it was elective adherence you know, 
sticking to the prescripts of the law, this was elective, 
when the law or the constitution barred one from doing 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 67 of 167 
 
certain things, creative ways were conjured up to go 
around the constitution, to go around the law and do things 
that were unlawful, were outside the constitution.   
 
I don’t want to belabour the point, I do presume that 
Dr Mufamadi spoke to it yesterday.  The very foundation of 
the State Security Agency from the amalgamation of the 
National Intelligence Agency, the South African Secret 
Service and the other entities in that environment was 
established in terms of the proclamation and not in terms 
of further constitution required, and then from that it is not 
10 
theoretical exposition, it is factual and a lot of other 
infractions followed, so I don’t know I could go on and on 
but suffice for me to add just a few other points Mr 
Pretorius and Chair. 
 
The other witnesses that are systemic and perhaps 
my view is that these are not just within the SSA, they are 
in government, State Owned Enterprises and maybe even 
in the private sector and one of those is compliance 
assurance institutions and processes.  These typically are 
subordinated to the accounting officer and they become 
20 
only robust after the fact, or rather they become robust 
only after things have happened. 
 
So 
there 
isn’t 
a 
system 
yet 
where 
we 
have 
compliance assurance instruments that run parallel with 
the conceptualisation, the development and the approval of 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 68 of 167 
 
projects.   You see an accounting officer with the people 
below him are biased towards achieving the goals, they are 
biased towards carrying out the activities and completely 
without 
any 
malevolence 
they 
might 
overlook 
certain 
requirements because of this bias to do certain things but 
if you had a compliance assurance instrument that is not 
subordinated and sufficiently autonomous of the accounting 
officer that would help.  It is quite another matter where 
such instruments must report to, that is another thing I 
picked 
up 
that 
there 
was 
a 
systemic 
gap 
in 
the 
10 
management of the intelligence environment and naturally 
my last point Mr Pretorius is that quite clearly there was 
executive overreach, there was quite clearly instances of 
manifestly unlawful or illegal instructions and that is 
something that I determined, I could with time go into this, 
and 
obviously 
oversight 
was 
extremely 
uneven 
and 
ineffective. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And this was over a long period of 
time I presume ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Pretorius, you say 
20 
oversight was?    
MR JAFTA:   It was very uneven. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oversight on the part of ...[intervenes]  
MR 
JAFTA:  
 Oversight to 
give 
an 
example Chair 
...[intervenes]  
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 69 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   DG giving oversight, Minister giving 
oversight, Parliament giving oversight, that is what I am 
trying to establish. 
MR JAFTA:  Okay there is oversight Chair by the 
Accounting Officer, there is oversight by the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR JAFTA:   The Inspector General and the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR JAFTA:   That was extremely uneven. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you say it was uneven you say, 
10 
you mean that coming from a certain power source it might 
be quite strong but another source who is supposed to also 
provide oversight it might be very weak. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe almost non-existent. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And so that is what you mean? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, right. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And these issues relating to 
20 
oversight, executive overreach I presume took place over a 
long period of time? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes when ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We are not talking of a particular 
incident? 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 70 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say that on arrival you would 
have discovered these matters, did you call for briefings?   
MR JAFTA:   Yes, I called for briefings from various 
entities within the State Security Agency and it is in 
processing 
and 
analysing 
those 
reports 
that 
– 
and 
obviously validating that you determine that but there is a 
weakness here, there is a weakness here, why are things 
done this way and not done that way. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Can you recall what the Chief 
10 
Financial Officer told you on your arrival? 
MR JAFTA:   It was one of the very first things I called for 
because as I indicate a moment earlier you follow the 
money.   A distinct one I remember Mr Pretorius and Chair 
is that – and it arose from the fact that most people owed 
the Agency money, it was that when a member, and I 
suppose this is true throughout the Public Service, when 
you ...[indistinct] you are given a temporary advance, that 
is for accommodation, food and, and, and.  What then 
happened in our instance was that they would take a 
20 
funding instrument for – they would take the temporary 
advance and use it as a funding instrument for projects, so 
in essence what that means is that you come up with a 
project, you cost it, the project is worth R10million.   
Through using the temporary advance instrument they 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 71 of 167 
 
would give you R10million in cash.   
 
Now you implement the project over a period of time 
and you settle at the end, and that is why then once they 
Loyiso R10million my name would be immediately on the 
register, now I owe the organisation R10million, whereas 
the proper approach, which has always been there since 
1995, is that you cost your project as you build the 
foundation you tender an invoice, we give you money for 
the foundation, you erect the walls, you tender an invoice, 
you pay for it and so on and until the house is fully built 
10 
up, you don’t give Loyiso R10million to walk out the gate 
with a sum of R10million cash and you have no control.  It 
is just a wrong way of doing things, that is ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We may hear more evidence of that 
in due course, but I think as I understand it you are saying 
there was insufficient recording and documentation to 
justify the release of cash monies within the system, is that 
correct? 
MR JAFTA:   That is correct ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think you say more than that, you 
20 
say the correct principles were not followed, or were not 
complied with, the principle in the example that you are 
giving was you should not be given the whole amount for 
the whole project at a time, you should be given on stages 
in accordance with the progress that you are making in 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 72 of 167 
 
your project and this principle was being breached, ja, 
okay. 
MR JAFTA:   I think Chair it is what I said right at the 
beginning that complying with the law, with the Constitution 
was elective, if it is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   If it is inconvenient ...[intervenes]  
MR JAFTA:   If it is inconvenient to go around it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR JAFTA:   It is not that the constitution it is not there.   
It is not that the constitution doesn’t provide that you can 
10 
only establish intelligence by legislation, just put that 
clause, it is like a work document, you delete that clause. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is just that this constitution and 
this law is not helping  us. 
MR JAFTA:  It is a work document and you can amend as 
you go along. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing].   Ja.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you institute or order that any 
investigations take place after you learnt of the situation 
on your arrival? 
20 
MR JAFTA:   Most definitely I did, I did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we will come to those in a 
moment.   In paragraph 6 you refer to the report of the high 
level 
review 
panel, 
that’s 
the 
panel 
chaired 
by 
Dr 
Mufamadi, and you referred to five high level answers to 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 73 of 167 
 
the questions that the panel raised what went wrong.  From 
your own knowledge and experience you highlight five 
issues or high level answers that the panel identified, what 
is your own view of those five points that appear at 
paragraph 6 of your affidavit? 
MR JAFTA:   The first point is around the politicisation of 
the State Security Agency.  This is fact, there are – and 
this is how I understand it was manifested itself and you 
see it in the projects that were being run.  There are 
monies that left the agency for the purposes of funding 
10 
political activity principally within the African National 
Congress, and often when you drill into it, it is not funding 
the African National Congress credibly, it is to fund 
activities authored by a particular faction within the African 
National Congress.    
 
So there would be monies disbursed for that 
purpose, there would be operations intended to if you will 
to drill into the credibility of those who were not on the 
faction, but that is within the African National Congress. 
 
You then have another situation where particularly 
20 
whenever we go towards an election there would be 
projects that would be intended and funded to enhance the 
political fortunes of the ANC and these projects were 
prosecuted.  Now if you go to – this is a matter of public 
record once again, there’s ample which at the time 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 74 of 167 
 
appeared to be quite strong compared to the NUM and the 
State Security Agency is used, is employed to found an 
alternative union that would weaken CAMCU around the 
platinum belt and then there’s – so what I am saying Chair 
is 
there 
is 
politicisation 
that 
manifests 
itself 
on 
participating in inter-ANC activities and now I am into civil 
society and then you have got projects that talk to, and 
some 
of 
these 
things 
...[indistinct] 
they 
talk 
to 
the 
...[indistinct], they talk to the point I was talking about 
earlier the uneven effectiveness of compliance assurance 
10 
instruments. 
 
Then you have got projects where a media, and it is 
established, and the State Security Agency is employed to 
fund that.  Now nowhere in the mandate of the State 
Security Agency do you find that the lawmaker anticipated 
that this entity would also fund a media entity within South 
Africa, towards what end?   There must be a political 
objective. 
 
Then there is – I am sure Dr Mufamadi spoke to 
this, there is a project Justice intended in part to influence 
20 
the judiciary.   I put it in this category on purpose because 
by the time you have a project intended to influence the 
judiciary it presupposes that there is other work that has 
been done and the determination has since then been 
made that to ...[indistinct] whatever in there is with the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 75 of 167 
 
judiciary you need to influence the judiciary.  I don’t know 
if I am putting this thing across well. 
 
So it is quite okay to be quite shocked at the fact 
that there is project justice intended to influence the 
judiciary by an intelligence agency but then the question is 
what did – what happened to arrive at this solution that is 
being implemented in this fashion.   So you have to 
assume that the judiciary was a target for intelligence 
operations. 
 
Now that can only be political.  The constitution 
10 
provides measures, processes, institutions to deal with 
eloquence centred around the judiciary, be it court rulings 
or juris behaviour of whatever nature by those on the 
bench.   It is nowhere anticipated in our constitutional 
construct that intelligence would be employed to influence 
the judiciary.   If anything intelligence should alert the 
judiciary to say Deputy Chief Justice Zondo your distant 
cousin or a friend to your son is in fact a member of a 
syndicate, 
you 
ought 
to 
be 
careful 
about 
this, 
that 
conversation with the Ambassador of Amazon is not a good 
20 
intention person, that sort of thing, but to influence the 
judiciary in the manner in which this was done, this is how 
politicisation manifests itself. 
 
The ...[indistinct] Chair these examples straddle 
these things.    
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 76 of 167 
 
 
National Security has outlined at least in the values 
and 
the 
principles 
in 
the 
constitution 
doesn’t 
sit 
comfortable with a definition of the entity as a State 
Security. The emphasis is on safeguarding and advancing 
the interest of the nation and not necessarily of the State.   
Theoretically the State exists for the nation, but the 
emphasis must not be on the State, it must be on national 
interest, and you do that well if you locate it in absolute 
respect and adherence to the letter and the spirit of the 
constitution. 
10 
 
And so for me several of the wrongs that were 
witnessed derived from moving from National Security to 
State Security. 
 
Now once you say State Security by definition you 
are gravitating close to the person of the Head of State 
and that is always the risk, so if there is politicisation and 
there is this shift inevitably and maybe even inadvertently 
you could easily end up with regime security instead of 
national security, so you exist to protect the fortunes of the 
regime and not national security, so it is a construct that is 
20 
– it appears as an 
academic construct or level of 
obstruction but these are important principles. 
 
The third point raised in that paragraph Chair is 
around amalgamation.  The situation got obtained after 95, 
this aggregated responsibility and authority/power over the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 77 of 167 
 
conduct of intelligence, for National Intelligence, National 
Intelligence Agency 
with 
a 
domestic 
mandate, 
South 
African Secret Service with an external mandate and the 
signals intelligence which is focused outside the country 
and there is office for interception centres, which is – bring 
interceptions on the basis of an authorisation. 
 
What happens with 2009 is that all of that authority 
which had been disbursed is now concentrated in one pair 
of hands.  The best democracies in the world, viewed from 
the point of view of ...[indistinct], the spirit of our 
10 
constitution don’t have that construct of having all of this 
authority located in one pair of hands, because of the 
inherent risk and I suppose this is something that we will 
talk to Mr Pretorius, secrecy.  To work in secret as is 
absolutely necessary for intelligence.  If you have that in 
one or two or three places with this kind of a construct 
...[indistinct] become easy to do, and the risk here is that 
Chair this is real authority, this not abstract, this is not 
theoretical, this is real authority, you can or I can 
destabilise South Africa, and destabilise other countries in 
20 
the region by virtue of the fact that I have the authority 
over all intelligence operations of the State Security 
Agency within and without ...[indistinct] and that makes it 
difficult for effective oversight. 
 
Secrecy we can’t do without secrecy, it is absolutely 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 78 of 167 
 
necessary.  The problem is not the secrecy, not at all, the 
problem is when there is no effective oversight over 
elements of that secrecy then secrecy is not transparent, 
in the eyes of those responsible for oversight and because 
there is no transparency accountability is going to be 
subtracted from quite considerably, so secrecy requires a 
very measured degree of transparency and very robust 
accountability.  When those two are not rigorous enough 
secrecy becomes a problem, but of itself it is not a 
problem. 
10 
 
The last point Mr Pretorius is resource abuse.  
Resource – my experience tells me that all ...[indistinct] 
talks about money.   Yes to be sure I believe money was 
stolen, people enriched themselves, very fictitious projects 
could have been implemented, and we have got evidence 
to prove that, but there is other resources that were 
abused, and this talks to assets, firearms, these are 
resources of the State Security Agency, of the State, the 
State gives us these firearms in order for us to discharge 
our responsibilities, from the defensive point of view, I 
20 
must clarify and because our members if they operate in a 
very rude environment they have got to be able to protect 
themselves, but when you are in a situation where firearms 
of the State are then given out to non SAA members in a 
manner that is completely outside the relevant prescripts 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 79 of 167 
 
that constitute resource abuse.    
 
When you have got personnel of the Agency being 
deployed to carry out responsibilities that fall outside the 
mandate of the State Security Agency that is an abuse of 
those resources, of such personnel.  When you have got 
fixed assets or immoveable assets that get registered in 
the name of Advocate Ntsebeza, and they become part of 
his estate, that is resource abuse and we have got those, I 
am by no means suggesting that he is sitting with an asset 
base that was funded by the SSA. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You thought you should clarify that lest 
you may be sued. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] 
MR JAFTA:   But over and above that Chair those five 
bullet points I would plead that they be understood 
together with the input I made about which is systemic this 
compliance assurance instruments, the spectre of illegal 
instructions, executive overreach, all of those have got to 
be, they have got to be added together with these five 
20 
bullet points on paragraph ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will deal with those and 
perhaps this is a convenient time to take the long 
adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we will take the lunch adjournment 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 80 of 167 
 
now, it is five past one, ordinarily we would resume at five 
past two, but I am just going to add a little bit more time to 
enable me to attend to something, so let us resume at 
twenty past two. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  What I needed to attend to took longer 
10 
than I thought.  So we are starting much later than twenty 
past.  Okay let us proceed thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Jafta in paragraph 7 of your 
affidavit you deal in a little more detail with the issue of the 
doctrinal shift.  Do you have anything to add in that regard? 
MR JAFTA:  No nothing else to add there thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Would you deal with the evidence in 
paragraph 8 please Mr Jafta particularly where you set out 
20 
the tasks that you had to undertake?  I am taking off as 
Director General or acting Director General you deal with in 
paragraph 8. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes.  Would that be the paragraph dealing with 
corrective measures? 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 81 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes you – well perhaps we should 
just go back to paragraph 7. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you highlight there the features 
of a reversion to a doctrine of State Security. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And what you describe there as State 
Security serving or whose interests you describe there as 
State Security Serving – what are those? 
MR JAFTA:  I would – I would be repeating what I had said 
10 
earlier about the State Security Agency being involved in 
political 
activities 
of 
the 
African 
National 
Congress 
particularly 
factions 
aver 
in 
and 
in 
civil 
society 
organisations, media entities etcetera.  Because those were 
intended to enhance the political fortunes of the – of the 
party.  
 
Then there is the issue referred to in respect to the 
person of the President.  I would like to make… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry just – just repeat that if you 
face this side. 
20 
MR JAFTA:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It will make it easy for me to hear you. 
MR JAFTA:  Sorry.  Yes I am very, very sorry about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ja I did not hear the part where you 
said with regard to the President or something. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 82 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:  Oh yes I was – I was getting to that point 
Chairperson my apologies.  The issue around the person of 
the President I would like to split it into his or her – his 
capacity as a private citizen and his public personality as the 
President of the Party and the President of the Republic. 
 
And these can be quite interchangeable.  Now most 
definitely when you – when you assist advance the political 
agenda of a faction associated with the President you – you 
assist in a sense his personal ends and his private person. 
 
But there are instances where most definitely our 
10 
activities really responded to the personal interest of the 
President in his private capacity. 
 
And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And of course it becomes important to – 
unless the context makes it clear which President you are 
talking about it is important to indicate.  You might be talking 
about the current President who has been President from 
2018. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  You might be talking about the period before 
20 
that during Mr Jacob Zuma’s Presidency.  You might well be 
talking about the period before.  So it becomes important so 
that it is clear which President we are talking about at any 
particular time. 
MR JAFTA:  Thank you Chair.  I am talking specifically about 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 83 of 167 
 
President Jacob Zuma the then President Jacob Zuma.  
There was – there was even reported in the media an 
attempted murder I will call it of former President Zuma 
allegedly by his wife.  And this matter was investigated by 
among others the State Security Agency. 
 
It is a private through public matter because he is 
President you do not know whether he is being poisoned for 
being President or he has been poisoned because of 
domestic considerations. 
 
But anyway the State Security Agency then was 
10 
involved in that investigation.  And in essence then Ms Zuma 
then was in essence put in the custody of the State Security 
Agency.  In simple terms … 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Ms Manthule Zuma. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes Ms Manthule Zuma yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JAFTA:  In essence then he was – he was not in remand 
detention so to speak without having gone through the due 
processes that lead one to being remand… 
CHAIRPERSON:  She was kept there against her will. 
20 
MR JAFTA:  I absolutely believe against her will. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that – yes.  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  I absolutely believe against her will.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  And there is sufficient evidence at – that points 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 84 of 167 
 
at her being disagreeable to the circumstances she found 
herself in.  And this is an example I am making about him as 
a private individual and as President of – of the Republic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know I am interrupting you and you must 
not lose your train of thought.  If she was kept there against 
her will that would be quite serious.  That would be quite a – 
because then it would be detention. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By an organ of state in circumstances 
where no law allowed the organ of state to detain her.  It 
10 
would be quite serious. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay continue. 
MR JAFTA:  It is – it is that example and I am saying Chair it 
straddles if my attempt is legitimate it straddles both the 
private and the public person of President Zuma. 
 
I may say – I have to say not may I have to say in 
general Chair it is very difficult to determine in absolute – 
with absolute certainty that a President has actually said 
Loyiso go and do this. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry just repeat that. 
MR JAFTA:  That a President has actually given an 
instruction that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  Do this. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 85 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja, ja. 
MR JAFTA:  It does happen quite a lot and it must have 
happened 
that 
functionaries 
at 
various 
levels 
would 
anticipate what would be agreeable to the person of the 
President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What would please the President. 
MR JAFTA:  What would please the President and take such 
initiatives. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  Regardless of what the law says.  So I do not 
10 
want to create an impression that former President Jacob 
Zuma was always aware and consented to many of the things 
that were done presumably for his benefit either in his 
private capacity or in his public capacity. 
 
And I am for – I am putting this by – I am 
foregrounding the point I am going to make by making the 
statement I have just made.  There is an intervention that 
gets instituted within the State Security Agency to establish 
a parallel vetting entity and exercise. 
 
The 
logic 
behind 
it 
is 
that 
the 
formal 
vetting 
20 
infrastructure takes rather too long to respond to emergent 
appoint – emergency appointment or appointments that need 
to be made rapidly by the President.  And therefore you sort 
of need a drive through process if you will to vetting. 
 
And 
this 
gets 
said 
quite 
explicitly. 
 
We 
were 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 86 of 167 
 
responding 
to 
a 
frustration 
that 
the 
President 
has 
experienced.  I am absolutely certain President Zuma I have 
not seen – I have not heard anybody saying he instructed 
that this drive through process must be put in place. 
 
But what that parallel vetting exercise does is that it 
– it subtracts quite substantially from the integrity and the 
purpose of vetting. 
 
So as a consequence there are people who get 
processed and I am not exaggerating within three days which 
is – which is an absurdity. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Too quickly. 
MR JAFTA:  It is literally a drive through process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JAFTA:  To rapidly.  And therefore the appointments by 
the President real or perceived will happen but they will not 
be underpinned by proper vetting.  And this is done as I 
indicate for the benefit of the President certainly in this 
instance in his public capacity. 
 
Those are the examples I am – I am making in these 
instances. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would that vetting – parallel vetting be 
against the law?  I ask that question because I imagine that 
you could have let us say a unit that is supposed to provide 
vetting and that is the official unit and they have got different 
desks. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 87 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then having had this concern of 
frustration on the part of the President they might just create 
another desk within the same unit. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And say whenever there is a request from 
the President for somebody to be vetted they will be 
channelled to this desk and those who help in this desk must 
know that those requests must be dealt with expeditiously.  
So that you – there might not be a law that is being 
10 
breached. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is a special dispensation 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe on other grounds other than law 
one 
may 
criticise 
it 
but 
maybe 
one 
can 
say 
it 
is 
understandable.  Is – the one you are talking about would it 
be against any particular law? 
MR JAFTA:  The one I am talking about Chair is if – if the 
construct agreed to have been in accordance with your 
20 
example that would have been fine.  The problem is when 
you – when you created within Special Operations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  And not within the vetting outside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Outside of. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 88 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:  Outside of this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR JAFTA:  And the prescripts that govern this exercise 
within the Special Operations environment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are different. 
MR JAFTA:  Are completely different from … 
CHAIRPERSON:  The ones that… 
MR JAFTA:  From the norm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are supposed to be applied. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR JAFTA:  But that is why I said parallel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR JAFTA:  It is not – it is not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is an extension of the existing one. 
MR JAFTA:  No, no.  It is completely parallel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ja. 
MR JAFTA:  The Clearance Certificate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR JAFTA:  Is not the same as this one. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR JAFTA:  This is completely fake.  This is completely 
fake. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 89 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say in paragraph 8 Mr Jafta that 
during your tenure at the helm of the Agency you have been 
seized with curing the systemic ills that underlie the 
challenges identified in correcting the governance failures by 
putting in place systems and processes and controls to 
support clean governance.  And you then refer in that 
context to the Office of the Director General and to certain 
steps that you have taken at the bottom of paragraph 8.1 and 
in paragraph 8.2 could you deal briefly with that please? 
10 
MR JAFTA:  The – I will deal with paragraph 8 together with 
what is also outlined in a fair amount of detail from 17.1 
because those speak to the interventions. 
 
The first thing to do obviously was to restore the 
systems for corporate governance.  And in that regard one of 
the very first instructions – directives was everybody who 
owed money consequent to the process I had outlined earlier 
had to return money to the organisation. 
 
That was the first thing. 
 
And then the second thing was to say we shall 
20 
henceforth fund activities in accordance with approved 
prescripts. 
 
Temporary 
advance 
would 
be 
temporary 
advance.  Instruments for funding projects would – that were 
approved and in place were going to be restored and 
everybody was going to operate in accordance with those – 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 90 of 167 
 
with those prescripts. 
 
The third directive was to institute an investigation 
into these wrongs with the particular emphasis not so much 
at establishing the what but how it happened and what 
possible solutions could be put in place to – the better to 
ensure that the problems do not recur. 
 
It is in that context then that we – I arrive at the 
determination 
that 
in 
fact 
the 
compliance 
assurance 
instruments are defective in the manner in which they exist 
and function and function now. 
10 
 
There is another matter which is – which is quite 
important which we also implemented and this Chair has to 
do with the fact that the rennet of the Auditor General did not 
include conducting audits on covert – on the covert side of 
our existence and business. 
 
And there were good reasons for that but that was a 
material defect.  And therefore we sought to cure that defect 
by engaging internal people operational and administrative 
particularly in the realm of finance, the external auditors, 
officials from the Office of the Auditor General to do a 
20 
benchmarking 
visit 
abroad 
comparative 
– 
comparable 
agencies that have – that are more mature. 
 
The purpose was to make sure that we respond to the 
recommendation of the high level review panel to expand the 
rennet of the Auditor General so that the Auditor General 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 91 of 167 
 
also scrutinises all activities in the covert space of our 
business and existence.   
 
And as of this past financial year the fact is the 
Auditor General has already audited us in respect to the A-Z 
of our existence including the covert environment.   
 
So those are some of the systemic – the systemic 
challenges that have been – that have been attended to.  
Obviously the one that is outstanding is this one about the 
compliance assurance instruments. That has to be – that has 
still to be crafted and approved in terms of what would be 
10 
the ideal extent of autonomy of such relative to the executive 
and the Accounting Officer and would do their report too. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does what you have just tell me in respect 
of the Auditor General mean that maybe for the first time this 
year or last year – the last financial year that the Auditor 
General has now – is now able to audit as much as needs to 
be audited? 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Under SSA. 
MR JAFTA:  Certainly Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would now be kind of hindrances that we 
heard about yesterday. 
MR JAFTA:  Certainly Chair in respect to the financial year 
1920 the Audit exercise also went into the covert area of our 
business. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 92 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And is that regime in accordance with 
at least some international precedent? 
MR JAFTA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  This was done after the benchmarking visit.  I 
may – I may just add as well that but for the novel Corona 
Virus Pandemic we would have visited three or more other 
10 
jurisdictions for that same purpose so that when we craft an 
approach that would be suitable for our jurisdiction we would 
have sufficient comparable experience of how these things 
are done elsewhere in the world. 
 
The point about it Chair is to recap what I said earlier 
in respect to the bullet point on secrecy.  You have to strive 
for transparency to the oversight entities the better to ensure 
more robust and rigorous oversight.  Those two most 
definitely better effectiveness.  The more oversight the more 
rigorous and robust it is the more transparency there is in 
20 
respect to the relevant oversight structures the better you 
are going to be. 
 
Because it provides clarity about what you should 
and what you should not do.  There should not be any 
ambiguity about that. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 93 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You then deal in paragraph 9 Mr Jafta 
with the policy and architecture that occurred firstly in 2009 
and then has been built with at least to a certain extent and 
you can describe to the Chair how in 2018.  In paragraph 9 
you talk about what happened in 2009 and in paragraph 10 
you describe the position that was in accordance with the 
White Paper on Intelligence prior to 2009.  I think you have 
described that already in your evidence do you have 
10 
anything to add? 
MR JAFTA:  No I do not have anything else to add on the 
architecture that obtained before 2009. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  I think the important point that 
you make in paragraph 10 perhaps if I can suggest Mr Jafta 
is that the architecture of the Civilian Intelligence Structure 
prior to 2009 was in fact based on the White Paper on 
Intelligence and therefore on the constitution as well. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes absolutely.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Apart from the principled approach to 
20 
the structures pre-2009 and post 2009 what did you notice in 
relation to the amalgamated Intelligence Service that you 
came across in 2018?  You deal with that in paragraph 11. 
MR JAFTA:  The – the major difference between before 2009 
and post 2009 is the concentration of considerable authority 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 94 of 167 
 
in the eyes of the Accounting Officer of the State Security 
Agency. 
 
And 
personally 
I 
cannot 
overemphasise 
the 
magnitude of that authority to conduct operations within and 
without the Republic and to have direct authority over all of 
the branches. 
 
The 2000 – the pre-2009 architecture had a distinct 
Domestic 
Intelligence Agency 
with 
its 
own Accounting 
Officer.  The Accounting Officer for the Foreign Intelligence 
Agency with the South African Secret Service.  The two 
10 
respective heads coordinated in the greater their activities 
the assessments and everything else but one was not 
subordinated to the other and from an oversight point of view 
you knew where to go to in respect of Domestic and you 
knew the A-Z about Domestic as distinct from Foreign. 
 
And you could not move resources between the 
Foreign Agency and the Domestic Agency nor could you have 
an official in the Domestic realm operating without the 
Republic. 
 
Further to that the two heads had no direct authority 
20 
over the Signals Agency.  There was a separate head for that 
entity who coordinated particularly with a foreign branch 
because signals operates without the Republic. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And signals is really interception of 
communications. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 95 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:  Signals is interceptions yes.  Yes.  So has to 
coordinate closer with the Foreign branch because both of 
them are operating outside the Republic.   
 
The office for Interception Centres which also is into 
interception only gets activated once the designated Judge 
approves that an interception can take place.  So that is not 
a problem. 
 
The risk with the current architecture is that one DG 
has authority over the Domestic, the Foreign and the Signals 
and that concentration of authority is prone to abuse.  It is 
10 
not – it is prone to abuse.  It is conceptually you cannot say 
by definition it is going to result to abuse but you leave it 
like that there is going to be abuse. 
 
I simply ascribe to the principle of separating which 
is what the high level review panel proposed and was agreed 
to by the President. 
 
The current architecture problems with it are no 
different to a degree from the problems that existed prior to 
1994 where you had the National Intelligence Service that 
had both the Domestic and the Foreign mandate and the 
20 
Signals mandate under the one – under one Director 
General. 
 
And we sought of know what can happen and what 
happened with that kind of an architecture.  And I am 
drawing the attention of the Chair to that pre-’94 architecture 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 96 of 167 
 
to illustrate the point that some of the exorcises we 
experienced cannot be viewed outside the context of this 
architecture.  To be sure there are very material differences 
in terms of the adverse consequences of this – of this design 
post 2009 and pre-1994.  There is no question about it.  But 
the architecture itself has got very, very big systemic 
problems. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then Mr Jafta you say in paragraph 
11 that the amalgamation and the abolition of the two 
separate positions of directors or Domestic and Foreign 
10 
branches that occurred as a result of the implementation of 
the strategic development plan.  Was that plan stopped? 
MR JAFTA:  The plan was stopped in rather very curious 
circumstances because when we had the occasion to meet 
with the then Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence and 
there was reference made to that it is called the Joint 
Standing Committee on Intelligence unequivocally said they 
had received the briefing conduct.  They had yet to comment 
on it and give approval to it or in respect thereto.  And 
because they have not, if you will, approved it, it could not 
20 
be proceeded with.  And as a consequence thereof, the STB 
was stopped. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
MR JAFTA:   But there were other reasons for it being 
stopped. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 97 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You deal in paragraph 12 with 
oversight.  And in dealing with what you say in paragraph 12.  
Would it be fair to ask you to comment on why the Joint 
Standing Committee of Intelligence did not see or learn of 
what was happening with the State Security Agency in the 
period that we are reviewing and take steps to halt it? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes.  I will only give, if there is such a thing 
Chair, an educated guess.  One, I am of the view that some 
of the oversight committees of the legislature, the National 
Assembly and the Council of Provinces and in our case, the 
10 
Joint 
Standing 
Committee 
of 
Intelligence, 
are 
not 
appropriately equipped with research capacity.   
 
You do not find assisting the JSCI capacities that knows 
enough about signals intelligence.  What configurations are 
possible.  How it operates.  How it should or should not 
interact and integrate with the other intelligence agencies.  
So my experience is that, there is a problem with the 
resources available to the oversight structures.   
 
And I have an opinion that this opinion of mine is true to 
a considerable degree of other committees and oversight 
20 
bodies.  That is one. 
 
Two.  When you have got activities of the nature I am 
talking to where, for instance, a parallel vetting entity is 
established.  It is unlikely for the accounting officer to sight 
the oversight committees of such an undertaking.   
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 98 of 167 
 
 
And therefore we are back at secrecy if you will.  Now 
that is one problem.  Then there is the absence of the 
uneven 
effectiveness 
of 
the 
compliance 
assurance 
instruments.  And I keep going back there Chair because it is 
an important issue.   
 
I do not want to comment on whether there was political 
will on the part of the JSCI.  I do not know.  But I suspect 
that perhaps somebody in the Commission can assist the 
Commission with this.   
 
I do seem to remember, I think it was the Speaker of the 
10 
National Assembly, Max Sisulu, at the time, the morning or 
reporting that the JSCI had failed to tender a report to the 
National Assembly as required by law for more than one 
year.   
 
I do not know for certain for how many years but I know 
for a fact that it is a couple of years wherein the JSCI did not 
tender reports.  The question then would be.  Had they been 
robust enough in exercising oversight? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   If they could not tender reports to the National 
20 
Assembly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And ultimately, if they did tender it, 
even if late after the expiry or whatever time, what 
explanation was given for them failing to do that at the 
appropriate time.  So it raises all of those questions. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 99 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:   Yes.  But the point I want to emphasise Chair 
is, in my view, they need to be better resourced.  You cannot 
exercise ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, your point about resources for 
Parliament for portfolio for various committees of Parliament 
is probably correct.  I have those suspicions and I may have 
been told by one or other member of Parliament who has 
testified here, that there are those problems.   
 
But there are – you can see a committee or a body that 
might not have enough resources but is trying the best they 
10 
can to do the best they can with what they have.   
 
So the question would always be that yes there may be a 
challenge about resources and maybe those should be 
improved but let us see what you could have done with what 
you have.  What did you do?  Did you do it?  You know.  So.  
Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Perhaps we should not assume 
that everybody is aware of who sits on the Joint Standing 
Committee of Intelligence.  Who does sit on the Joint 
Standing Committee of Intelligence? 
20 
MR JAFTA:   It is elected public representatives of the 
National Assembly and the ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   They are members of various 
political parties? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, it is a multi-party. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 100 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if they believe they are under 
resourced.  Would you agree that they have a responsibility 
to resource themselves to research their issues and to deal 
with their duties in an oversight committee early and 
responsible? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, I would agree with that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that goes for all political 
parties? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  You have dealt with the 
10 
position of the ITI.  There is just one question.  I presume 
that given the importance of the role of the ITI, that post 
should always be filled. 
MR JAFTA:   The presumption Chair is I think good 
intentions but unfortunately not, not factual.  There is a 
period of two years I think even 2015 and 2017 when the 
post was vacant. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is a matter of concern, I take 
it? 
MR JAFTA:   Absolutely, yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think I have lost you Mr Pretorius 
whereabouts are you now in his affidavit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We are at paragraph 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 101 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And about to move to paragraph 13 
where Mr Jafta draws a conclusion and describes as what he 
regards as the outcome of this amalgamation that occurred 
in 2009.  Do you have anything to add there? 
MR JAFTA:   No, I do not have anything to add to paragraph 
13. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
In 
paragraph 
14, 
you 
talk 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  I do not want to 
forget 
this 
Mr 
Jafta. 
I 
am 
going 
to 
take 
you 
back 
10 
considerable to in your evidence.  Just one question.  Where 
you were telling me about funds of the State Security Agency 
were used for a political party, the African National Congress 
of factions within the political party. 
 
In terms of the records of the agency, the records in 
relation to what this money was taken for and was used for 
would, I take it, be vague or incorrect or misleading.  They 
would not reveal that they were used for assisting a 
particular political party or factions or individuals within a 
political party. 
20 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, Chair.  They were appropriately or suitable 
disguised.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR JAFTA:   But some of the disguise was – excuse the 
term ...[intervenes]  
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 102 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not so smart. 
MR JAFTA:   It was comical. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  
MR JAFTA:   It is almost like you are the project that starts 
with – I am just making an example. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR JAFTA:   [Speaking vernacular] [00:10:37] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR JAFTA:   [Speaking vernacular] [00:10:39]  I am making 
an example. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, ja. 
MR JAFTA:   So [Speaking vernacular] [00:10:44] and then 
the project [Speaking vernacular]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR JAFTA:   So you can draw a link. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   Or this was the ultimate objective. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes.  We started here.  This was a phase.  And 
then ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR JAFTA:   It creates some confidence that perhaps there 
would never have been any accountability. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   For the activities. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 103 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think for the benefit of those who might 
not be conversant with isiZulu/isiXhosa.  You might just have 
to give the Zulu or Xhosa meaning of [Speaking vernacular] 
MR JAFTA:   Chair, I must confess.  You got me there.  I 
would hope you would help me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Well, I it has got something to, it 
must come back. 
MR JAFTA:   It must come back and now ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, whatever it is. 
MR JAFTA:   Whatever it is, it must come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR JAFTA:   And then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Speaking vernacular] is about completing 
something. 
MR JAFTA:   Completing.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR JAFTA:   Ja, something to that effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So Mr Pretorius, that is the idea 
20 
that should give you ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  Noted Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughs] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 14 you make a 
submission about a possible cure to the problems that you 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 104 of 167 
 
have 
highlighted 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
architecture 
and 
amalgamation.  What is that? 
MR JAFTA:   The proposal is what was agreed to by the 
president as a recommendation off the high level review 
panel which is to speed up the state Security Agency along 
the lines of what existed before 2009. 
 
And that would be do you have a distinct - to you have 
one agency for a domestic environment and it must be very 
distinct from the one for foreign.   
 
And the signals should also be distinct by working 
10 
closely or more closer with the foreign than the domestic but 
that is what is referred to in paragraph 14.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I may just go back to the  do you 
role of Parliament and the Joint Standing Committee of 
Intelligence.  That issue is dealt with in the report of the 
High Level Review Panel.  And at page 141 of YY2.   
 
Chair, you need not go there unless you wish to.  We 
can put it in front of you.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The report reads and I will deal with 
20 
just one paragraph.  It reads: 
“The JSCI Was unable to engage substantively with 
the panel.  The panel was told that  most of the 
committee 
members 
were 
new 
and 
have 
no 
institutional memory.” 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 105 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think, hang on.  Let us your junior 
assists Mr Jafta.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have the passage there?  
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is the third paragraph on page 
141.  I will start again.  
“The JSCI Was unable to engage substantively with 
the panel.  The panel was told that most of the 
committee 
members 
were 
new 
and 
have 
no 
institutional memory. 
10 
In addition, the chair of the committee was changed 
thrice since 2014 and the process of replacement 
took time, rendering he committee wither less. 
Members of the committee further pointed out that 
they do not serve on the committee on a full time 
basis and were only able to meet once a week for 
few hours. 
The accumulative effect of these issues was aptly 
captured by one member who admitted that the 
committee had lost control of their oversight role 
20 
and that three of their annual reports had not been 
presented to Parliament.” 
 
I presume that you might have some knowledge of that 
or is that not so?  It is a matter of concern that state of 
affairs, is it not? 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 106 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, it is.  And thanks for that Mr Pretorius and 
Chair.  I did indicate that a couple of years that the 
committee had failed to submit his reports to Parliament. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I see. 
MR JAFTA:   And this excerpt confirms that for three years 
and that just indicates to a degree the magnitude of the 
problem. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 15, you talk of the 
limited remit of the Auditor-General of South Africa.  You 
have dealt with that in some detail.  Do you have anything to 
10 
add? 
MR JAFTA:   No, I do not have anything more to add to this. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  But you do stress in paragraph 
16 and you have told the Chair that the expansion of the 
oversight capacity or purview of the Auditor-General of South 
Africa 
is 
being 
implemented 
subject 
to 
reasonable 
considerations so as not to compromise operations. 
MR JAFTA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And as I understand it.  That is one 
of the recommendations that came from the High Level 
20 
Review Panel and was approved by the President.  Is that 
correct? 
MR JAFTA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that has been put into place? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 107 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in accordance to international – 
to some international president? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes.  It is an ongoing exercise Chair.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then in paragraph 17, you talk about 
administrative 
systems 
and 
processes 
for 
good 
and 
accountable governance.  And in paragraph 17, you seem to 
suggest that the problem is not the absence of rules but 
rather the evasion of rules.   
 
Do you have some comments to make in relation to 
paragraph 17 and particularly over the page, those three 
10 
bullets? 
MR JAFTA:   I made an example earlier or earlier I referred 
to the abuse of funding instruments.  This talks to that.  But 
there is another important point to be made here Chair and I 
do not know how we can illustrate this point.  There are two 
funding instruments, temporary advanced and the other one 
for operations.   
 
Now we fund and we approve funding of operations on 
the basis of a detailed project plan, hear motivations, clearly 
outlined objectives and all of those things that should be on 
20 
a project plan.   
 
However, you then find a situation where – may I call 
this Chair a certificate – wherein a member would in the form 
of a certificate say something approximating the following.   
I hereby request to be given a sum of R 10 million, 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 108 of 167 
 
R 20 million to prosecute Project Symptoms.  The 
costs thereof is R 20 million.  Project Symptoms is 
consistent with the prescripts of the Constitution, 
the law.  And the annual stamps of the organisation. 
 
Something approximating that.  And on the basis of the 
certificate, R 20 million will be given to me in hard cash and 
I will walk out of the gate with R 20 million in my bag or in 
the boot of my car.    
 
I would then show up - the times vary, it could be two 
weeks, it could be two months, it could be six months.  I 
10 
would show up and draw up another certificate.   
 
Project Symptom was duly prosecuted and the sum of 
R 20 million was expanded.  The objectives have been 
satisfied.  Full stop.   
 
Alternatively say:  However, the budget of R 20 million 
proofed to be small.  I need an additional R 2 million.  And 
on that basis, I will get an additional R 2 million and out the 
gate I walk.   
 
And then tender another addendum of a similar nature 
that the additional R 2 million was expanded in accordance 
20 
with this, that and the other.  And this would suffice for 
dispersing funds and accounting for disbursed funds.   
 
Chair, I kid you not.  This is a reality.  So stopping the 
abuse of the temporary advance and reverting back to the 
proper funding instrument immediately stopped the abuse of 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 109 of 167 
 
at least financial resources.   
 
And the intended operations that would be funded by 
that because the method I have just explained to the Chair 
would not suffice for any corporate entity under any 
circumstances.  I do not know if ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What is...  Well, you see.  A dispensation 
that allows taxpayers’ money to be used like that, where the 
piece of paper that remains within the organisation which is 
supposed to reflect the justification for the money that has 
been given to somebody, that kind of dispensation which 
10 
allows for the vaguest terms you can think of, cannot be 
allowed.   
 
I can understand within the context of intelligence the 
idea that certain information must only be known by certain 
people but then it must be adequate information.   
 
And certainly ought to be known to people, I would 
imagine, to the accounting officer because he or she must 
account, I would imagine.   
 
So a system that allowed that, I struggle to think how 
anybody at anytime who may have been in charge would 
20 
have though it is acceptable to have that dispensation.   
 
Are you able to throw light, say maybe I am being too 
unfair to those who may have been in charge when that 
system was going on? 
MR JAFTA:   You are not being unfair Chair.  You are 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 110 of 167 
 
absolutely being very, very fair.  The picture – I want to 
remind the Chair that very early on I did say compliance with 
the law, with the Constitution, in my view, with that I have 
seen and experienced was elective. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR JAFTA:   I even used the dramatic expression that this 
was – whenever the Constitution and the law was proving an 
inconvenience, you will simply walk around it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR JAFTA:   There are prescripts in place to fund projects 
10 
but they are determined to be a nuisance in this instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR JAFTA:   And people just walk around those.  And permit 
for this method I have just explained which once it is 
adopted pleased everybody in the organisation who good 
corporate governance and political accountability.   
 
Matter of fact Chair.  Once you have systems of the 
nature I have just spoken to, by definition you have to hide 
that from the oversight entities.  You have to hide it.   
 
And you must massage.  You must manipulate reports so 
20 
that the oversight structures are none the wiser about the 
reality of what is going on.   
 
And if they are under resourced and all the other 
reasons that were read out by Mr Pretorius the oversight 
structures are not likely to up this level of detail because 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 111 of 167 
 
they just have to follow the money. 
 
And 
alert 
oversight 
board 
would 
say 
but 
why 
is 
expenditure like this.  and very, very quickly you will get to 
the source that the problem lies here.   
 
My own sense Chair is.  It was done on purpose.  It was 
expedient for it to be done and it was done so brazenly that 
in fact I do not believe the people involved ever thought they 
would have to give accountability.  
 
But more than that, it most definitely undermined our 
own integrity as an organisation in the eyes of the banking 
10 
environment that we have to work with because you cannot 
have a relationship with a bank with money moves in that 
fashion, in that reckless fashion.  It actually poses a risk to 
operations.  
 
But Chair, this was done and it was not done for a week, 
it was not done for a month, it was done over a long period 
of time.  And my submission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   For a number of years. 
MR JAFTA:   It was done on purpose.  The PMFA or any 
other law with common sense cannot reconcile with that kind 
20 
of conduct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But oversight bodies, maybe not so much 
those that may be outside of the department but I am 
thinking that the leadership of the organisation certainly at 
the level of DG, you cannot have a situation in your 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 112 of 167 
 
organisation, I would imagine, where...  
 
Because here from what I have heard and I am still to 
hear quite a lot I think, we are talking about large amounts of 
money, leave the organisation. 
 
And it looks like you had to rely on somebody's word 
whether they were used for the purpose for which they were 
supposed to be used.  
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now it is just difficult to think of that, one, 
as the account officer you would not pick that up over 
10 
sometime and you have picked him up, you would think it is 
okay.  You understand what I mean?  
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  But you might – You have been in 
the position for about three years.   
MR JAFTA:   Just three years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   you might be able to say it is not so easy 
when you - so in terms of your predecessors, whoever they 
may be, you might be able to say:  Well, it is not so easy to 
pick these things up.  Are you able to comment?   
20 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, it is very easy Chair to pick it up and to 
stop it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   And I am speaking at least from experience. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 113 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:   You just say one, we used the appropriate 
funding instrument. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   You stop this thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   We only fund in accordance with the 
organisational prescripts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   And it stops. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR JAFTA:   And it stops, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   May I say, Chair, and maybe we have to 
favour the Commission with that annual report.  For the 
financial year ‘17/’18, R125 million could not be accounted 
for because …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have seen that in one of the 
affidavits, sir. 
MR JAFTA:   Because of this funding, because of this 
approach. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   To accounting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Actually there is another figure, I 
think it is – I do not know if it is 1 billion or 2 billion that I 
have read in one of the affidavits which could not be 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 114 of 167 
 
accounted for. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is in relation to assets. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is in relation to asset. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   9 billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   R9 billion.  I mean, that is a lot of 
money.  How could you have – or could government 
department not be able to account for R9 billion and I have 
a suspicion no heads rolled and – I mean, whatever the 
position is, this kind – this state of affairs simply cannot be 
10 
allowed to continue.  Whatever arguments there can be, 
this state of affairs were R9 billion of taxpayers’ money 
and just disappear and government and the department 
cannot put anything on the table to say this is what it was 
used for, we are sure about that, because that money could 
have gone into a number of peoples’ pockets who were not 
entitled to it and with R9 billion, imagine what you can do 
for people.  Yes, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Two issues arise out of your 
evidence in relation to paragraph 17.  The one, Mr Jafta, is 
20 
the problems which arise for legal accounting purposes, 
financial accounting purposes through the use of cash.  
Was this a problem that you identified? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, absolutely. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what has been done about it? 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 115 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:   Unavoidably we still have to use cash in the 
operational environment and please permit me, Chair, not 
to go into detail on why but we have to use …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine. 
MR JAFTA:   We have to use cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I understand. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes.  But what we most definitely do not 
do is to bring to our environment large amounts of cash 
that we hand over to people, we do not do that.  We do not 
do that, ja. 
10 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
And 
you 
mentioned 
the 
documentation in the reporting chain in relation to a 
certificate which would evidence the receipt of cash, the 
handing over of cash to a certain project.  Can I refer you 
to bundle SSA1 page 465? 
MR JAFTA:   Page 465. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You asked that we show a 
certificate. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, please. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To the chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Registrar, get my bundle as well so I can 
see. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Bundle 1, perhaps page 464.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Get the page – what is the page number, 
Mr Pretorius? 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 116 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   464. 
CHAIRPERSON:   464. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now it would be useful and 
illustrative to put this on our overhead, Chair, but if I may 
just put on record what the certificate says. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then Mr Jafta can comment.  It 
is a certificate of receiving cash, it has a document which 
has been declassified.   
“Name of person giving cash” 
10 
And then you have a name. 
“Amount R1.4 million, One Million Four Hundred 
Thousand 
Rand. 
 
Reason 
for 
giving 
cash 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius, it looks like you 
are reading from a page that is different from mine.  Did 
you say 467 …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Have you got 464, black numbers, 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, 467. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, 464. 
CHAIRPERSON:   464. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I have got it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, amount in words and then: 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 117 of 167 
 
“Reason 
for 
giving 
cash: 
 
Project 
Maybuya, 
Ops:Justice.” 
There is a signature, there is date, there is a name of 
recipient and a declaration: 
“I declare that I am recipient of the above” 
And there is a signature.  So it seems to me that in the 
reporting chain, Mr Jafta, there would be other documents 
perhaps before and after but at this link in the chain at 
least this is the type of information that would justify 
handing over R1 400 000 in cash.  Would you like to 
10 
comment? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, this is exactly, Chair, the kind of a 
certificate 
that 
would 
suffice 
for 
somebody 
to 
get 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this would be in the dispensation 
before you made whatever changes you made. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just broad in terms of the reason. 
20 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just very broad. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let me put it to you, does that 
type of documentation with such sparse detail allow proper 
financial controls to be implemented? 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 118 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:   It does not.  It is not possible to account not 
just for the expenditure of monies but also for the proper 
management of operations and projects.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then if one looks at paragraph 18, 
you deal with a new issue and that is operations being 
conducted through the involvement of or from – as you say, 
from the office of the accounting officer.  That is the DG’s 
office.  What do you have to say about that? 
MR JAFTA:   The point about it, Chair, is that ideally you 
should not have operations that are prosecuted from the 
10 
office of the accounting officer for the simple reason that 
who is going to approve the projects that are run from the 
office of the accounting officer? 
 
Elsewhere in the organisation there are very good 
systems in place for processing and recommending and 
approving projects.   
Now when the accounting officer initiates a project 
and approves it, there is a risk of bias and because it is 
the accounting officer, the other compliance assurance 
instruments may not as robust as they otherwise would 
20 
have been if the operation was conducted elsewhere in the 
organisation in the operational environment. 
There will be instances where the accounting officer 
has to ensure proper coordination and that operations are 
given effect to but it is very risk when such operations are 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 119 of 167 
 
conducted from the office of the accounting officer. 
Part of the problem with it, Chair is that you 
possibly have a situation where the accounting officer 
determines a need, approves a project, the output of the 
project in the form of information serves before the 
accounting officer and possibly involves himself or herself 
in the analysis and the processing and the evaluation of 
the information that comes from his own office and possibly 
is likely to add on his own intelligence whereas properly 
you have to disaggregate the responsibilities, those who 
10 
collect are not the same as those you do the analysis, the 
processing, the evaluation and then the information comes 
to the accounting officer for onward-forwarding to other 
relevant authorities in the apparatus of government or the 
state. 
So there is that real risk with having operations 
being run from the office of the accounting officer.  I may 
just also say that proof of this anxiety I am expressing lies 
in the fact that the R125 million that could not be 
accounted for in fact could not be accounted for are in 
20 
respect to operations that were conducted from the office 
of the accounting officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the amount related to operations that 
were run from the office of the accounting officer? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 120 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So – but, of course, the accounting 
officer is responsible for that. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you make the point that if the 
operation was not run from the office of the accounting 
officer and was being run from another unit there may have 
been enough checks. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which may well have made sure that the 
money 
was 
not 
– 
did 
not 
disappear 
without 
being 
10 
accounted for. 
MR JAFTA:   I agree.  Absolutely, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe I should ask the question, 
since – if the R125 million that disappeared without being 
accounted for related to operations that were run from the 
office of the accounting officer it ought to have been easy 
for action to be taken against the accounting officer to hold 
him accountable.   
20 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that done, do you know? 
MR JAFTA:   I do not think that was done, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not know. 
MR JAFTA:   No. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 121 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  If action was taken would 
you not as somebody who goes into that office have had 
access to documentation or records that show that action 
was taken or is the position that you might not have 
checked? 
MR JAFTA:   The holding accounting officers is outside my 
province. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Falls outside. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes, it falls outside my province. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course you would be entitled as the 
next accounting officer – I do not know whether it is the 
next or there may have been another one in between but, 
for what it is worth, I guess you would be entitled to say 
well, as the accounting officer of this department in 2021 I 
still want to know what action was taken, if any, about this 
money that went missing in this department.  Would you 
not be able – entitled to…? 
MR JAFTA:   I would be able to … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would be entitled to. 
MR JAFTA:   I would be able to make that enquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, alright. 
MR JAFTA:   But I will also, even far more importantly, 
spend a bit of time in trying to know definitively what was 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 122 of 167 
 
the money used for, it is a lot of money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Obviously, what the money was used for 
and recovering it. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because it seems obvious that it was not 
used for an acceptable purpose. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So then you would be wanting to take 
steps to recover but you would also be wanting to say what 
do we need to do to make sure that this kind of thing does 
10 
not happen again. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And to decide on those steps you might 
want to know what steps were taken last time because 
maybe steps that were taken are enough to deter others. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it looks to me you would be fully 
entitled to know. 
MR JAFTA:   To do that, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was any action taken. 
20 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja, okay, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Perhaps another example – and 
the documentation in the bundle, Chair, will be dealt with 
in detail but by way of an illustration, if I can refer you to 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 123 of 167 
 
bundle SSA1 at page 884 which is another document 
purporting to authorise the grant and receipt of monies, 
presumably cash. 
MR JAFTA:   Page?  What page is it? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   884.  Perhaps we should not go 
there at the moment.  Let us just go to 887. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That will not be recorded, Mr Pretorius, 
go closer to the mic. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, no I do not want to go to 884 
because 
a 
name 
appears 
there 
that 
has 
not 
been 
10 
foreshadowed.  If you would go to 887.  That is the last 
page in the file. 
MR JAFTA:   Ja, ja, I am on it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Again part of the accounting trail, 
as it were.  It is a handwritten document with amounts 
scribbled amounting to several million rand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, this is one document that if there 
is no information there that is sensitive that could be 
shown on the screen. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, the evidence says that this is 
20 
part of the paper trail, the accounting paper trail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In accordance with which monies 
are handed over. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, continue. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 124 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have anything to say about 
that? 
MR JAFTA:   No. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Would 
it 
be 
an 
adequate 
justification of record of receipt or obtaining of monies? 
MR JAFTA:   The organisation in terms of standing 
prescripts for financial accounting would never accept this 
form for accounting for monies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   Even if we are talking about R150, we would 
10 
not accept accounting for a sum such as – at the top of 
that page, R19 million accounted for in this fashion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I mean the top part, the date is 
given, it is – I think there is no harm in reading the date, 
15 December 2017: 
“Collected R19 million” 
And then there is R5 million and there is R1,9 million, 
there is 900 000 and there is R360 and I do not know 
whether it is the names of the operations that appear 
against some of the amounts and then below on the second 
20 
half of the page two dates are given, 13 December 2017 
and 8 December 2017 and there is R2,5 million received, 
there is R2 million received, there is R2,4 million.  I think 
the next one is R1 million, R30 000, R1,3 million.  Ja, it is 
like money – cash just gets dished out to different people. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 125 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is an illustrative example but 
there will be more detailed evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it like you can have R19 million, 
you can have R5 million, you can have R3 million and 
people take the cash and go and - I guess maybe some use 
it for legitimate purposes, others might not use it for 
legitimate purposes but the point is the financial controls, 
this is not the way to ensure that there is – that money is 
accounted for.  Ja.  Okay, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Perhaps you can assist the Chair 
10 
in relation to an issue that arose in your evidence earlier.  
The Chief Financial Officer under whose jurisdiction many 
of the controls would have resided, was that office always 
permitted to fulfil his or her duties fully? 
MR JAFTA:   As far as I am aware yes and no, Chair.  
Some responsibilities were fulfilled in accordance with the 
prescripts, certainly on the non-operational side of our 
business but on the operational side of the business, I do 
believe that financial controls particularly at the level of 
the Chief Financial Officer, somebody with authority must 
20 
have leaned on them and they possibly did not have an 
escape route the way it must have been – and they just 
allowed these things to happen.  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You talk at paragraph 19, Mr Jafta, 
of corrective measures and what you have done to rectify 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 126 of 167 
 
the problems you came across.  What were or are those 
corrective measures? 
MR JAFTA:   The first one, Chair, was an instruction that, 
as I had indicated earlier, that whoever appeared on the 
register of debtors must return money that belongs to the 
SSA and that happened …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What would fall under that?  What 
money would fall under that, was contemplated in terms of 
money to be returned.  It was not loans, is it not? 
MR JAFTA:   Let me explain, Chair.  If I travel to another 
10 
country, to country miles, there is a framework that 
determines what my temporary advance should be in miles. 
So I would be given a temporary advance and then I come 
back 
after 
four 
days, 
the 
regulation 
is 
that 
within 
reasonable point of time, I think it is a day or two, I should 
have tendered invoices and account for all expenditures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR JAFTA:   Accommodation and everything.  I took a taxi, 
I account for that.  Now to that extent because I have 
money of the organisation I am captured as somebody who 
20 
is owing the organisation and once I tender all the invoices 
I have settled, now I do not owe anything.  The problem 
then arises when, as I have indicated, when you fund 
projects through the temporary advance instrument.  Then 
now, as we have just illustrated, I am in possession of R20 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 127 of 167 
 
million that belongs to the state.   
So when the CFO briefs me and we get to this item 
or this chapter in the briefing on debtors, I am astounded 
as to how anybody can owe a state department a some of 
R20 million.   
It is at that point that then I get to know that a 
proper funding instrument was ignored and the temporary 
advance was employed for funding projects.  So the 
instruction then was, everybody who owes the organisation 
money, because of this irregular arrangement, must return 
10 
the money back to the organisation. 
A bit of a painful exercise because now I have given 
Mr Pretorius R12 million twelve months ago for a project of 
24 months.  Now where is the money, the invoices cannot 
be reconciled and then he tells me no, my wife and I use 
one account, we settled the bond, we did this, we did – 
meanwhile I have said return all the money. 
Now when I say return all the money it is with the 
proviso that we will continue to fund legitimate projects but 
the money must come back to the SSA.   
20 
So that is the first thing that we did.  So I gave a 
directive, I think it was the second week or so of May 
2018. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
So 
returning 
the 
money 
included 
providing - accounting for the money by way of providing 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 128 of 167 
 
receipts and so on. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it was not just about returning cash. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it included returning cash where 
somebody might be in possession of cash that belongs to 
the organisation that should not be with them. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay and then of course if I cannot 
account for the money, for the R2 million, R5 million or 10 
10 
or even 20, that means I cannot return the money. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then what happens? 
MR JAFTA:   In that instance, Chair, the following 
happened and that is why I said it was  a painful exercise, 
there are colleagues who obviously had used the money for 
purposes other than those for which the money was given 
to them.  Now if you owe us a sum of money, in policy we 
can deduct up to an x percentage of your income per month 
towards settling your debt.  
20 
 
Now we would work it out with you that in fact 
Loyiso, now you are 53 years, you have left with 7 years 
before retirement, you can count how many more pay 
cheques are due to Loyiso and we will work out that listen, 
if we continue to deduct 15 000 from your salary, you 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 129 of 167 
 
would not have paid this R1.5 million that you owe.  In that 
case, because we were quite determined to get the money, 
we would agree that but it looks like your pensions have 
got a bit of fat relative to what you owe us, so it is prudent 
that you resign and then we access our money and bring it 
back to the fiscus.   
And what you do should not really concern us 
because you have used that money, you are a million rand 
richer in any event, it should not be – and I must 
emphasise this point, it should not be that we were cruel 
10 
with people, they have used 1 million, now they cannot pay 
it back, so they give us from their pensions because they 
are a million rand richer and then we will get our money in 
that fashion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And has that largely worked or is it still 
too early to say? 
MR JAFTA:   It has worked, there are outstanding cases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it has worked in some cases. 
20 
MR JAFTA:   It has worked, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR JAFTA:   The one thing we do not do is to write-off the 
debt and say -  we do not write off the debit and say, you 
know, we do not write off the debt, yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 130 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, ja, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 19, first bullet, you 
say illegal operations were terminated and you deal with 
that in detail in paragraph 19.1.  If you will give some 
examples of the operations terminated please? 
MR JAFTA:   There is numerous of them, Chair, but one of 
them, 
for 
instance, 
would 
have 
been 
the 
protection 
services provided to Mr Collen Maine, Ms Dudu Myeni, the 
services that were put around Ms Ntuli-Zuma, that was 
terminated and several other …[intervenes] 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The protection services to the 
President and Deputy President. 
MR JAFTA:   Obviously those were terminated. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, no, of the country. 
MR JAFTA:   Come again? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You do not mention the security 
services 
to 
the 
President 
and 
the 
Deputy 
President 
provided 
by 
the 
SSA. 
 
I 
believe 
those 
have 
been 
terminated. 
MR JAFTA:   Of President of the Republic? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   No, those would be provided by the South 
African Police Services. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes but the SSA services 
…[intervenes] 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 131 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Pretorius is talking about, the 
protection services that Mr – or Dr Mufamadi told us about 
yesterday in respect of the era of Mr Jacob Zuma, I think 
he said the State Security Agency appeared to be running 
some kind of protection services. 
MR JAFTA:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which were in addition to the protection 
provided by SAPS to the President. 
MR JAFTA:   Oh, ja, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he is talking about that, whether 
10 
that additional protection to the President and Deputy 
President – I do not know if there was Deputy President 
protection give. 
MR JAFTA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether that was terminated.  I think 
that is what he is asking. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR JAFTA:   No, then that element of it was terminated. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then the second bullet in 
paragraph 19.1, what was terminated there? 
20 
MR JAFTA:   The …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But let us clarify this.  Mr Pretorius 
might know better, he is the evidence leader, I did hear 
about that type of protection having been provided by the 
State Security Agency to Mr Zuma when he was President 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 132 of 167 
 
in addition to the SAPS protection but I did not hear about 
such protection being provided by the State Security 
Agency 
to 
the 
Deputy 
President, 
whichever 
Deputy 
President Mr Pretorius may be talking about. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was the position, do you 
know? 
MR JAFTA:   The detail of it, Chair, is as follows.  I cannot 
recall the precise date now but there was a project 
whereby members of the SSA would provide protection to 
the Presidential Jet Inkwazi. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, just say that again? 
MR JAFTA:   They would provide protection to the – they 
would secure the Presidential plane.  Yes.  Now the jet that 
the President uses is the property of the South African 
National Defence Force, the Air Force, in particular, but we 
had these members who would then be deployed to watch 
over the aircraft within the country and without the country 
and that is what was terminated without leaving the aircraft 
exposed.  That is what was terminated, most definitely, 
yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The evidence given by Dr 
Mufamadi was a little more detailed and he spoke of the 
training of security services personnel in a foreign country 
and 
he 
is 
being 
deployed 
for, 
amongst 
others, 
the 
President and the Deputy President.  Do you know anything 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 133 of 167 
 
about that?  And I am talking about President Zuma and 
the Deputy President. 
MR JAFTA:   There are …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Deputy President who? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, it depends on the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It depends on the time, that is why it 
is… Well, before 2014 the Deputy President was President 
Motlanthe.  From 2014 up to beginning of 2018 the Deputy 
President was Mr Ramaphosa.  So it is important if we talk 
about the Deputy President having been provided with 
10 
protection from the State Security Agency in addition to 
SAPS protection, we need to know which one we are 
talking about. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, may I intervene?  This is not 
in the statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it may be a legitimate question 
but no 3.3s have been issued to any Deputy President of 
whatever era. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, I just wanted to make sure 
20 
that we do not have a situation where somebody says you 
have implied that I received this protection when I did not 
because you did not explain which Deputy President or 
when, you know, but – we will clarify that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja, okay. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 134 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
The 
issue 
of 
community-based 
organisations, what projects there were terminated? 
MR JAFTA:   There were projects particularly in the 
Western Cape where community-based organisations had 
been employed …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius and Mr Jafta, I 
would like us to take a short break and then we will 
continue afterwards.  I meant for us to take a break at four.  
How long will we need when we come back, Mr Pretorius?  
I am not putting pressure, I just want to have an idea.  An 
10 
hour? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Less than an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  No, that is alright.  So we will 
just take a fifteen minutes break.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was a small mishap. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that is the risk of using old 
buildings. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And old lifts. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
but 
let’s 
continue 
and 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair, I hope that is all 
in order. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 135 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no everything is in order, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 19.1 you talk of 
community based organisations established as a cover to 
influence political developments in the country, those 
projects being terminated? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, yes, those projects it is a wide range of 
illegal what we have judged to have been illegal projects 
that were run, some of them using the format of community 
based organisations for party political ends, those were 
terminated…[intervenes]. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Give us one example without 
naming the perpetrators names but the – maybe those 
parties affected? 
MR JAFTA:   It would be – it would be, for instance, the 
example I made mention of around Rustenburg and the 
Platinum 
Belt 
establishing 
a 
union 
that 
would 
be 
terminated – it would be a project, I can think of one in the 
Western Cape 
where that was explicitly provided to 
improve 
the 
fortunes 
of 
the 
ANC 
within 
various 
communities 
around 
the 
Western 
Cape, 
that 
was 
20 
terminated…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And anything to do with the EFF? 
MR JAFTA:   No, nothing to do with EFF at all, ja and then 
there will be other forms of community based organisations 
or NGO’s that we terminated, simply because they didn’t – 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 136 of 167 
 
they 
were 
not 
consistent 
with 
our 
legal 
mandate…[intervenes]. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
They 
were 
not 
concerned…[intervenes]. 
MR JAFTA:   They were not consistent with – the purposes 
were not consistent with our legal mandate, and those were 
terminated as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then – well, let’s just clarify one 
aspect. 
 
You 
say 
community 
based 
organisations 
established as a cover, did the SSA involved itself in the 
10 
establishment of community based organisations? 
MR JAFTA:   Can you repeat that sir? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say – the second bullet in 
paragraph 19.1, you say, 
“Amongst 
the 
operations 
terminated, 
was 
an 
operation or were operations involving community 
based organisations established as a cover to 
influence political developments in the country”. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Established by the SSA? 
20 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right and then the next bullet 
says, 
“Political Intelligence operations conducted outside 
the legal mandate of the agency”. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 137 of 167 
 
 
Would those be Intelligence operations in relation 
to 
political 
organisations 
or 
what 
operations 
were 
terminated? 
MR JAFTA:   There’s intelligence – the operations that 
were – as I’d indicated, Chair, before lunch, within – 
dynamics within the ANC for an example would invariably 
lead to the SSA being or undertaking a project whereby 
they would conduct operations against other members of 
the ANC. Now, that would be Political Intelligence within 
the ANC and those are the kinds of projects that were, 
10 
most definitely terminated. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Terminated because they fell 
beyond the mandate of the SSA? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And, therefore, you’re quite 
justified in talking about them? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then in paragraph 19.2 you deal 
with terminating relations with persons utilised by the 
agency.  You had mentioned this before, but do you have 
20 
anything to add there? 
MR JAFTA:   There’s a whole group of people who 
emerged, Chair, when I say we said people must return 
monies but will continue to fund projects, you’d find that 
there’s a group of people in some part of the country and 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 138 of 167 
 
this 
predominantly 
happened 
in 
Kwa-Zulu 
Natal 
and 
Gauteng, there would be a group of people – and obviously 
other provinces, there would be a group of people who 
would emerge and say, we have not been paid, you owe us 
this amount of money we are going to take you to court, we 
were working as a team because funding would have dried 
up and then it would be explained what the purpose of a 
particular project would be and if it does not satisfy the 
framework provided by the law, then funding would stop 
and then these people would emerge one after the other 
10 
and we would listen to each one of them.  The Inspector 
General for Intelligence also listened to some of them.  A 
great degree of coincidence between those that were 
listened to by the Inspector General for Intelligence and 
ourselves and in most of those cases we came to the 
correct decision that, whereas there has been some form of 
a relationship between the agency and such a relationship 
was unlawful or irregular and therefore we would find a 
way of parting ways with several of those people and then 
there’d be people who would come up and say, we were 
20 
taken to country X and we received this kind of training, we 
were awaiting integration into the SSA – employment to the 
SSA.  I must say, Chair, it was quite painful because some 
of them had been recruited from permanent jobs and they 
came in some foreign jurisdictions but there are certain 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 139 of 167 
 
processes that would not have been satisfied and then we 
would win them off and terminate the relationship with such 
people. So, it’s that category, Chair, of people that – 
among others, those are the categories of people that we 
terminated relations.  As a matter of fact, one even had a 
suspicion that, possibly, word had gone around that show 
up at the SSA, certain litigation, SSA will pay you.  Such 
was the extent to which this problem presented itself of 
these groups of young people, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In 19.3.1 and 19.3.2 of your 
10 
affidavit you talk of attempts to recover operational funds 
that had been given to members or people outside the 
agency and you say that, that process is ongoing, you’ve 
given extensive evidence in that regard, do you have 
anything to add? 
MR JAFTA:   No, I don’t have anything else to add on that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You deal in, 19.3.3, with the 
problem of recovering firearms, that’s pistols and assault 
rifles which members had kept in their custody in breach of 
Corporate Policy and you say that, for a number of years, 
20 
no one within the agency Management knew where the 
firearms were stored and what they had been used for.  Do 
you have any comment on that and in particular to say to 
the Chair, whether you were confident that all the firearms 
that were distributed as part of lawful or unlawful projects, 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 140 of 167 
 
have now been recovered? 
MR JAFTA:   Chair, earlier when I was talking to abuse of 
resources, I made a distinction between abusing monies, 
abusing personnel and abusing assets such as firearms, 
cars and immovable assets, this relates to that but it is 
specific to firearms.  There are prescripts in place that 
govern the management of firearms and ammunition in our 
possession. 
 
Notwithstanding, 
the 
existence 
of 
such 
prescripts which have not lapsed, firearms were taken out 
of our custody and these firearms were given to people in 
10 
many instances or in some instances to non-members of 
the SSA.  We tried, the best we could – this is, again, 
within, predominantly the special operations environment.  
We tried to get those firearms back into our custody and 
we did receive – or we collaborated with the office of the 
Inspector General and various entities within the agency.  
We were able to recover some firearms but we – in respect 
to ammunition, some of the ammunition that we recovered 
had clearly never belonged to the SSA and the there is an 
ongoing investigation into, why – what happened to the 
20 
ammunition 
of 
the 
SSA 
why 
are 
we 
receiving 
back 
ammunition that doesn’t belong to us but in respect to the 
firearms that we’ve since recovered, all of them were 
surrendered 
for 
proper 
investigations 
– 
ballistic 
investigations within the South African Police Services, the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 141 of 167 
 
better to determine and satisfy ourselves that none of 
those had been used in any criminality in the country.  To 
be sure, Chair, we have not recovered all of the firearms, 
there are firearms that remain outstanding and there are 
efforts in place, despite difficult to recover such firearms 
and 
as 
I 
say 
to 
determine 
what 
happened 
to 
our 
ammunition and why we get back ammunition that was 
never ours in the first place. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, would it be correct to 
conclude then that, at least in some cases, firearms issued 
10 
under the rubric of unlawful projects or alleged unlawful 
projects may still be “out there”? 
MR JAFTA:   As I’m sitting here, Chair, I cannot give any 
absolute guarantees about what those firearms were used 
for.  I have anxiety about a possibility that they may have 
been used for – in prosecution of criminality but most 
definitely not – it will be, again, one of those abuses of 
due process and assets of the SSA. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then in paragraph 19.3.4 you talk 
of 
investigations 
that 
are 
underway 
with 
respect 
to 
20 
movable and immovable property, briefly what are those 
and what is the state of those investigations? 
MR JAFTA:   The – this is when I made this jest about 
Advocate Nzabeza.  We have instances where, within the 
context of the Covid environment, movable and immovable 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 142 of 167 
 
assets were procured but in order to provide and sustain 
cover, they would be registered in the names of members 
or non-members, certainly operatives in that environment 
or former members and those assets, because it’s an 
illegality, Chair, you procure an immovable asset as SSA 
and then you register it in the name of Loyiso.  In essence 
that asset belongs to Loyiso.  Now, how does the agency 
and the State, therefore, recover that which belongs to it, 
to itself when, in law – in the eyes of the law these assets 
is part of the estate of Loyiso.  There are instances where 
10 
some of the people to whom – or against whom these 
assets were registered, have since passed on and in those 
instances such assets remain, in law, part of the estate of 
the deceased and we have very little recourse to go to the 
– to the surviving members of the deceased to say, by the 
way whereas your father or your other owns this register of 
assets, asset three and asset seven and asset eight 
actually belongs to the SSA because it was done, rather 
recklessly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would imagine that, at least in some 
20 
cases, you ought to be able to recover it if you can show 
that it was bought with money provided by SSA for certain 
purposes or it was bought with money that was meant for 
certain legitimate purposes but was abused, basically the 
money was stolen from the agency to buy this property 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 143 of 167 
 
which was registered in the name of somebody that 
actually, in reality it belongs to SSA or were you are able 
to explain that, because of the nature of some of the 
operations of SSA it sometimes happens that property is 
registered in the name of somebody, and employee of SSA 
but both the employee and SSA know that it’s not his 
personal property but in terms of war that’s what will 
happen but of course, there might be others where you 
might not have enough information to place before or 
represent at court to convince the court that, legitimately 
10 
its SSA’s property, yes. Ja so there may be situations 
where SSA can recover those properties but I’m sure there 
will be others where it’s difficult. 
MR JAFTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you’ll bear with me a minute, 
Chair.  In paragraph 20 you deal with the issue of 
executive overreach and you deal with it at a policy level.   
Without naming or implicating any particular executive 
member, would you just tell the Chair, please, what your 
20 
view is in relation to the  relationship between the agency 
and the executive and what your views are in that regard?  
It’s important because the Chair has to consider these 
issues. 
MR JAFTA:   The relationship between the Accounting 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 144 of 167 
 
Officer within the Civilian Intelligence Agency and the 
Minister is provided for in law, the administration must 
account to the executive, the executive determines policy, 
determines priorities, the legislature the resources and 
then there’s accounting for the activities that have to be 
undertaken.  During the period under review, there is – 
there’s a very strong body of evidence and circumstantial 
evidence that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when you say, under review, you 
mean the period that was reviewed by the executive panel? 
10 
MR JAFTA:   This would be the period, Chair, particularly 
after 2009. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2009 to early 2018? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, there is evidence of – certainly 
presented to me where members of the National Executive 
or 
at 
least 
the 
Ministers 
responsible 
regularly 
ran 
operations that would mean they ran – they handed 
sources, they tasked them, they’ll debrief them, they must 
obviously generate reports, analyse and all – and do all 
the processes that are done in the Intelligence cycle and 
20 
then possibly advise themselves because they are in the 
policy realm and possibly advise the President and/or their 
colleagues.  There’s no question in my mind that this did 
happen. Now, in my experience that inherently contains in 
it an unlawful instruction, a manifestly unlawful or illegal 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 145 of 167 
 
instruction because the Executive should not be involved in 
operations.  Now, in this instance, Chair, I’d like to express 
this opinion that this problem is not unique to the SSA, 
State Security, it’s a problem which is fairly widespread.  It 
would 
attend 
State 
owned 
enterprises 
where 
the 
representative of the shareholder would exert the powers 
of the Board and the Board or the Chair of the Board would 
use their powers of the Accounting Officer in the instance 
of – so this notion of Executive overreach is not something 
unique to the SSA and as I say, inherent in it is this 
10 
problem of manifestly unlawful or illegal instructions.  Now, 
in my view, it should be that – because the problem, I 
believe, is widespread it goes beyond the SSA.  Policy 
instruments should be put together to prevent this thing 
from happening to have an auditable system and you can 
design something like a requirement that instructions from 
the Executive must always be in writing put together or 
communicated in accordance with a prescribed form. So 
you can say, I’m Minister for this portfolio, consistent with 
the provision of this clause or that clause of the law and 
20 
I’m giving this instruction and it is in pursuance of this 
objective, carry out, it’s possible to work out a framework 
for instructions to be in writing because that profile is for 
certainty then instructions are auditable but further to that, 
the – presently all that the law says is that nobody shall 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 146 of 167 
 
obey a manifestly unlawful or illegal instruction, there’s 
nothing else that’s being said.  So, it might very well be 
that there is a need to expand on that to create an 
obligation, as an example on her or she who receives such 
an instruction, to report it to some authority whether in the 
Executive 
or 
in 
the 
Legislature 
and 
that 
maybe, 
theoretically you can even say the Auditor General must 
have sight and satisfy himself or herself about the property 
of instructions by the Executive and so should the case be 
with the Legislature.  It might be a different detail in 
10 
respect of State owned enterprises but I believe, Chair,  
that this is it is supreme challenge of Executive overreach 
and illegal instructions require attention.  By the way, and 
I’m by no means suggesting that, particularly in respect to 
manifestly unlawful and illegal instructions, this is – this 
only obtains within the province of the Executive.  Within 
the administration, you need similar measures so that no 
Accounting Officer or DDG or Chief Director can give 
manifestly unlawful or illegal instructions and there must 
be censure that is quite serious and severe for those who 
20 
breach such prescripts but it is a problem and I’d like to 
reiterate, Chair, that I don’t believe that this is a problem 
you need to Intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If we may go back, briefly, to 
paragraph 19.4, you’ve told the Chair already and you 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 147 of 167 
 
repeat here in this paragraph that you caused a number of 
investigations to be conducted, is that correct? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, that’s correct. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
You 
also 
say 
that 
these 
investigations that yielded evidence of what you term, 
flagrant contraventions of the law.  
MR JAFTA:   That’s correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you also say that in such 
instances, the matters have been referred for criminal 
investigations 
to 
Law 
Enforcement 
and 
prosecuting 
10 
authorities, 
namely 
the 
Directorate 
at 
Priority 
Crime 
Investigations, 
that’s 
the 
HAWKS 
and 
the 
National 
Prosecuting authority as well as the South African Revenue 
Service, has that been done? 
MR JAFTA:   That’s correct, that has been done. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Has anyone been prosecuted as a 
result? 
MR JAFTA:   No, no not as far as I’m aware. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Do you know why? 
MR JAFTA:   I do not know, Chair, why but it’s quite a wide 
20 
– this body of evidence has been handed over, particularly 
to the HAWKS, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Again, there will be further 
evidence in this regard.  Could we go then to paragraph 
21, there you refer to a decision of the Gauteng High Court 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 148 of 167 
 
in the AmaBhungane Centre for Investigative Journalism 
versus the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services 
and others, we learn that, that decisions on appeal so that 
it – literally the jury is out on the content of that judgment 
but do you have, from your own knowledge and experience 
any comments to make about signals and cyber capabilities 
of the country and the involvement of the SSA in that 
sphere? 
MR JAFTA:   Yes, I do have comments, Chair, on this 
matter.  The world we live in is exceedingly difficult and 
10 
dangerous and very messy and it requires, on the basis of 
some of the things I said about secrecy, transparency, 
accountability, as I explained, it requires that all available 
tools are employed with great circumspection to determine, 
first the national security.  Now, the world we live in is – 
there are certain things that are there in place today that 
were not there 20/30 years ago.  The reality is that, if you 
are talking about terrorism you couldn’t have a decent 
conversation without talking about the dark web, without 
talking about recruitment online, without talking about 
20 
communication online, giving instructions, command and 
control and all of those things.  Now, we need instruments 
in law that would enable us to scan the environment, the 
better to detect any risks to national security. In other 
jurisdictions, and I don’t want to mention names, if the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 149 of 167 
 
Chair permits, there is a requirement, for instance that – or 
there are views that say, Signals Intelligence and signals 
Intelligence outside the republic, in the main, it’s bulk 
interception, it’s scanning the environment.  You then 
employ certain tools to determine if there is something 
worth following. Now, when you hear ideas that, Signals 
Intelligence, 
and 
this 
is 
what’s 
happening 
in 
other 
jurisdictions, Signals Intelligence without a country of 
origin is definitionally, illegal.  That immediately ties 
Intelligence hands behind their backs because they can’t 
10 
scan the environment.  They can’t scan the environment 
where they operate it could be terrorism, it could Trans 
National Organised Criminal Syndicates and these are real 
risks. 
 
On the other hand there has to be emphasis on 
control appropriate and suitable for the environment but 
there is also another aspect which is critical for that specific 
area which is ethical conduct of Intelligence in the – in that 
realm of Signals Intelligence and in Cyber. 
 
Now Chair with your phone back in the day late ’90’s 
20 
early 2000’s your phone predominantly was useful only for 
sending a sms and talking.  But now you basically do 
everything with your phone.  So if I tap onto your phone I 
can – I know everything there is to know about you  literally 
everything including your house and those who are related to 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 150 of 167 
 
you and everything.  So there must be sufficient checks and 
balances ethical but very effective checks and balances to 
prevent abuse.   
 
But preventing abuse should not mean inadvertently 
disabling 
Intelligence 
from 
scanning 
the 
environment 
because the risks are real and if you miss an opportunity the 
consequence would be to – can be too dire. 
 
Now in other jurisdictions you have a situation where 
you are required in law if you tapped on somebody you are 
required in law to alert them that – oh by the way I listened 
10 
to your conversations for the past three months please 
pardon 
me 
because 
you 
know 
I 
was 
scanning 
the 
environment I did not find anything. 
 
Now you know Chair in the real world there are things 
called sleeper agents.  These are people who sit there do 
not attract attention to themselves.  They are underground 
operatives of MK the Special Branch misses them. 
 
Now you have a good sense that there is something 
worth following up on this person.  Now if you are going to 
go back and confirm to them that you are listening to them 
20 
and meanwhile the person is part of a sleeper serve or a 
sleeper agent or operative you are basically giving away 
what your truest intentions are.  
 
These are the issues that have to be canvassed by 
the 
country. 
 
The 
balance 
between 
privacy 
and 
the 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 151 of 167 
 
imperatives of National Security.  How do we strike the 
balance so that we preserve the rights to privacy; we do not 
infringe on those but at the same time we are still able to do 
our work.  It is by no means easy because Chair and I do not 
mean to be too long. 
 
I have just said a moment ago Signals is focussed 
outside of the Republic.  What that means is that when the 
Chair is outside the Republic through that bulk interception 
exercise I would also suck in your communications as a 
South African. 
10 
 
So the issues are not – are not easy.  The converse 
of it is that now the terrorist has moved from country A is 
inside the Republic.  A different set of rules now applies.  So 
– so the issues are not easy.  I am raising them rather 
rapidly but these are issues that require serious and careful 
consideration; yes with emotions but balanced and take into 
consideration Chair that the world is a very, very messy 
place. 
 
I nearly said something undignified for this occasion 
but the world is a messy place Chair.  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 22 you reach certain 
conclusions.  Would you place those on record please? 
MR JAFTA:  Come again Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 22. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 152 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You reach certain conclusions.  
Would you place those on record please? 
MR JAFTA:  Meaning I should read paragraph 22? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes please or speak to it. 
MR JAFTA:  Okay.  I will just read it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry? 
MR JAFTA:  Can I just read it? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You may.  Well the DCJ I am sure will 
10 
allow that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay you can read ja. 
MR JAFTA:  Okay. 
“In similar vein the National Security doctrine 
that is espoused in the White Paper on 
Intelligence 
promotes 
the 
creation 
of 
a 
societal 
environment 
that 
is 
free 
from 
violence and instability while engendering 
respect for the Rule of Law and human life.  
It 
is 
mandatory 
for 
members 
in 
the 
20 
performance of their functions to obey all 
lawful directions received from a person 
having the authority to give such directions.  
In terms of Section 11(1) of the Intelligence 
Service Act 2002 Act 65 of 2002 the White 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 153 of 167 
 
Paper advocates the utterance to a code of 
conduct for Intelligence Officers premised on 
loyalty to the state and the constitution 
obedience to the laws of the country and 
compliance with domestic values and ethical 
norms 
and 
standards. 
 
It 
is 
therefore 
imperative that the intelligence community 
instil ethical intelligence practices through 
the establishment of an autonomies ethics of 
this within the office of the Director General 
10 
of the Agency and the institutionalisation of 
integrity testing on members.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes that ethical intelligence office or 
ethics office has that been established – is there any plan to 
establish it? 
MR JAFTA:  Yes there are plans to establish it but not yet. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But not yet it is 00:06:56. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in relation to Cyber Security the 
balance that you talk about between intelligence demands 
20 
and private security or private privacy really.  Has that yet 
been attained or is it something you hope to attain? 
MR JAFTA:  There is a process in place that we are engaged 
with together with the Department of Justice.  Yes.   And we 
are giving due regard to best international practice yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 154 of 167 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes thanks.  One last issue at least 
as far as the legal team is concerned.  We have learnt as 
part of our investigations and also from the evidence of Dr 
Mufamadi that it is not clear to the SSA whether certain 
projects were carried out in accordance with their intention 
where the monies aimed at executing a particular project 
were actually delivered and received.  One such example is 
Project Justice.  And the question that I have in that regard 
is why those investigations have not gone that far to 
establish whether the projects have been carried out to their 
10 
conclusion? 
MR JAFTA:  The investigations Chair have yielded a fair 
amount of evidence.  I should say a 00:08:41 amount of 
evidence.  That is not to suggest that as I indicated earlier 
we have recovered all the fire arms.  That is not to suggest 
that we know where all of the money went to; what it was 
used for.  
 
I will give you an example why it is difficult to – to 
conclude the investigations to their logical conclusion.  Right 
at the beginning we detected that factually one of the 
20 
members in the investigative team was actually whispering to 
some of the people we were investigating that this is where 
we are; this is their thinking; we are coming for you. 
 
Because it is not a very large community and that 
frustrates the investigation.  We do rely on our members and 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 155 of 167 
 
their good faith to come forward and tell us what happened.  
It is one thing to receive an undertaking that that will be 
done.  It is quite another whether such members actually do 
– do follow up on their commitment. 
 
The other reality Chair is that these activities 
particularly those that are illegal do not cover one in glory 
and therefore the incentive you almost have to incriminate 
yourself.  You almost have to incriminate yourself; you are 
too embarrassed at the fact that you have gone so far down 
the low road so to speak. 
10 
 
Let me – let me illustrate the point I am making.  You 
would have a member through whose hands literally north of 
R200 million has passed through.  So in other words there is 
member who has cumulatively taken into his or her custody 
R200 million plus. 
 
Now when you sit down with that member and you 
say, let us start talking about this money.  It is too 
embarrassing; it is too overwhelming for such people to talk.  
That is my opinion. 
 
But at the same time it is too onerous a task to ask of 
20 
anybody to account for R200 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat that. 
MR JAFTA:  It is too onerous a task to ask somebody to 
account for R200 million because – and this has been my 
experience when you – when you look a person eyeball to 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 156 of 167 
 
eyeball just where do you start? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I want to find out it is too onerous for 
who? 
MR JAFTA:  For the one who has to account. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Ja, 
ja 
the 
one 
who 
must 
call 
for 
explanations it is not difficult. 
MR JAFTA:  No the one who calls for explanation it is not 
difficult but the one who has to give the explanation it is very 
difficult. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR JAFTA:  Now here is the difficulty in some instances.  
The person will tell you no we ran this project, we costed it, 
that is my signature.  And then we say okay fine.  Say – 
argument sake Chair R5 million.  Okay you travel to Mars 
and then you went to Venus and then you went to Mercury.  
The distance between the three is actually 500 kilometres. 
 
Now explain to me you stayed in Bloemfontein – 
downtown Bloemfontein what was the cost per night?  
R1000.00.  Where are we going with this conversation – we 
are going towards R5 million and it becomes – it becomes a 
20 
very – I have experienced it; it becomes a very awkward 
conversation on the part of those who have to give 
explanation. 
 
We keep trying it is not easy.  It is not easy that I 
must say.  There is pushback.  There is pushback no 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 157 of 167 
 
question about it and Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In groups – in groups or at individual level 
or both? 
MR JAFTA:  At individual level pushback will be for instance 
in the form of somebody meeting one of the investigators 
and say, no Jafta will go one day we are going to sort you 
out.  Jafta is going – he is not going to be forever.  Once he 
goes we are going to remain here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Intimidation. 
MR JAFTA:  Or remarks like, oh so now you are working with 
10 
Jafta you are a sell-out.  And those have an impact.  Those 
have an impact they do embolden those who have to 
account.  It is desperate.  It is not that sometimes people 
have got away with all to do anything but it is still has an 
impact at the level of the. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I guess that the fact that people make 
threats does not mean that if there is action that must be 
taken against them it is not taken or will not be taken 
particularly to recover taxpayers’ money.  But maybe what 
you are saying is you have to work with certain people within 
20 
the organisation and if they get threatened and intimidated it 
does make the job not easy.  That is – is that what you 
mean? 
MR JAFTA:  Yes that is what I mean Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 158 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:  That is what I mean yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR JAFTA:  But – but to be absolutely certain Chair 
somebody I know and I have known for a while we had a very 
difficult conversation.  He had to leave on the eve of his 
retirement because we wanted our money and we got our 
money back.  We got the money that belongs to the state 
back.   
 
So we do not – we do not hesitate to do the right 
thing. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR JAFTA:  We do not hesitate to do the right thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  It is the other side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  Where there are difficulties to get things.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
 ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
This 
evidence 
may 
yet 
be 
forthcoming but we do not have it as yet but in relation to the 
most recent questions and answers this afternoon and by 
20 
way of example Project Justice we were told by Dr Mufamadi 
that there was no evidence that the money allocated for the 
project reached its final destination to put it bluntly bribery 
of Judges.  The question is why do we not know that?  Or do 
we know that and it is just too sensitive a matter to place 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 159 of 167 
 
before the Chair?  And either could be logically an 
explanation. 
MR JAFTA:  Chair the – that in respect to that specific 
example we have – we have very strong circumstantial 
evidence.  What we do not know – what we do not have and 
it is because – let me not go into that because Chair.  We 
have very strong circumstantial evidence that some of the 
money went into the hands of some of the members or a 
member of the Judiciary.  But I do not have sitting here now 
is absolute concrete evidence of that. 
10 
 
Remember Chair all of these things that we are 
talking to and I am sure you might hear I do not know who 
else is coming here.  We are talking about cash transactions.  
It is money that gets delivered to A and A delivers it to B.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And there is no receipt. 
MR JAFTA:  And there are no receipts.  To give you an 
anecdote Chair to illustrate the point.  One member says to 
me – two actually say they had a very wonderful – there was 
a wonderful period in their lives where I do not want to 
implicate people Chair so I will speak in these terms. 
20 
 
They took money to A and A helped himself to some 
of the money that was in the bag.  But from head office the 
money was almost as even as – as this page is.  But A then 
took some money so that by the time they went to B the 
money was not as even as it had been – and they evened it 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 160 of 167 
 
up themselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now when you say you mean in terms of 
the pile? 
MR JAFTA:  Yes how high it is yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR JAFTA:  Because then he wanted to remove doubt by the 
time they get to B the bag had been tampered with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or it might be even but lower. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes.  So these two members said to me, no we 
had a wonderful time when we delivered that consignment of 
10 
money.  Now they will tell me they did but where is the 
evidence of it?  It is very difficult.  I believe them because 
whenever else they talk about – they share information it is 
always accurate – it is always authentic.  But I do not have 
the evidence.  I do not have the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said the – the strong circumstantial 
evidence that you I guess are aware of in pointing towards 
some money having been given to a member of the Judiciary. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can – would it be fair to say to the extent 
20 
that Project Justice seems to have talked about Judges you 
are not aware of any other case involving a member of the 
Judiciary where there seems to be some strong evidence?  
In other words were you aware of strong and you emphasise 
circumstantial is it not?  It is in respect of one. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 161 of 167 
 
MR JAFTA:  Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is the position? 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Are you satisfied then that the 
circumstantial 
evidence that 
you have 
has been fully 
investigated?  Have you asked the Judge concerned? 
MR JAFTA:  No, no we have not – we have not asked the 
Judge. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you intend to do so?  Have you 
10 
investigated the Judge? 
MR JAFTA:  It is unavoidable that we have to at some point. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So investigations are on-going? 
MR JAFTA:  Investigations are on-going. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well then I will not ask my further 
question because that may disrupt those investigations.  
Then if I could just finally ask you about Project Veza I hope 
I have the pronunciation right? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that Project Veza? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Veza. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Veza ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  You have a small functioning 
investigation which is on-going. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And we will lead evidence as to 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 162 of 167 
 
whether persons who might be implicated or might have 
assisted the investigation have cooperated fully with that 
investigation.  It appears there has not been full cooperation 
and you may confirm that or not as you please but we will 
deal with that with Project Veza.  Are you happy with the 
integrity and skills of the Veza team?  Can we rely on them 
to assist us in the commission with their evidence? 
MR JAFTA:  Yes Chair I am – I am quite happy with the 
skills, with the integrity of the people and I am also happy 
with the output of the investigative work that they have done.  
10 
If it is necessary Chair I should add it has not been an easy 
exercise.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then finally then Mr Mufamadi that 
investigation is on-going but you have given your… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Jafta. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Your permission.  Sorry Mr Jafta. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It has been a long day Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Ja okay yes.  And I try not to but I do 
have senior moments Chair.  Mr Jafta the Veza personnel 
who are due to give evidence you have given your 
20 
permission and leave for them to do so. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes I have. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then finally the issue arose early 
this morning Mr Jafta that you have taken some trouble in 
consultation with the investigators and the legal team to look 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 163 of 167 
 
carefully at all the information at your disposal.  Its 
declassification and taking care as to the line between 
evidence that can be given and evidence that should be 
protected legitimately under this veil of secrecy.  Are you 
satisfied that – that job between the Agency and the legal 
team has been satisfactorily done? 
MR JAFTA:  I am – I am – I am confident with what we have 
done.  I then right at the beginning I profess my input by 
stating my responsibilities to protect the names, the names 
of members, associates, our methods and part of the reason 
10 
why I framed my own input in this way was to avoid talking 
about people but to talk about issues of principle and policy. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  But in general I am very confident that we have 
taken every possible step to make sure that we do not 
jeopardise that which we have to protect. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and it is a task that is taken with 
the assistance of your lawyers and staff several months. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one question Mr Jafta.  The amounts 
that were given to members of the State Security Agency for 
projects but were accounting for those was unsatisfactory.  
The documentation that was kept not good enough such as 
the documentation we looked earlier.  But I am more 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 164 of 167 
 
interested in terms of those were maybe there is a 
reasonable strong feeling that funds were not really used for 
legitimate purposes.  Do you have an idea – an idea or do 
you know how much in the past X number of years per year 
those amounts amounted to?  Is it – or if you do not know is 
it something that you can establish easily and furnish to the 
commission later? 
MR JAFTA:  Chair it is something that I would rather for 
purposes of certainty given due regard to the Terms of 
Reference or Terms of Reference of the Commission. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR JAFTA:  I would need to be very firm on it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR JAFTA:  But ja let me commit to doing that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no that is fine. 
MR JAFTA:  The answer though it – though it might appear 
finite the investigations are continuing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JAFTA:  And therefore … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
MR JAFTA:  The figures might change. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – obviously – well certainly what I would 
like is to be able to have an idea that given that year the 
kinds of funds. 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 165 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That fall under this category. 
MR JAFTA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is about so much during that year it is 
about so much and obviously I am not – I am just looking at 
the past few years. 
MR JAFTA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If it is not possible to give exact amounts 
but at least if I have reasonable estimates or as close an 
estimate as possible that – but obviously the first prize is 
exact amounts. 
10 
MR JAFTA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so – so… 
MR JAFTA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you can arrange with Mr 
Pretorius or the legal team when you might be able – when 
you are ready to – to give us maybe a supplementary 
affidavit or that just deals with that.  Ja.  Okay thank you 
very much.  You are done Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes unless Mr Jafta has anything to 
add. 
20 
MR JAFTA:  No I do not have anything else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Moerane did you intend to ask for an 
opportunity to re-examine?  Is he still listening Mr Moerane?  
Or has he gone?  Okay I think he is – he is not hearing us.  
No that is fine.  I am sure that means he did not intend to re-
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 166 of 167 
 
examine.  Okay thank you very much Mr Jafta for coming to 
assist the commission and to give evidence.  I can confirm 
that there is nothing in your evidence that I think posed any 
threat to National Security so certainly as far as I am 
concerned thank you very much.  If we need you again we 
will ask you to come back.  But thank you very much you are 
now excused.  We are going to adjourn for the day.  
Tomorrow will I be listening to Ms Y? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr K. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms K? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay will she take – will it be one witness 
the whole day or? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Probably more than one day Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh probably more than one day okay 
alright.  So that is alright.  And you will move the – the 
application in regard to her tomorrow morning? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes if I may discuss that with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  We are going to 
adjourn.  So tomorrow we should – should we start a little 
20 
earlier? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There are logistical arrangements 
that involve a number of people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Given that her identity will be 
26 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 331 
 
Page 167 of 167 
 
protected hopefully. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja so… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   After the application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We can start at ten? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And those arrangements are quite 
complex so if we may start at ten Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  So we will adjourn for 
the day and tomorrow we will start at ten.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 27 JANUARY 2021 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
