 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
12 MAY 2021 
 
 
DAY 393 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 317 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
12 MAY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 3 of 317 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 12 MAY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready?  Good morning Dr. Dintwe. 
DR DINTWE:    Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Dr Dintwe you will have to put the 
microphone closer to you please.   
CHAIRPERSON:  They sometimes complain – witnesses 
10 
sometimes complain about that chair – the seat.  But the 
problem is that the other one is – seems further from the 
mic.  But try and just make yourself comfortable.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is it necessary for the oath to be 
taken? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is.  Please just administer the oath 
or affirmation again. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
DR DINTWE:  Setlhomamaru Isaac Dintwe. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
20 
prescribed oath? 
DR DINTWE:  No objection. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
DR DINTWE:  I do. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 4 of 317 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence you 
will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing but 
the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help 
me God. 
DR DINTWE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You may be seated. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Dr Dintwe your 
statement in affidavit form is before the Chair in Bundle 
SSA2(b) and it is Exhibit YY15.  We ended the last session 
of your evidence at page 812 the black numbers in the top 
10 
left hand corner of the pages. 
DR DINTWE:  I confirm that I can see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You gave evidence before we 
adjourned in relation to an appointment or the approval of 
appointment you say without due process by Mr Bongani 
Bongo and you deal with that in paragraphs 119, 120 and 
121 of that page.  
 
You informed me just before commencement of your 
evidence today that there was an issue that you wish to 
clarify.   
20 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Please so so. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes Honourable Chair I am not amending 
what I would have written there but I could have created an 
impression that the Minister accepted our findings and 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 5 of 317 
 
recommendations readily – at first instance. 
 
But I have since checked my records again there 
was something – some other correspondence that I would 
have omitted and I think that the commission – The Chair 
will appreciate that I am sitting with about 200 complicit and 
given time so those mistakes do happen.  But it does not 
really change the whole complexion of what I would have 
written in my affidavit.  
 
I however request your permission that I read 
something here so that I clarify that once step that I say 
10 
that I would have jumped. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
DR DINTWE:  Thank you very much.  And may I continue?  
So we – we have written to the Minister with the findings 
and recommendations but she then wrote to us and although 
she was not saying that the appointment was regular she 
raised about three points and we accepted them as includes 
because when you are doing investigations you want to also 
give them an opportunity to input into that investigation.  So 
we accepted that but the following points were raised in her 
20 
letter and this was on the 27 t h of February 2020 where she 
said that: 
“From the report it appears as though the 
former Minister of State Security Mr B Bongo 
and the former Director General of State 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 6 of 317 
 
Security Agency SSA Mr A Fraser were not 
interviewed with the aim of ensuring that the 
other version is heard.  It is difficult for me 
to 
reach 
a 
logical 
conclusion 
without 
information 
from 
these 
two 
critical 
role 
players on this matter.” 
And then she further concluded in that letter – in her letter 
and I quote – open quotes 
“It will be prudent to guard against a culture 
that erodes the integrity of the organisation 
10 
and opens up such issues once the political 
principle has left.” 
So the investigators then decided to explain those matters 
and the reasons obviously why we did.  And the following 
reasons were sent to the Minister and these are not direct 
quotations but they will be in my report – in the – if you – if 
you like the report after the inclusion of – of her inputs. 
We said that there was no need for us to have interviewed 
he former Director General Mr A Fraser in light of the fact of 
that Mr Fraser as the Accounting Officer of the SSA then 
20 
was excluded in the submission to appoint the aforesaid 
member to the position aforesaid. 
 
So you will have a number of signatories and Mr 
Fraser was not in fact one of those entries. 
 
The second reason that we 00:06:13 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 7 of 317 
 
was that in – “We are in possession of the 
approved submission wherein the member 
concerned was appointed to the aforesaid 
post of 00:06:25 Manager within NICOC the 
National 
Intelligence 
Coordinating 
Committee.  The approved submission as an 
official document under the custody of the 
State 
Security Agency 
constitutes 
prima 
facia proof of the appointment of the said 
member 
by 
the 
then 
Minister 
Advocate 
10 
Bongani 
Bongo 
MP 
as 
contemplated 
in 
Section 8 (2) of the Intelligence Services Act 
65 of 2002.” 
 
The third reason: 
“It was clear on the face of the submission 
aforesaid 
that 
the 
appointment 
of 
the 
member concerned by the then Minister of 
State Security Advocate Bongani Bongo was 
done in total disregard of the applicable 
laws and regulations.” 
20 
 
And then finally we said: 
“The affidavit by a member of the SSA who 
implemented 
the 
approved 
submission 
confirmed that the member concerned was 
appointed as a result of their aforesaid 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 8 of 317 
 
submission 
as 
approved 
by 
Advocate 
Bongani Bongo MP in his then capacity as 
the Minister of State Security.  It was 
indicted 
to 
the 
Minister 
that 
with 
the 
evidence collected thus far by us it was 
clear that the appointment of the member 
concerned was irregular and unlawful.  No 
useful purpose was going to be served by 
approaching 
the 
former 
Minister 
and 
interview – interview him.” 
10 
 
And then we sent that particular letter. Now this is a 
significant point since then the Minister has never reverted 
back to us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Just to summarise then you 
gave evidence last time of an appointment which was called 
into question by your office. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  As being irregular. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You conducted an investigation and 
20 
made certain recommendations. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The Minister – Minister Dlodlo raised 
what appeared to be procedural concerns about who had 
been heard and who had not been heard. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 9 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You responded to those complaints 
maintained your recommendation and the matter was from 
your point of view not resolved. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct to date. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we could go over the page then 
please to page 813.  You deal in the paragraphs on that 
page and over the page with appointments to the cadet 
program and to other portions or departments within State 
Security.  Page – paragraph 122 just very briefly what 
10 
happened in 
relation to those 
appointments there or 
recommendations. 
DR DINTWE:  It is a generally accepted practice amongst 
intelligence services that sometimes they will want to 
identify intelligence officers at an early stage.  They could 
visit high schools, they could go to the universities and 
start recruiting there.  And what they have done here is that 
in 
certain 
instances 
they 
will 
identify 
the 
so 
called 
underprivileged or previously disadvantaged students or 
individuals they will give them a bursary and then they will 
20 
go and study with already a commitment at that stage the 
they will be absorbed into the agency once they complete 
that. 
 
Same principle with the cadet program as well.  So 
they have done a lot on that.  Like a single cadet program 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 10 of 317 
 
could have around thirty or even more students who will be 
taken to the college.  We would not have a problem of that 
it is a good practice accepted.   
 
The only problem is that they do not have a criteria 
which says what are the requirements basic or otherwise 
that these cadets or students should you know comply with 
and that is creating a serious problem because there is 
evidence even in the high level 00:10:57 panel which 
concludes that the SSA has been turned into an employment 
agency for the politically connected as well as those who 
10 
are connected to the senior managers within the State 
Security Agency.  And we cannot question that as an 
oversight because the things that we should be doing is to 
say what is the criteria and check really whether that 
criteria and the procedures were followed when recruiting 
those people. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright you have given me examples 
in paragraphs 122 to 124 and the facts are set out there but 
in principle what is wrong if a Minister of State Security 
suggests a particular candidate for a cadet program with the 
20 
undertaking that that person will then employed by SSA?  
Surely a Minister can identify a person suitable for such 
appointment on his or her own?  What is – what is the 
problem with this Ministerial overreach as you call it? 
DR DINTWE:  The problem is that more often than not we 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 11 of 317 
 
have stumbled across or in fact we found that there would 
familial 
relations 
between 
people 
who 
are 
appointed 
between them and the political principles and in certain 
instances also with senior managers within the State 
Security Agency. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  What about – yes you do 
not mention… 
DR DINTWE:  For us it is nepotism and – and we cannot 
really deal with that issue satisfactorily until we know which 
criteria was used to identify that. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  So that – the danger of 
nepotism you do mention as a general point but the – in 
paragraph 122 you do say there are other instances of the 
children and family members of senior politicians and 
Ministers being appointed to these cadet positions.  You do 
mention that.  But the particular examples you give here are 
not examples of nepotism. 
DR DINTWE:  They are examples of nepotism.  We decided 
to – to remove about two names. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh I see. 
20 
DR DINTWE:  For the reasons of the time – the pressures of 
time Chairperson and we are also trying to limit the notices 
that would have sent.  But in the – in the documents that 
will be declassified and transmitted to yourself you will see 
the names, the surnames and that relationship. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 12 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am – I understand what you are 
saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so we would – so we will get that 
information. 
DR DINTWE:  It is in the documents that I have submitted to 
the commission already. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  The second point is what is 
the – what are the issues around the future loyalty of the 
SSA member a cadet becomes a SSA operative about the 
10 
potential of partial loyalty to the person influential in his or 
her appointment, is that a problem? 
DR DINTWE:  That is a problem and I think I would have 
raised it earlier as well to say that they become beholden to 
the appointing authorities and they are ingratiated in a 
particular manner because some of them will tell you that I 
did not expect this you know.  Just imagine how easy it is 
Chairperson if I get identified I am given a bursary, I get 
appointed but our neighbours child who may even be more 
qualified than myself is not getting considered for that 
20 
position.  It is obvious that I will be beholden to the 
appointing authority. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then in addition to that you have 
testified to the Chair that you are not clear whether the 
requirements – the appointment requirements were actually 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 13 of 317 
 
followed in each case. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct.  We would not be able to 
establish that because each time we request the assist – 
the criteria they say we do not have the criteria. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
But 
how 
rife 
is 
this 
problem 
of 
appointments that are done in this way particularly those 
that seem to have features of nepotism roughly do have 
some idea?  Are we talking about two, three okay in 
instances are we in a year are we talking about over the 
past five years fifty people more or less.  Do you have some 
10 
idea or is that difficult to say? 
DR DINTWE:  It is frequent practice Chairperson.  In fact 
when I was driving – drafting the affidavit and I wanted that 
documentary proof I was given a list of about forty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Forty. 
DR DINTWE:  Cadets yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:  And – and at that particular point I am 
informed reliably that the then Minister of State Security 
Minister Kasrils I am not implicating him so I think I can 
20 
mention the name he actually disowned those students 
because he said that when he was going through the list he 
could pin point exactly that Minister, that other former 
Minister, that other Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that so. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 14 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:  That other DG, that Deputy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  DG. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  So he disowned about forty graduates on a 
cadet or a cadet program.  The other ones it was actually 
two students who had gone to university but then the reason 
why I focused on that it is because they would have written 
to us now complaining in turn. But there were not placed on 
a level that they were promised before they went to 
10 
university.  It is a very, very, very frequent you know issue 
at the Security – the State Security Agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have an idea as to whether there 
is a number that they seek – or a target that they seek to 
achieve per year that they must have got X number of 
people that will go into this training and then later on get 
employed by SSA? 
DR DINTWE:  I do not remember I think that we – we made 
that enquiry but it should have been included in that annual 
report. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  If not they are planned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  For the so called 00:18:08 ATT. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 15 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:  But we could not get kind of information so I 
do not know in any given year how many people are they 
targeting to recruit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it would be good to have an idea 
whether one can say over the past five years or even more 
it looks like on average per year so many people get put 
into the program even if to the training with a view to later 
being employed by SSA – even if not all of them are people 
who have been employed due to nepotism but people go 
into that program to see its size. 
10 
DR DINTWE:  Ja I will not be – I will not have any 
intelligence – intelligent you know response to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine. 
DR DINTWE:  I – work that out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It can be furnished later in writing if – if it 
is information that you can get. 
DR DINTWE:  Maybe safe to indicate that it is also 
happening loosely in that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not (talking over one another). 
DR DINTWE:  In that you will get and I write – I write the 
20 
names of the Ministers you will get Minister David Masobo 
who will visit a particular high school in KZN and then he 
identifies maybe three or four students.  You will get the 
then Deputy Minister I mentioned her name Ms Molekane 
who will go to a high school in – and I am exchanging 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 16 of 317 
 
provinces here to the North West and identify two that we 
have that particular information. And then you will have the 
Director General then who will have a program of about 
thirty or forty at any given time them being sent on this 
cadet current program.  So it has happened because there 
is no criteria.  Other people are going and where we are 
sitting now we may even be oblivious to some of those 
cases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Just in summary then as a matter of 
10 
principle at the bottom of page – or at the end of paragraph 
123 on page 813 you say: 
“This involvement of the Ministry and the 
recruitment process constitutes significant 
executive overreach into the functioning of 
the SSA.” 
 
And as I understand it you have raised at least three 
problems one is question mark around proper qualification. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And adequate suitability of the 
20 
candidate for the post being properly assessed.  The 
second is that there would a potential of the relationship 
between the state official or the Minister and the operative 
being exploited.  I suppose both ways is it possible that the 
operative would be loyal then to the Minister and the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 17 of 317 
 
Minister could exercise influence over the operative.  Is that 
a valid observation that you make? 
DR DINTWE:  It is an observation that we – we confirm and 
– and maybe can I give a final example of what happened in 
terms of the executive overreach?  And this is the matter 
that we are dealing with – with now. 
 
Now the specifications starts writing a submission 
and that submission appoints 26 managers – now it is 
senior managers they use their own levels there but I think 
that in the public service it would be your directors and – 
10 
because they are also general managers who could be 
equivalent to chief directors and so forth. 
 
Now this is the chase that is confirmed but what 
happens there is that they did not advertise it. There is no 
selection panel. There are no interviews. Some of those 
people do not meet the requirements of that particular post.  
The DDG – I mean the DG the acting DG that even refused 
to recommend because he is writing his concerns about how 
these people were identified.  26 Chairperson managers and 
the only thing that you find in that submission is that they 
20 
have a blog where they write their motivation.   
 
One example of that motivation is that this person 
used to act in the particular position and he is a loyal 
member for years and he has experience on that particular 
field and so forth.  And then they got appointed.  Some of 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 18 of 317 
 
them and what the DG wrote under the comments is that 
some of them were even recalled from retirement and then 
they were appointed – appointed – appointed again. 
 
There is no regulatory framework.  When you go 
through that particular submission they did not tell you 
about this any legislation which empowers the 00:22:28 but 
it is the Minister who then appoints this group of 26.   
 
As I am talking to you they are in their positions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so are you saying that there is no 
legislation or regulation that gives power to anybody 
10 
whether it is Minister or DG to say this can be done? 
DR DINTWE:  The way I see it Honourable Chairperson 
sorry – ja the way I see it, it is that the Minister was 
intending to come up with what we called a deviation.  So 
the regulations are in place and they could not code those 
regulations because regulations says you advertise, you 
come up with a selection criteria, selection panel and then 
you follow those steps. 
 
That is what their own regulations are saying.  So – 
so they did not write any of those there.  The only reason 
20 
that they provided under the motivation is that there is a 
huge number of managers who have either resigned, went 
on retirement.   
 
In fact coming up with what one could see as an 
emergency recruitment.  So in my career I have only heard 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 19 of 317 
 
about emergency procurement when there is a burst pipe 
somewhere and so forth.  
 
But I have never ever heard of an emergency 
recruitment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – the legislative provisions that you 
have in mind about the advertising and so on I think those 
would relate to the actual appointment of these people.  Is 
it not? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  What I was more concerned about is 
10 
how they come in because based on your evidence it is like 
they first have to get into some training or they get 
bursaries on the basis that once you have got whatever the 
qualification or training is you will be employed.  So I was 
asking about any legislative provisions relating to the 
granting of those bursaries or whatever the program is.  Do 
you know anything? 
DR DINTWE:  Ja no in that case they do not have and I will 
request the Chairperson to delineate the two that I was 
talking about. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  The latest example that I was referring to is 
people who are long in the service. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
DR DINTWE:  Now that are appointed into management 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 20 of 317 
 
positions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
DR DINTWE:  I had exhausted… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you had exhausted the earlier one. 
DR DINTWE:  At least (talking over one another) time – 
there is cadets and the students. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  But the cadets get bursaries to 
get some training or whatever and then they get employed 
afterwards, is that right? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So – okay that is where I was still on 
– and you say that one has got no legislative provisions – 
framework as far as you know? 
DR DINTWE:  It does not have and that is what we have 
been requesting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  Even if it is a policy which this was the 
criteria. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  To be considered. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  They do not have? 
DR DINTWE:  They do not have that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So it is like somebody just decides it 
is a good thing to look around and give bursaries sometimes 
to people who seem to be deserving and then it is done. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 21 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay but the latter category you 
were talking about is people who have been in the system 
but not in certain positions and then they are promoted to 
certain positions without following any processes. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  And in that instance there are regulations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja there are… 
DR DINTWE:  Which deals with that but they get ignored. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  Completely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. And in regard to that both 
Ministers and DG’s are involved as well in the breach of 
those regulations? 
DR DINTWE:  In the latter example. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  The acting DG refused to recommend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  But the Minister went ahead and approved. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
 DR DINTWE:  The appointment. As I am talking to you 
those people are in those positions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is about how many people? 
DR DINTWE:  26. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 22 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  26. 
DR DINTWE:  Managers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And which Minister are we talking about 
do you know? 
DR DINTWE:  Minister Ayanda Dlodlo. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes 
and 
how 
recent 
is 
that 
that 
appointment are – or how recent are they? 
DR DINTWE:  They are yet to get their 00:28:11 salary 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is something that happened after 
10 
this commission had heard some evidence about some of 
the challenges in SSA. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Pretorius.  I am sorry – I 
am sorry Mr Pretorius.  Have you got any understanding 
with 
regard 
to 
this 
category 
– 
have 
you 
got 
any 
understanding why Ministers and DG’s would act in breach 
of the regulations in regard to these appointments when 
20 
they know them. Do you know why they would be doing 
this? 
DR DINTWE:  I do not want to give you conspiracy theories. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Okay.  Alright. 
DR DINTWE:  I did not want to give you that. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 23 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Because the – it cannot be that 
they do not know I would imagine.  They must be – know the 
regulations.  You do not want to say anything. 
DR DINTWE:  Alright.  And I – I think with one of those 
appointments there was a media opinion.  There was an 
opinion in the media.  Those people are connected majority 
of them are connected to the previous management.  The 
management that would have worked with Mr Arthur Fraser 
10 
during that time.  People are able to appoint and – and 
there is a belief that they are coming back and 00:29:54 in 
the State Security Agency.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The period that you are referring 
to, is that the period covered by the PAN 1 Report, 
Principal Hedge and Network 1 Report, that period? 
DR DINTWE:   During that period.  That is correct, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  And the allegation - and it 
is an allegation for the moment, we may deal with that 
20 
later, Chair - is that people who were implicated in the PAN 
1 Report were reappointed to the SSA.  
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that what ...[intervenes]  
DR 
DINTWE: 
 
 
Maybe 
we 
should 
not 
call 
it 
the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 24 of 317 
 
reappointment.  We should ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Promotion. 
DR DINTWE:   ...talk about promotion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I see. 
DR DINTWE:   So during Pan 1, they would have been in a 
level below, the level that are pointed to now. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  So it is promotion you are 
talking about? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just to summarise then.  The 
Cadet Programme, the Bursary Programme has its outcome 
appointment into the ranks of the SSA.  Correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you have given examples of 
ministerial involvement in the selection and appointment 
informally, of course, into that programme. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And your concern is that the proper 
procedures are bypassed in that process. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In relation to the 26, you speak 
about irregular promotions to senior positions within the 
SSA. 
DR DINTWE:   I confirm that, Chairperson. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 25 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But all these are done under the 
direction rather than the recommendation of the minister, 
as I understand what you are saying. 
DR DINTWE:   The approval of the minister.  So the 
minister is the last signatory and it will be written, like, on 
the submission to say that recommend, not recommend 
that.  So it will be the other signatories.  You will get an 
HR official somewhere but the last part there it is approved 
or not approved.  And the minister - the appointments 
happened under the approval of the minister. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is wrong with that? 
DR DINTWE:   Exactly what I am saying that involvement of 
the 
minister 
in 
the 
recruitment 
process 
constitutes 
significant executive overreach and this is not – cannot not 
be seen as my opinion only because it is also contained in 
the HLRP. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, as I understand it, the minister 
does not approve finally but is involved in the process 
leading up to his or her approval, irregularly? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  Yes, Chair. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 124, page 813 you 
record an interesting observation.  You say: 
“This was also the case in the Free State 
Provincial Office of Crime Intelligence where 
the Provincial Head, Major General Makele has 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 26 of 317 
 
acknowledge this practise. 
According 
to 
her 
the 
appointment, 
the 
appointment of children and family members of 
senior police officials, as well as, a girlfriend 
to one her brigadiers assisted in ensuring that 
they recruited trustworthy people. 
These members were then placed in a very 
sensitive environment without the necessary 
experience 
to 
the 
detriment 
of 
Crime 
Intelligence...” 
10 
 
Leave aside the former qualification issue which 
you raised in the second sentence but are you then aware 
of the statement actually being made that family members 
are appointed because they are trustworthy? 
DR DINTWE:   And I am still shocked, even today, 
Chairperson.  But what happened is that when my staff 
members go and do what we can call, like, verification, 
like, 
when 
they 
visit 
these 
offices, 
I, 
sometimes 
I 
accompany them and we will deal with or we will have a 
meeting on the first day and then I will leave them because 
20 
sometimes they will work there for a week or so. 
 
So in this specific meeting I was sitting there 
with the Provincial Head, Major General Makele, and I 
posed that question.  It was from myself to say:  But we 
are informed by somebody in that meeting...  In fact, a 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 27 of 317 
 
component - responsible for Counterintelligence because 
Counterintelligence in the SAPS will investigate the other 
officials with intelligence(?) agents.  And I was shocked to 
her response to that and that is the reason that was given 
to myself. 
 
Because the names – the names were mentioned 
and next to each name it will be a station commander of 
that 
station, 
police 
station 
in 
Bloemfontein 
– 
the 
Bloemfontein area.  It will be a major general somewhere 
in the provincial office.  It will be a brigadier in the same 
10 
office whose girlfriend is appointed in that space.  And 
then you will also have a relative of Advocate Mapele(?) 
herself. 
 
And the reason what – and the reason that she 
provided to us was to say that these children or these kids 
are well-bred.  Well-bred up.  Because they belong – they 
are children to senior officials of SAPS and so forth.  And 
that was the reason that was provided to us.  I am still in 
disbelieve even today that that was the reason used. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  You go on in that paragraph 
20 
to say: 
“There has also been a complaint that because 
they... [and I presume it these appointees] 
...owed an allegation to the provincial head. 
They only share the intelligence that they 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 28 of 317 
 
gather with those members of management to 
whom they owe allegiance...” 
 
Is that a complaint you received.   
DR DINTWE:   That is the complaint that I received.  May I 
please paint a this by using an alphabet, if you will allow 
me Chairperson.  Now you will have A and A is a head of 
Counterintelligence.  And then you will have B who is a 
head of Surveillance.  Now because this group falls under 
this other group of B, for instance, they will then provide 
information only to B so that B could appear more 
10 
successful than A.   
 
So they will be sitting there, and I am just being 
careful because this is one of the networks that they are 
doing but let me use a similar or simplistic example.  Let 
us say they are responsible for listening to conversations 
and they come across, for instance, people who are 
blaming to commit cash-in-in-transit heist, for instance. 
 
Instead of giving that information to A, they will 
not do that but they would rather give it to B because B 
was 
on 
their 
side 
and 
would 
have 
influenced 
their 
20 
appointment.  So that kind of a competition also exists and 
which poses a serious problem then because it means that 
the 
other 
people 
may 
not 
even 
come 
across 
that 
information. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So do I understand you correctly to 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 29 of 317 
 
be saying that one of the principles of employment in State 
Security particularly, and I presume it applies throughout 
the public service, is that the person appointed must be 
completely independent of external influence? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Particularly influence in regard to 
their appointment in the first place? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You go on in the next section, 
paragraph 125 and following, to deal with the controls 
10 
relating to the use and flow of money in the Intelligence 
Services.  Now we have heard detailed evidence in this 
regard.  You give evidence of a more general nature 
arising out of your own experience and independent 
investigations.  What have been your findings?  You deal 
with that in paragraph 125 and following. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes.  And Chairperson, yes, I think that I 
need to stand by confirming that indeed we would have 
removed 
specific 
transactions 
because 
amongst 
your 
witnesses I think that Ms K detailed all those.  We do have 
20 
also a detailed list of money-flows.  What I can confirm is 
that money has been stolen and we are talking lots and 
lots of money taken with suitcases, others being lost and 
people were never really held accountable for that money.   
 
And what I am saying there is that our findings 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 30 of 317 
 
are that these monies have been used for other things that, 
in fact, could affect our National Security adversely.  For 
an example, some of those monies could be used to fuel 
political tensions.  There is evidence in our possession 
that some of those monies were used to finance a 
particular faction within in the governing party and in other 
jurisdiction you will find that these monies can be used 
also to finance terrorism.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  In paragraph 126 you go 
into a little more detail.  Would you deal with that?  But 
10 
before you do.  The documents that you are yet to provide 
in the various bundles supporting your statement, do they 
contain more evidence of this? 
DR DINTWE:   They do contain itemised, Chairperson.  
Itemised, you know...  Ja, the items which indicate at what 
stage was this amount taken and what reason was given, 
and I even attached examples of what could be seen an 
invoice.  In other words, reporting that the recipient would 
have received the money. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  So that documentation, we 
20 
trust, will be forthcoming hopefully as soon as possible 
Dr Dintwe.   
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  I confirm that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Paragraph 126, you go into a 
little more detail. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 31 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   Yes.  And I also referred them to that.  I 
think...  Okay.  I am aware, Chairperson, that during the 
evidence of Ms K you were shown an example of a Word 
document.  So I take the money and say that I am taking 
this money to Josef.  Josef could be a source or he could 
have done certain work for us.  And what I do is that I only 
type.  I, the undersigned, confirm that I have received this 
particular money.  And then there is just a signature.  No 
letterhead, no nothing and so forth and they are taking 
huge amounts of money.  One of the transactions was 
10 
equivalent to 200 000 Euros at a call(?). 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who is quick to work out how much that 
is in – is it multiplied by eight or ten?  To turn it into – 
convert it Euros. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Nineteen, I think. 
DR DINTWE:   Even eighteen.  It is eighteen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
DR DINTWE:   It is around eighteen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have not travelled in a long time.  
20 
[laughs] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   [laughs] 
DR DINTWE:   It runs into millions.   
CHAIRPERSON:   It is roughly? 
DR DINTWE:   It runs into millions. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 32 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Millions. 
DR DINTWE:   At that time that I was doing that 
calculation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   To be – what I find at that particular point.  I 
know it is fluctuating but it was R 2.7 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes.  That was taken by a member and it 
just got lost, just like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  And there is no proof of what it 
10 
was used for? 
DR DINTWE:   Not at all, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  You are saying, firstly, that 
the use of cash is inherently problematic, although it might 
be necessary, I think, that has been conceded by you 
elsewhere, but it is the accounting and the documentary 
records in relation to the disbursements of cash that is of 
concern.  Is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  And also to add that 
20 
managers 
deliberately 
or 
being 
unaware 
attempt 
to 
misconstrue secrecy and allow the commission to use 
cash, to mean that then it is no accountability.  There must 
be an authority somewhere where you go and account.  So 
they see that kind of a thing to say that once you say that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 33 of 317 
 
you can use cash, then it means that you can – you may 
not, in fact, account it for and that is what is happening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is a tap that must be closed without 
jeopardising 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
intelligence, 
proper 
intelligence 
and 
the 
use 
of 
cash 
legitimately 
for 
intelligence purpose but close the tap for those who can 
just take money and they do not have to account to 
anybody as to whether that money was used properly. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson but they will 
never ever be able.  None – all intelligence service will 
10 
need to use cash in certain instances. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no I ...[intervenes]  
DR DINTWE:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the legitimate part of using cash, that 
must continue.  The problem is to close the tap of using it 
illegitimately. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Because one can understand why 
cash may have to be used for legitimate intelligence 
purposes but one must close the tap if one can in regard to 
20 
people being able to just take money and go and use it for 
whatever they choose to use it for and say it was for 
intelligence purposes and their word must be accepted. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  That is our proposition, 
Chairperson. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 34 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will deal an extract from one of 
the reports you actually made in this regard over the page 
but for the moment if we could stay on paragraph 126.  You 
say you raised concerns about the prevalence of large 
sums of cash being withdrawn at the SSA and that is in 
relation 
to 
the 
2016/2017 
Financial 
Year 
of 
SSA 
Operations.   
 
And you say: 
“This concern was raised following claims that 
10 
large sums of cash were being carried out of 
the 
SSA 
by 
members 
sent 
by 
senior 
management of the SSA to various destination 
between 2014 to around 2017 with limited 
proof of receipt of those monies by persons at 
the purported destinations...” 
 
Are those the claims that were made to you and 
your office? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes but we would have investigated them.  
So what we include in our certificates.  Remember – that I 
20 
referred to last time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   [Indistinct]  
DR DINTWE:   Yes.  It will basically be findings not 
value(?).  So we would have received a report and we 
would get into the system and check whether all that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 35 of 317 
 
money indeed went out and we will check whether there 
was some kind of invoice or settlement of that particular 
money. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
DR DINTWE:   So what I list in the certificate will be our 
findings to say that this X amount of money went outside 
and we do not have proof that it was really received by the 
intended recipient. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Now these claims that were 
made - complaints that were raised with your office.  You 
10 
say you investigated and you made findings.   
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And those findings highlighted 
concerns over the use of cash and the improper or 
inadequate accounting for that cash. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now you say that you raised these 
issues in certificates.  Who receives your certificates? 
DR DINTWE:   First it would be the minister responsible for 
that particular service.  In other words, Minister Bheki Cele 
20 
will get on behalf of the police of SAP-CI.  Minister 
Nosiviwe 
Mapisa-Nqakula 
will 
get 
on 
behalf 
Defence 
Intelligence, and Minister Ayanda Dlodlo will get on behalf 
to the State Security Agency.  That is the first authority. 
 
The 
second 
authority 
will 
be 
the 
Head 
of 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 36 of 317 
 
Services.  So it will the DG and the Divisional Head’s 
Commissioner.  In the case of SAP-CI, it will be Chief 
Defence Intelligence Officer in that right(?) chain(?).  The 
third authority will be the Joint Standing Committee on 
Intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now in regard to the latter.  
Without the intervention of the minister or the director 
general or acting director general, as the case may be, in 
each security establishment, there is a direct reporting 
between your own office and the Joint Standing Committee 
10 
of Intelligence.  Do I understand that correctly? 
DR DINTWE:   You understand me correctly. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What did the JSCI do on receipt of 
these certificates in relation to the improper use of cash, 
as you found? 
DR DINTWE:   The previous committee never acted.  Never 
acted on this. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you know why? 
DR DINTWE:   The one or the other reason that was 
provided at a particular point was that they want to really 
20 
achieve(?) the separation of powers.  For them they saw 
these as the decisions which happened with them, the 
executive realm.  And I do not know to what extent they 
were intended to hold those executives, you know, to 
account but as far as I know is that I was never really 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 37 of 317 
 
provided a reason, a convincing reason.  Let me say that.  
I was never convinced as to the reason why they could not 
act. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You conduct in your office an 
oversight role over the executives, correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you do so independently. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   With your knowledge of what 
oversight entails, are you satisfied that the JSCI performed 
10 
its functions adequately? 
DR DINTWE:   No, not – I can say and submit to the 
Chairperson that no they – that is not sufficient their 
oversight role.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought you were tempted to say I can 
say without fear of contradiction that they are not doing 
their job.  [laughs]   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   [laughs] 
DR DINTWE:   No, Chairperson I can say confidently 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   ...that their oversight was never adequate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR DINTWE:   The reason why I say I am confident about it 
is that it is also a finding of the HLRT(?) ...[intervenes]  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 38 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   But I think that there is evidence before this 
Commission, as it were ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:   ...to say that Parliamentary oversight was 
not adequate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now with regard to this particular 
committee.  Are you basing your view on your experience 
during your term of office only or are you only basing your 
view on records or lack of records that you found in your 
10 
office as to interactions between your predecessors and 
this particular committee or what is the position? 
DR DINTWE:   My preference was to confine this to my 
term of office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Because I think that even officials(?) will 
tell you that it is I have been there for a sufficient time to 
then be able to formulate an opinion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   But also formulate or identify a particular 
20 
pattern. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   So, I mean, I have been there now for four 
years ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is a long time. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 39 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   So I confined myself to my – office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  By the way, who was your 
predecessor? 
DR DINTWE:   My predecessor was Advocate Faith 
Radebe, the late. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, she is late? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So she would have been there, from 
what?  Around 2010?  Is it a five year term? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, I am writing about – it is a five year 
10 
term. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then there was the space of two years 
when there was nobody. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before your time.  Before you were 
appointed. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   I think in my earlier paragraph here, I have 
written which years exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:   But 2010 sounds more probable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Now if – I am trying to find out 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 40 of 317 
 
how one can find out even without asking the committee, 
find out as to what may have been sent to the Portfolio 
Committee 
by, 
for 
example, 
Ms 
Radebe 
and 
what 
responses, if any, she may have received in response to 
her reports.  What did you call them?  What do you call 
your reports?   
DR DINTWE:   Certificates. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Certificates in regard to her certificates.  
So in your office, you would have copies of certificates that 
she would have sent during her time.  Is that right? 
10 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in terms of the mechanisms, you do 
not have a way of knowing whether the committee acting 
upon each certificate, do you? 
DR DINTWE:   No, but I will know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   ...by implication. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Because there is continuance in the office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   It is only the Inspector General of 
Intelligence who gets appointed who comes and go. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   The rest of the staff and very senior people 
including investigators are always there. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 41 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Now during my first year in the office and 
when I started dealing with my first certificate there was 
reference 
made 
or 
recommendations 
that 
remained 
unimplemented and 
were coming from the tenure of 
Advocate Faith Radebe.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR DINTWE:   There are many examples.  Examples of 
that.  In fact, the so-called Rogue Unit at SARS and so 
forth.  I still had to deal with that issue after I have taken 
10 
occupancy of that office.  So I will have a group of 
certificates which will show what my predecessor sent to 
the committee but those problems would still be applicable 
under my term of office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Like, for instance, the one that I am writing 
there.   Inadequate controls relating to the use and flow of 
money in the Intelligence Services.  You will find those 
things also under the certificates that were drafted or that 
were signed before I assumed the office. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think this is how we can deal with 
it and maybe you deal with it in your affidavit.  Maybe we 
have dealt with it last time.  Mr Pretorius will remember.  
Or maybe it is still to come amongst the documents that 
you will send.  I think it would be good if you were able to 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 42 of 317 
 
say I have looked at the certificates that were sent by my 
predecessor from that year up to that year.  I am aware of 
what she recommended or whatever.   
 
What issues she raised before the committee to 
look at or deal with as well as the ministers, the relevant 
minister because you have said that the certificates go to 
the relevant ministers, the relevant DG and the committee.  
You – so if you could identify those for each year and be 
able to say the following – the problem – this problem that 
was raised during that year is still there or when I arrived 
10 
it was still there.   
 
So I can tell that nothing has been done to deal 
with it properly.  So or whatever had been done has not 
worked.  You know.  And so I think that could help just to 
give that indication.  In terms of law, there is nothing that 
requires the committee or the relevant ministers and DG’s 
to revert to your office to say you raise these issues.  This 
is how – this is what I have done in response.   
DR DINTWE:   I think my submission, Chairperson, was to 
say that our recommendations are just being ignored willy-
20 
nilly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And we touched on the PAN 1 Investigation.  
If I can make the specific example.  And I am using this 
example to submit to the Commission that it is doable.  It 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 43 of 317 
 
is an exercise that I think that if I go back to the office I 
can readily ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You can do that, ja. 
DR DINTWE:   ...identify so say that...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   ...this has been a problem for time 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
DR DINTWE:   Or since the establishment of this particular 
office. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Let us take an example of what one of my 
staff members would be writing an affidavit about that I 
discussed and I think it is in here.  Now, the former 
Minister Mahlobo says that he was not aware that Mr Arthur 
Fraser was implicated in the PAN Investigation.  And I went 
to the office because the Commission wanted us to confirm 
whether there were some presentations made to the 
minister with regard to the PAN Investigation.   
 
So 
the 
same 
recommendations 
in 
the 
PAN 
20 
Investigation was that people should be judged(?), for 
instance.  So that is exactly what – it is a classic example 
and I think an accurate example of saying or being able to 
furnish(?) the Commission that it is a doable exercise to go 
there and say that these were the findings before even my 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 44 of 317 
 
occupancy 
of 
the 
office 
and 
they 
were 
never 
ever 
implemented.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   In law, I do not think that ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   ...therefore ask as – in terms of oversight 
body. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Well, of course, I think you 
suggested the last time or you do in your statement that I 
think you wish for a regime in terms of which your 
10 
recommendations cannot just be ignored but they would be 
binding.  I got the impression you had in mind the same 
situation 
as 
the 
Public 
Protector 
but 
I 
may 
be 
misrepresenting what you say but certainly the minimum, it 
would seem, is that those authorities when your office has 
raised issues and made recommendation they should at 
least come back and say we have noted, we agree and this 
is what we will do or we do not agree because of the 
following reasons, so you can take it from there but to 
have a situation where they just completely ignored you 
20 
and you never -  you are not – you never know whether 
they did anything seems untenable. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You are not misrepresenting me, 
Chairperson, you have got a very sharp memory. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 45 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   Because that is what I was saying and I was 
saying that I think that we do have a good model to say are 
these remedial measures, we know that they are not.  But I 
was even saying to yourself that I wish that we had the 
resources because I was going to take myself to court and 
say that I do not think that any legislature will have an 
intention to put so money into this organisation but then 
recommendations are just being ignored. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ignored, ja. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, that was what I said. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 127 on page 814 you 
cite two examples.  I would just like to ask whether you 
confirm those.  You say: 
“In one instance a member claimed that he had lost 
an amount of approximately R3.6 million while on 
an operation.  This is clearly absurd.  A further 
finding was that since 2016 there was an SSA 
member who had been submitting fraudulent travel 
claims amounting to R9 million.” 
20 
Do you confirm that those were findings or investigations 
conducted by you? 
DR DINTWE:   These were findings and I write there, I say 
this is clearly absurd because what came to our attention 
was that - in the 3.6 million, there is a gentlemen on an 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 46 of 317 
 
operation to Jupiter, this other planet and he comes back 
and says but I lost it, they have taken it or I misplaced it or 
whatever but then he does not even create serious 
attention or, you know, serious attention because he then 
tells that I have lost it and you deduct it from my salary.   
In fact the gentleman went on an early retirement 
during the course of 2020 and others, who will know, that 
their pensions will not even get to that particular amount 
and in this instance he just came back and said that oh, I 
have no reasons, I have lost it and please start deducting 
10 
it and so forth.  I am told that that money – and they would 
have attached his pension if not part thereof.  Now this is a 
problem and it came in the analysis of our evidence.  If  
 
Now if I got 3.6 million and I went and bought a 
property I will be saving about another 100% because if I 
am buying a property for R3.6 million and it is bonded, I 
am going to end up paying about R7 million but if I buy it 
cash and I say that no, no, you can buy that money from 
my pension it means that I would have received and 
interest free loan to do other things.   That is the first 
20 
example. 
 
The second example of R9 million in the finding, 
also, this person is a protector.  He is a protector who 
accompanies 
a 
principal 
when 
he 
travels 
both 
internationally and locally and our findings is that this 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 47 of 317 
 
person could not have pulled this mission alone because it 
is very easy.  If I am not travelling overseas but you get my 
protector coming to claim money that they would have 
travelled.  It should be well-know but no, no, no but he did 
not apply, you know, to go to this and other country and so 
forth.  So it happened over a period of time until he 
reached an amount of R9 million.   
Inadequate controls and there is an argument about 
that because other people will say absence of internal 
controls.  No, in this instance controls are there but they 
10 
are being ignored as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this would have been in a period of 
about how many years?  Do you have that information? 
DR DINTWE:   Three years on average, a travel of three 
years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Accumulated to R9 million within three 
years? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR DINTWE:   It also tallies with the usage of cash.  I will 
20 
never understand why do they give me cash when I travel 
outside the country, I just do not know, because it is even 
risky, I am called Inspector General Intelligence, I am not 
collecting intelligence, I am not doing anything, I am 
oversight body.  But believe you me, when I travel they 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 48 of 317 
 
give me that kind of cash.  So when I come back normally I 
will return some. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not millions. 
DR DINTWE:   I beg your pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not millions. 
DR DINTWE:   No, it will not run into millions, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is this a convenient time, Chair?  It 
is, let us take a 15 minutes break, we will resume at half 
10 
past eleven. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The examples that you have given 
to the Chair, Dr Dintwe, both at a general level and at a 
particular level.  Were these included in the certificates 
that were given to parliament and to the Minister and the 
20 
heads of department? 
DR DINTWE:   I confirm that, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 128 you raise a 
concern about the possible use of these monies.  What do 
you say about that?  That is on page 815. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 49 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   I am saying that they were used to fuel or 
finance 
a 
particular 
– 
I 
mean, 
a 
particular 
faction 
depending on who is taking that money.  Our finding in that 
regard is not one-sided at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is like different people may have 
taken monies to finance different factions. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that information too would be 
in the certificates. 
DR DINTWE:   It will be in the certificates. 
10 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Having 
been 
reported 
to 
parliament? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Or at least to the joint standing 
committee on Intelligence. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say in paragraph 129 that you 
made certain recommendations in a report and you talk of 
one of your reports, would this report have been included 
in your certificates? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   It is certificate – I think that I used the word 
report interchangeably there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, so it was a certificate 
reported to all those instances to whom you have referred 
including the JSCI? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 50 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
DR DINTWE:    Would you not like me just in one or two 
sentences explain why I would have used the word report 
over there?  So over and above the certificates, I also do 
what is called monitoring reports.  Now monitoring report, I 
may change just one subject because the certificates will 
run – will deal with issues, a variety of these sort of issues 
but in this instance I may decide to do a monitoring on 
procurement maybe of software, for instance, and just write 
10 
that particular issue and then I will send to a responsible 
minister.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would those reports go to 
parliament? 
DR DINTWE:   They will then go to parliament because a 
certificate 
is 
a 
culmination 
of 
your 
review 
reports 
monitoring reports, outcome of investigations. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I see. 
DR DINTWE:   So even if I would have sent only this 
subject right in the middle of every reporting year it will 
20 
then be found in the certificate as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Perhaps you should read 
onto the record your recommendation in paragraph 129. 
DR DINTWE:   I will do that, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 51 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   I say: 
“Whereas the movement of large sums of cash is 
justifiable 
within 
the 
context 
of 
secrecy 
of 
operations there is a need to ensure stricter 
controls to ensure full accountability for cash given 
to members for operational purposes.  However, the 
veil 
of 
secrecy 
associated 
with 
intelligence 
operations 
does 
not 
make 
any 
public 
servant 
immune 
to 
accountability 
and 
sound 
financial 
management hence the person who claims any 
10 
money or uses the resources of the SSA is required 
to 
settle 
such 
in 
accordance 
with 
applicable 
prescripts. During over certain engagements I came 
across a number of instances where the monies are 
not properly accounted for.  I am aware that even 
the SAA internal investigative units are currently 
working on several cases where money is not 
accounted for.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then you go in page 815, 
paragraph 130 to talk of recommendations that you made in 
20 
your capacity as Inspectors General Intelligence.  What 
were those? 
DR DINTWE:   It was that although the control measures 
are there, they need to be tightened a little bit because 
some of them were too old. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 52 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   A little bit? 
DR DINTWE:   Old for my liking, in any event even the 
secretary’s account I think it was 1957 or so. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, you used the word a little bit.  
Was it just a figure of speech? 
DR DINTWE:   Maybe too old.  Ja, but my intention was to 
say that they could be a little bit old, just too old for our 
liking and that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think Mr Pretorius is suggesting 
that in the light of what appears to be large scale abuse of 
10 
monies that should be used legitimately for Intelligence the 
tightening should not be or cannot be for just a little bit, 
much more is required.  I think [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
DR DINTWE:   Yes but my quagmire is that times will differ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   So they would have amended one out of 
fifteen.  Maybe in 2009 they would have, you know, 
adjusted three or four in 2014 and so forth.  That is why I 
cannot use an umbrella weight that too old.. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
DR DINTWE:   For us, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We have heard the evidence of Mr 
Jafta as to what steps have been taken more recently in 
relation to financial controls but it appears from your 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 53 of 317 
 
evidence that what you are saying is a substantial review 
of control measures and their implementation is required 
within the SSA and other intelligence organs. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson, but I also said 
in this instance that they must be both preventative and 
deterrent. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And you say that steps 
should 
be 
taken 
to 
recover 
outstanding 
temporary 
advances from members who have not settled those. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now all these issues concerning 
financial controls, the absence of financial controls, the 
loss of state security monies, the inadequate controls over 
the use of cash are – and which you have now highlighted 
over the last hour or so, your report or your reports or your 
certificates audit to the JSCI and the Ministers would 
contain detail in this regard. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And would contain detail in regard 
to your recommendations. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   How is – and these questions I 
have been asked to raise in relation to further evidence to 
be led by Adv Freund, who I have spoken to in the break, 
Chair – to whom does this report go in particular?  I mean, 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 54 of 317 
 
does it go to the secretary of the JSCI?  The Chair of the 
JSCI? 
DR DINTWE:   We address them to a Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, who is the Chairperson of 
the JSCI or who was the Chairperson of the JSCI at the 
time you would have been submitting these reports? 
DR DINTWE:   Previously it was – no, there is a previous 
committee, the immediate previous one, it was Mr Nqakula, 
who then was transferred to the Presidency as State 
Security Adviser and during that particular time there was 
10 
an acting Chairperson, Mr Ganebe and we then also – 
okay, ja, Mr Ganebe acted for a while.  With the current 
one is honourable Maake 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Now 
this 
is 
a 
multi-party 
committee, as I understand it. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And did you ever have occasion to 
speak to any member of the JSCI and say what is going 
on?  Why are you ignoring my recommendations?  What are 
you doing about my reports.  Was there any interaction of 
20 
that nature either in correspondence or verbally? 
DR DINTWE:   I would not address any formal letter to any 
other person except for the Chairperson but I cannot rule 
out that there could have been a discussion between 
myself and one of the members because they also had an 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 55 of 317 
 
open line to myself.  In fact one of the people that I 
remember raising these issues with is General Bantu 
Holomisa because he was sitting in the previous committee 
but apart from that, there is also a Chief Whip, a Deputy 
Chief Whip in parliament that I also have that kind of an 
open line.  So we would have had those discussions about 
these issues. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you would have in discussions 
raised concerns about your certificates, how they were 
considered and what was being done in response thereto? 
10 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you able to say – do you feel 
comfortable to say what General Holomisa said to you? 
DR DINTWE:   General Holomisa said that he is aware – 
normally he will sort of give me counsel, such as you have 
to be strong, we are aware that you are doing your work 
and perhaps he could have promised me that he will see 
how he would nudge, you know, the Chairpersons or the 
committee itself in its entirety to really implement these 
things because all these people that I would have, you 
20 
know, talked to, they were aware of the rot that was 
dipping especially in the State Security Agency but also in 
Crime Intelligence, so they were not oblivious to those. 
 
Can I say that there is an interview that was done 
by one of the current members, Dr Mbuyiseni Ndlozi who 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 56 of 317 
 
said in that interview on TV that he is aware that we are 
doing what we are supposed to be doing but the failure is 
at the point of implementation by the committee itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But somehow it seems that even though 
different 
members 
of 
that 
committee 
may 
be 
aware 
including members of opposition parties serving on that 
committee, may be aware of the problem, it looks like they 
cannot get action to be taken by the committee because, 
from what you have said, it looks like no action seems to 
have been evident or seems to be taken that is effective.  
10 
At least, if anything has been done, it seems not to have 
been effective but you cannot tell what it is that may have 
been done. 
DR DINTWE:   That is my submission, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  And one does not know 
whether it might be the same problem that has been 
experienced by some portfolio committees in parliament in 
regard to oversight where members of opposition parties 
say we can push as far as we can if the ANC and members 
of the party who are in the majority do not agree, we 
20 
cannot do anything because a decision must be by 
majority.  So one does not know whether that is the 
situation with this committee as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, whether that is a satisfactory 
explanation 
or 
not 
from 
a 
member 
of 
parliament 
is 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 57 of 317 
 
something we will make submissions on in due course, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  No, no, that is fine.  Thank you, 
let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But in summary then, the problems 
that you have raised, the impropriety, the illegalities, the 
loss of monies, the inadequate accounting for monies, the 
looting that you have spoken about, the improper use of 
monies in factional battles, those are all in your reports. 
DR DINTWE:   They are all in my reports, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No member of the JSCI can claim 
ignorance of what you have reported to the JSCI. 
DR DINTWE:   Not at all because, to confirm that, I would 
submitted the certificates in a redacted version for the 
Chairperson.  All what I removed was methods that they 
use, 
sources 
but 
I 
also 
removed 
organisational 
weaknesses.  But in terms of the transactions I made it a 
point that the Commission, you know, becomes aware. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So when we get those certificates 
the Chair will be able to see exactly what the JSCI knew, 
20 
apart from the redaction.   
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you be able to say whether 
because of the redaction, the redactions that you made, 
there would be nothing wrong with those reports.  Now I 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 58 of 317 
 
cannot remember whether they are classified or not, your 
certificates, being available to the Commission if those 
redactions have been made or they will still be a problem 
even if there are redactions? 
DR DINTWE:   No, there would not be problems because I 
deal with administrative issues.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   With regard to procurement, for instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And I think I will make submission earlier or 
10 
later to say that there is generally over classification and it 
done to hide malfeasance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   So I have worked on the certificates to an 
extent but I am satisfied that they can be made public also. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR DINTWE:   That is the reason why I would removed the 
other issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, well I would be very interested 
in seeing those certificates, those report insofar as one 
20 
can look at them without any problems in terms of security 
and so on. 
DR DINTWE:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, our understanding, we have 
looked at this quite carefully and have consulted externally 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 59 of 317 
 
as well, is that you would be entitled, as Chair, to see the 
unredacted versions of the certificates. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   However, for the purposes of your 
report and whatever goes public, the redacted version 
would be necessary to be revealed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Provided, of course, the person in 
control and who has the lawful power to deal with it 
agrees. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that is Dr Dintwe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, that is fine.  I think it would 
be important in order to get the full picture.  Whatever can 
be dealt with publicly without being in breach of any law, it 
would be good to look at that.  Whatever I can look at away 
from the public, that might also be important if it can be 
done. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will consider the position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   I have considered that position.  It is in fact 
my 
administrative 
decision 
that 
I 
said 
to 
the 
co-
functionaries that I consulted with to say that there are two 
levels of disclosure here.  The first disclosure is to 
yourself, Chairperson, and maybe I also mean the legal 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 60 of 317 
 
team.   The second disclosure is then to the public. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  In paragraph 131, 
page 816, you deal with what is another serious issue in 
your terms in relation to Crime Intelligence and you say in 
paragraph 132: 
“Our 
investigations 
have 
revealed 
that 
the 
systematic and endemic institutionalised looting of 
the Secret Services account is carried out and 
perpetuated 
by 
senior 
managers 
within 
Crime 
10 
Intelligence and their trust subordinates under the 
guise of legitimate intelligence operations in order 
to avoid culpability and accountability in the event 
of detection.” 
Now these issues or some of them at least are in the hands 
of law enforcement agencies at present but would you tell 
the Chair, please in general terms what you say in 
paragraphs 131 and following?  And you give an example 
in paragraph 133. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, I give an example of that and I used 
20 
the word looting deliberately because pure looting.  Yes, of 
course, there are investigations that are taking place.  We 
were also promised that the Crime Intelligence itself will 
conduct its own internal investigation.  To date we are 
aware of about two members who are dismissed.  I think 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 61 of 317 
 
that they have appealed and so forth based on those 
findings. 
 
Now what was happening there and I am giving an 
example 
later, 
is 
that 
we 
were 
even 
calling 
the 
subordinates their runners.  What would happen is that a 
Chief Financial Officer based at Crime Intelligence will be 
involved in operations.  An example of an operation here is 
that he will handle a source and it is not acceptable but 
because he cannot go and claim money for that particular 
source, he will use a Captain or a Colonel or a Warrant 
10 
Officer somewhere because he will be a Major General.  So 
a poor Captain will go, collect money, give it to the CFO, 
the CFO will then claim that I would have paid a source 
and the settlement will then be done on behalf of the 
Captain not on behalf of the person claims that they are 
actually real handlers of the particular person.  So we are 
calling them runners, that these senior managers will then 
have these other people. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So a senior official would require a 
subordinate to go and collect money allegedly for the 
20 
payment of a source. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That money would be given to the 
senior official who had no authority to deal with sources at 
all. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 62 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:    That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that senior official would then 
say or claim, perhaps not, that that money had been 
handed to a source, correct? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, he would just return and give him 
something and say that I have given to the person that I 
have given so he can go back and [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the person accounting to the 
system, as it were, the accounting system, would be the 
10 
runner, the person deputised by the senior official, is that 
correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  And during 
the investigation what was also surprising is that – I think 
that we have an affidavit, I stand to be corrected, here by 
the staff members in my office, but many instances where a 
subordinate will tell us that I did not have any proof that 
the money was given to a source, I do not even know who 
that source is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, that is a point I wanted to 
20 
raise, the subordinate or the runner who is used to collect 
the money allegedly to hand over to a source and as used 
by the senior officer, that subordinate or runner has never 
seen, in this example, the source. 
DR DINTWE:   Not at all. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 63 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Cannot.  But, nevertheless, 
accounts and says that the money has gone to the source. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, that is what the account will say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me also just make sure I understand 
it.  So you have somebody such as a CFO who, in terms of 
his authority and job description, is not supposed to have a 
source. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And a source here is an operative, is 
that right or it can be… 
10 
DR DINTWE:   I do not know I will – I will not be discussing 
the method here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
DR DINTWE:   But a source could be somebody at a 
different rank. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who gives information. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, it is somebody that takes a rank, ja, it 
is not a police official. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hey? 
DR DINTWE:   It could be somebody that …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
DR DINTWE:   That I saw when this thing was happening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Yes, it is somebody who gives 
information required by the organisation. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 64 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And there could be 
different categories but that is the general. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if I, as CFO, want some cash, maybe 
from time to time I could just have somebody that I connect 
with, a subordinate of mine who, in terms of the law, is 
entitled to have a source. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then I give the money to my 
subordinate to give to the source and then I get it in some 
10 
other way or no money gets given to the source physically 
but the records are written in such a way as if my 
subordinate gave money to a source. 
DR DINTWE:   No, you I misunderstood me there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And it is very critical that I explain. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Now the CFO instructs the subordinate to go 
to accounts department and collect money there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   And the reason that he is using there is to 
say that you know that I have …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A source. 
DR DINTWE:   A responsibility to handle a source. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 65 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   So this money that I am taking from you is 
for a source. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is for a source, okay. 
DR DINTWE:   But it never goes to the source himself, he 
gives it to the CFO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the CFO. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, so …[intervenes] 
DR DINTWE:   And then the CFO tells him that no, do not 
worry, I am going to give to the source. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so suddenly the CFO must give to 
the source. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, that is the claim by him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But would the – would both of them know 
– I guess the CFO knows the subordinate would know what 
is going on, that this is criminal? 
DR DINTWE:   They know, the CFO knows, the subordinate 
knows. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The subordinate also knows. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes.  That is why we are calling them 
20 
runner because I think that there was a suggestion by the 
evidence 
that 
they 
could 
have 
been 
getting 
some 
kickbacks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
DR DINTWE:   But we did not have that – because why 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 66 of 317 
 
would you go there?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Because when questions are asked, they 
will not be posed to the CFO, they will posed to yourself as 
a real handler, as you claimed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And there is an added element that 
you have just said that perhaps the public requires a more 
detailed explanation or a clearer summary.  Chair, I will 
attempt to do that.  The CFO says to a subordinate you go 
10 
and fetch money and you tell administration that it is for a 
source and you give it to me. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then the CFO says I am going 
to give it to a source.  He may or may not do so. 
DR DINTWE:   That is what our proposition is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  So he may keep the money. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He may give the money for another 
illegitimate purpose because the CFO has no mandate or 
20 
power to deal with monies in this way. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is why he must use a 
subordinate who had the power to go and get the money in 
the first place. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 67 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But importantly, also to report that 
the money has been given to the source, when he does not 
know that at all. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So  - but the subordinate also knows 
that what the CFO is doing is criminal because he knows 
that it is not part of the CFO’s job to be paying sources or 
is there no such – or is that not the position? 
DR DINTWE:   Although we would not have concrete 
10 
evidence to say that they were getting kickbacks and that 
is why I am using this word selectively of a runner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   But he is aware that in terms of the 
prescripts that is not allowed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And if he was oblivious to that, he would 
ask the CFO as to why do you not go straight there? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   So this is an activity of a person who is fully 
20 
aware that the CFO cannot handle a source. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I guess the bottom line is the law 
does not allow the CFO to be taking money to a source 
because if the law allowed that, the CFO, if he was acting 
lawfully, would go to the accounts department himself. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 68 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  The reason why he must use the 
subordinate is because he is not allowed to go there and 
claim money from the accounts department for purposes of 
giving to a source. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You give another example in 
paragraph 134, page 817, but you have dealt with the 
system that can be used or abused.  Paragraph 135 you 
10 
say: 
“There are many other instances which include the 
misuse of monies from the Secret Service account.  
Misuse of safe houses and the renting out of 
personal 
houses 
by 
senior 
managers 
as 
safe 
houses to Crime Intelligence at inflated prices.  
Investigations 
into 
these 
abuses 
cannot 
be 
concluded because there is a refusal to declassify 
documents.” 
Let us deal with the first issue first.  We know from other 
20 
sources that these – this type of misconduct or illegal use 
of monies and assets has occurred but was this also part 
of your investigations and were these your findings? 
DR DINTWE:   These are finding, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On investigations into the detail? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 69 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   The details. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you have summarised the 
findings here, or you have summarised the type of 
malfeasance that occurred? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, would these issues and 
reports and findings also be included in your certificates? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  You then say something in 
addition in paragraph 135.  You say: 
10 
"Investigations 
into 
these 
abuses 
cannot 
be 
concluded because there is a refusal to declassify 
documents." 
 
Before you answer the question that I would like to 
put to you, I would like to put you a preliminary question.  
Is it clear to all concerned that classification cannot be 
used to conceal criminality?  
DR DINTWE:   That is the general principle, the general 
rule. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is it also clear to all concerned in 
20 
terms of the legislation that classification cannot be used 
as a reason for not giving you documentation?   
DR DINTWE:   That will be my response, but there is a 
rider to that.  That last sentence does not refer to us.  It 
does not refer to the investigations conducted by the office 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 70 of 317 
 
of the Inspector-General of Intelligence.  I do not know.  I 
may have – it sounds as if that is the submission but it is 
not a submission.  When I say investigations cannot be 
concluded, now I am referring to criminal investigations 
and we have got instances such as those. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
DR DINTWE:   In our chains they do not have a right to 
withhold any information. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Whether classified or not. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That's good. 
DR DINTWE:   We always give to others.  So our 
investigations in the specific case will be concluded, but 
the other investigations that follows will be hampered by 
refusal to declassify. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
DR DINTWE:   So I am referring to investigations such as 
those conducted by IPID, for instance, and those maybe 
conducted by the Hawks. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will come to those in detail in 
20 
due course.  The regulations in terms of security are 
unfortunately and ironically and quite improperly kept in 
our submission themselves secret.  So the law or the 
regulation which says you cannot use classification to 
conceal criminality secret, but that principle is widely 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 71 of 317 
 
known, as I understand it. 
DR DINTWE:   It is widely known and I think that it is 
laughable.  In fact, the team have always laughed about it.  
Maybe I should just explain what happened with this 
specific one. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, please. 
DR DINTWE:   Now, the SSA wanted to develop a 
regulation which will sort of put into effect the provision of 
the missed documents.  Now we decided that we should 
have our own document in the regulation which takes that 
10 
position which states it cannot classify documents to hide 
malfeasance.  But guess what they do, Chairperson?  The 
very same reason they classify it as secret. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So it has the consequence, Chair, 
that 
any 
person 
affected 
or 
interested 
in 
unlawful 
classification 
of 
documents 
cannot 
source 
the 
very 
regulation that deals with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the classification of the law, you 
know, the classification of such a document cannot be 
legitimate.  I mean, if you do that, how do you expect that 
20 
people will benefit from the principle that you cannot use 
classification to hide criminality? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Well, Chair, the idea that one 
could classify the law.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, you just have to say it to realise 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 72 of 317 
 
how absurd it is. 
DR DINTWE:   There is another dimension to that, 
Chairperson.  Now, I am just imagining that if it was myself 
and I contravened the same regulation and that they 
wanted to ask me questions.  Let’s say we are an operating 
and over-classified and they said oh, but you have 
contravened that.  My response will be that once you 
classify and say that you will apply a principle of need-to-
know, so which means that I may not have been considered 
as a person who should be aware of that particular ...  And 
10 
I can easily say that was classified.  I did not have access 
to it.  So you are defeating your own purpose, your own 
objective by ensuring that people do not over classify 
because they will say but I am not aware of that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And it goes a lot further than 
criminality.  It talks about administrative abuse as well, 
that classification cannot be used.  We can get the 
wording.  I think you deal with it somewhere in your 
statement.  You deal with the expression and the missed 
document, but let us deal with it when we get there.  In 
20 
paragraph 136 – well, perhaps we should then just clarify 
what you say in paragraph 135, that these abuses, this 
criminality, is reported to a law enforcement agency. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, but over and above that their 
management – divisional management of Crime Intelligence 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 73 of 317 
 
also promised us that they are going to deal with these 
issues and they are going to refer them to law enforcement 
agencies, because our recommendation would be that here 
is a clear case of criminality, so please refer it.  We do not 
want to replace the management of these agencies.  We 
can 
only 
flag 
and 
point 
out 
to 
where 
malfeasance, 
especially criminality, would have taken place. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is up to them to take it further in 
terms of law enforcement, prosecution and the like. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  And I think 
10 
that they would have developed an access path for me if I 
did have to do that, I mean, into the courts.  I could be at 
the Magistrate's Court and the other courts every day of 
my life because of the level of malfeasance in those 
particular ... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now, but you say that – in 
paragraph 
1.35 
you 
make 
the 
point 
that 
these 
law 
enforcement 
agencies, 
their 
investigations 
and 
prosecutions are hampered by their refusal to declassify 
documents. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in paragraph 136 what is the 
evidence that you give there?  
DR DINTWE:   Alright.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is another form of fraud or 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 74 of 317 
 
malfeasance. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, it is another - it is another form.  And 
maybe I can use an example of what happened there.  So 
they 
would 
have 
told 
us 
that 
they 
procured 
and 
...[indistinct].  Chairperson, I do not want – because it will 
be names of companies normally.  But on Advocate 
Pretorius's laptop he will have, like, for an example 
antispyware in that.  So normally he will – you will pay a 
certain licence fee.  So they bought something along those 
lines in the region of millions and the intention of that 
10 
particular licence was to protect the principles within the 
environment – within the management so that their gadgets 
could not be easily intercepted by foreign, you know, 
agents and so forth. 
But now what we found – because I went there 
personally again.  What we found is that, in fact, the 
licence itself or the software was never delivered and the 
investigators in my office were actually tipped that it was 
never delivered and it was about to expire.  So normally 
you will pay it for a period of 12 months.  But when we 
20 
went there we satisfied ourselves that it was supposed to 
be still there and we requested that we should be taken 
there so that we can observe it.  And there was a 
confirmation that it was not available.  It was never 
delivered. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 75 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So procurement funds, funds for 
procurement, are basically stolen. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  They buy non-existent 
things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which means they pocket the money. 
DR DINTWE:   That is the only inference I think that one 
could make. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But on the records – the records will say 
the money was used to buy such-and-such an equipment or 
something like that but the equipment would not be there. 
10 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And just to confirm once more, 
these various investigations in their detail, including your 
findings and recommendations, would be in the certificates 
you have spoken about. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  I confirm that, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay.  Let's move on then to 
paragraph 137 on page 817.  What is a grabber without 
revealing too much method? 
DR DINTWE:   Well, the general came back that they use 
20 
and there is a second gentleman who is appearing before a 
court in Centurion ...[indistinct] so it is in the public 
domain. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay. 
DR DINTWE:   But a grabber is an equipment that can be 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 76 of 317 
 
placed within a particular radius and it will be able to 
create a tower.  But there are side issues.  But it will 
create a tower.  So, in other words, when I call the 
Chairperson you will have the other line, so that machinery 
will be, like, between myself, so call it eavesdropping, 
because that particular person that is not really prevent my 
communication to reach you but the only effective ability of 
hearing 
the 
conversation 
between 
myself 
and 
the 
Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If the grabber is placed in the 
10 
required radius of a party conference, and you gave this 
evidence now, it would be possible for the person in 
control of the grabber to hear everything that is spoken 
over a cell phone. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, ja, including it goes to the 
extent of emails as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Emails as well. 
DR DINTWE:   So let us say digital communication in 
general. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So all electronic communications 
20 
would be able to be monitored within the specific required 
radius of the grabber?  
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So in paragraph 137 you refer to 
media reports.  Would you, without naming the company 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 77 of 317 
 
and the name of the person who is the director of the 
company, please – and I will explain the circumstances 
thereto in due course, but would you tell the Chair the 
story of the grabber?  
DR DINTWE:   Alright.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And its procurement. 
DR DINTWE:   Okay.  However, we use the names that we 
will have used.  I think it is very important to refresh the 
Chairperson's memory to say that there was this gentleman 
called – that we called Ivani here. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ivani? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes.  Who is a director of a company called 
IDI.  So this person is the person who accompanied a 
group of other people to go investigate ...[indistinct].  He is 
the same person now, but he is appearing under the other 
circumstances.  Now, just days before the NASREC 
conference I received a call from Mr Mbindwane, Mr 
Bongani Mbindwane.  He was given notice.  I am aware of 
that, Chairperson.  And at that time he was the advisor to 
the then Minister of Police, Mr Fikile Mbalula.  And what he 
20 
informs me is that, "There is an urgent issue that I want to 
discuss with you."  And obviously he was telling me that he 
is sent by the minister, but I really have to impress upon 
the Commission that the minister never requested me to 
attend that particular meeting but I went there.  And then 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 78 of 317 
 
when we met at that particular place he told me that there 
was a group of backpackers who wanted to influence the 
conference, the outcome of the conference, the NASREC 
conference, and ... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is a group? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I'm sorry.  A group of what? 
DR DINTWE:   He called them backpackers.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Backpackers? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
10 
DR DINTWE:   Well, they use that concept in criminology 
and so forth, but it will be, like, people who will claim to be 
tourists, for instance, so they are known to have those 
backpacks, you know.  It may be full of cameras and so 
forth. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because they ...[indistinct]. 
DR DINTWE:   Mr Chairperson, that is how you describe 
that group of people who were said to be coming from a 
foreign country and they were, you know, littered around 
Soweto.  So he told me that the biggest challenge that they 
20 
have is that the then acting divisional commissioner of 
...[indistinct] did not want to procure the grabbers.  He said 
that they were actually in need of grabbers to the region of 
R210 million.  However, because the date was too close 
they could settle for one grabber at a tune of R45 million.  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 79 of 317 
 
He explained, like, you know, the idea.  This is how it 
works.  These are the capabilities so do not be surprised 
that it is so expensive.  An ordinary grabber costs around 
R7 million.   
But the reason why he called me was to say that the 
divisional commissioner was scared or did not want to 
purchase because I was conducting some investigation 
with the previous procurement.  And I felt so bad.  I said 
how could they want to use my name and if something 
terrible really happened it will seem as if, you know, I was 
10 
involved in that, hence I promised him that I will go to the 
divisional commissioner and change it.  "No, no, do not 
worry.  If there is a threat and so forth, leave.  Continue.  
Manage the organisation and make decisions."  And that is 
what I did.  I left there immediately and I went to see the 
divisional commissioner.  I know I am taking long, but I 
think it is important to do this. 
When I got to where the divisional commissioner 
was he was not at his headquarters.  He was there at the 
other place.  We met.  So we will normally meet in a room, 
20 
so he had ...[indistinct] room.  We did not even get to sit 
down, because the divisional commissioner then asked me, 
"Are you aware of the company that they want me to 
procure from?"  I said, "No, he did not tell me."  And he 
mentions this company, IDI, and I immediately said that, 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 80 of 317 
 
"No, no, but he was not honest with me, hence I am no 
longer getting involved in this particular issue."  "Then I 
understand why you do not want to procure."  And that is 
where we ended on that day, claiming, the divisional 
commissioner that, "No, no, I was coming to permit you or 
somehow tell you that I will not stand in front of any 
procurement."  But in this instance I am no longer getting 
involved. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I would say in summary there was 
an attempt to procure and it seems to me that you suggest, 
10 
at least in your statement or your affidavit, at an exorbitant 
price a grabber for use at the NASREC conference of 
December 2017. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is it correct that that intended 
procurement was halted by IPID? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And amongst the reasons, as you 
say in your statement, was that the company from whom 
the grabber was to be procured had already been flagged 
20 
in relation to irregular procurement previously. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  But we also 
as the office of the OIGI we are involved in keeping the 
IPID.  In fact, a senior manager from my office was working 
with 
a 
senior 
manager 
from 
IPID, 
because 
we 
had 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 81 of 317 
 
information and I am calling it information, not evidence, 
information to say that the rest of the money will be used 
to buy votes at NASREC. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So not only was the procurement 
process irregular, not only was the party from whom the 
grabber would be procured already under investigation for 
irregular procurement, but you had information that you 
used to which the grabber would be – sorry, not the 
grabber – used to which the money would be used, either 
through 
inflated 
procurement 
...[indistinct] 
inflated 
10 
procurement prices was the information you received was 
to buy votes at NASREC. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  And it sounded probable.  
That's when we interrupted or intervened, because the 
grabber's original price or average price would be R7 
million, but here in this case they wanted R45 million to 
buy only one grabber. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And during this process 
when problems arose about the procurement, influence was 
sought to be exercised on you to facilitate the project.  Is 
20 
that correct?   
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  Maybe I 
should also mention that I stopped somewhat about this 
procurement, but there was a subsequent meeting again 
that took place in front, Chair. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 82 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let's tell the Chair about that, 
please?   
DR DINTWE:   Alright.  Now, after withdrawing – telling the 
divisional commissioner that I will not get involved in this 
because I did not make those decisions, I then received a 
WhatsApp message that I am attaching the documents that 
will be coming from Mr Bo Mbindwane, saying that, "AG, I 
had thought that we agreed on a particular position."  And 
my understanding is that that WhatsApp message came as 
a result of the Divcom, the divisional commissioner, telling 
10 
Mr Mbindwane that, "No, no, that guy did not, you know, 
agree or he did not want to get involved in this particular 
process."  And then I said that, "I will settle then for a 
tripartite meeting, because I spoke to you alone.  I went 
somewhere else and I got a different story, so let us meet."  
And yes, of course subsequently we met here in Sandton 
and again I reiterated that I do not get involved in 
procurement by any of the services, as long as they 
procure in accordance with the applicable prescripts, 
whether applicable with any other legislation that regulates 
20 
procurement.  And I ended up in leaving that particular 
meeting 
and 
they 
give 
...[indistinct] 
behind 
with 
Mr 
Mbindwane. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Now, so Mr Mbindwane 
had been involved in procurement at all?  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 83 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   He was involved.  That is ... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But should he have been involved?   
DR DINTWE:   No, he should not have.  He is a ministerial 
special advisor.  Even the minister, I mean, for that matter 
never really gets involved in ...  That is exactly what they 
tell us.  And in this instance I have to be very clear that 
even Minister Mbalula has never, ever discussed this 
matter with myself.  It was the advisor who was pushing for 
this. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  And the relevant crime 
10 
intelligence unit that would have been responsible for the 
purchase of this grabber, was it ever consulted?  Did you 
investigate this issue?  
DR DINTWE:   I investigated it though they were never 
...[indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   They didn't even know?  
DR DINTWE:   They didn't even know that there was a 
process to a trial and a purchase of this particular 
equipment. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Now, you say ... 
20 
DR DINTWE:   And – sorry, sorry.  This could be very much 
important to say that if I'm hacking surveillance in crime 
intelligence journals, they call me end user.  In other 
words, I am the one who initiates the process, who go to 
the procurement people and tell them that I am in need of 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 84 of 317 
 
these three bottles of water and then they will conduct 
their own research, source the prices and then buy.  So I 
am an end user.  I must initiate.  It cannot be initiated 
anywhere else.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Now, you say in paragraph 
143 that:  
"Media reports suggest that the money was, in fact, 
intended to be utilised for vote-buying during the 
mentioned ANC conference.  I cannot comment on 
the correctness of these reports other than to note 
10 
that the procurement process was stopped when 
IPID became aware of the irregularities and raised 
a query." 
 
Is that – are those comments an accurate reflection 
of where you stand in relation to your own knowledge?   
DR DINTWE:   It is correct and that is the reason why I 
said that information should not be misconstrued for 
evidence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  So you were relying on 
media reports.  You had a suspicion.  Those suspicions 
20 
were corroborated but you have no knowledge of that fact, 
of the vote-buying. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  But you say that that matter 
is under investigation by IPID. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 85 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, it was under investigation and there 
was also litigation with regard to that particular matter, in 
fact, yes.  There was a finding per se – I mean, a judgment 
which states that those documents must be declassified. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now, well, that is the point.  IPID 
was investigating the series of events, right?   
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Were they able to access the 
relevant documentation?   
DR DINTWE:   Not at that stage. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Not at that stage.  Before the court 
case?  
DR DINTWE:   Before the court case, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And how did this affect their ability 
to 
investigate 
this 
obvious 
– 
well, 
certainly 
obvious 
allegations of criminality?  
DR DINTWE:   The investigation could not even take off as 
far as I know, because there was an application by police 
management, including Mr Mbindwane, to say that IPID 
cannot have access.  And I think that interdict was, you 
20 
know, issued until there was an appeal or a review as far 
as that decision was concerned, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now, all these are serious 
allegations.  Are they currently still under investigation?   
DR DINTWE:   We know a lot more now.  But even at that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 86 of 317 
 
stage as the office we knew more than what IPID knew 
because we were in possession of these documents. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And is your office 
investigating the matter?  
DR DINTWE:   Yes, our office also got involved in the 
investigation of that particular matter.  Remember that I 
always say, Chairperson, that the other agents cannot stop 
the investigation on our behalf or at our instance, because 
we are reporting to different authorities.  So IPID was 
conducting a criminal investigation.  We were conducting, 
10 
if you'd like, oversight investigation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And would you have reported your 
investigations 
through 
the 
various 
instances 
in 
your 
certificates or would you do that in the future?  
DR DINTWE:   It will be in the certificate, this one, 
because it is a 2017 matter, so it will be in the 2017/2018. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So all this has been reported to 
Parliament? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  Yes, that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the response? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   No, there was not a response as far as that 
is concerned.  But I think that even the ANC members in 
that committee were really concerned and worried about 
what I have reported ...[indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was this reported to you, this 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 87 of 317 
 
concern? 
DR DINTWE:   Ja, the concerns.  So it will be during the 
deliberations, 
during 
presentation 
when 
they 
started 
comments and so forth to say that this is worrisome that it 
is actually happening. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  So did you make a 
presentation on the basis of your certificate to the JSCI in 
relation to this? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  I did that, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what ...?  Well, I suppose the 
10 
proceedings are top secret.  Is that not correct?   
DR DINTWE:   Ja, they are. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So we will consider that position 
and deal with it but maybe the Chair wants to ask a 
question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I'll ask the question.  You know 
what you would have said to the committee.  You cannot 
tell us what the committee said, but what you can tell us is 
whether subsequently there was anything you learnt there 
which indicates that the committee has done something 
20 
about it. 
DR DINTWE:   I do not think I clearly understand your 
question, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I am trying to deal with the 
problem that you cannot tell us what the committee says, 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 88 of 317 
 
but you can tell us if indications are that something has 
been done. 
DR DINTWE:   Okay.  Now ... 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of what you have observed 
since then. 
DR DINTWE:   The other part then happens in the public 
domain. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  It displayed itself, so I do not have 
reservations informing the committee what happened then 
10 
about this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   I think two issues that I want to mention, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   Now, during the time that it was reported in 
the public domain there was an expression by senior ANC 
officials who are not even in Parliament to say that this is 
worrisome and these monies are used to fuel the factions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Factions. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   Yes.  In the ANC and some of them were 
also worried to say that to what extent can Intelligence be 
involved in the internal for that event, because that is an 
internal ANC event, it is not a government – government 
event. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 89 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
DR DINTWE:   There is confirmation that officials of Crime 
Intelligence were even removed from NASREC and they 
were told to go a little bit far because they were causing 
problems for that particular conference, but now after the 
Court decision this issue came to the fore again, and now 
there are two incorrect narratives that have been created 
about this particular issue. 
That the declassification of the documents revealed 
two 
things 
that 
General 
Sithole 
never 
signed 
the 
10 
procurement of this grabber of R45million.  The second 
issue that we lost the declassification is that General 
Sithole kept on telling the – my other managers, the 
management that you can do this as long as you comply 
with procurement prescripts.   
So he kept saying those two things but the problem 
is that the narrative that was being built, whilst this was 
declassified 
was 
that 
General 
Sithole 
signed 
the 
submission and that he could have allowed a deviation, but 
it never really reached a particular stage.  
20 
The other issue which is very important and critical 
to National Securities, but it is in the public domain, again, 
where Minister Cele accused or said that this grabber with 
the R45million was also - could also have been used to 
intercept the emails of the then Deputy President of the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 90 of 317 
 
ANC but that event took place way before we were involved 
in 
that 
investigation, 
way 
before 
this 
attempted 
procurement.  
So those are the issues, the narratives that are 
incorrect, and they've played themselves out now in the 
public domain. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the correct position, at least 
the position evidence by the documents now declassified 
and public was at least that General Sithole did not 
approve. 
10 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, you deal in paragraph 144 
Dr Dintwe with a new issue and that is an issue involving 
the same company, Ivane’s company and you deal with a 
different form of corruption or malfeasance in relation to 
information 
technology, 
solutions 
for 
Intelligence 
collection. Could you tell the Chair briefly about what 
happened here, you deal with in paragraph 144 and 145 of 
your statement? 
DR DINTWE:   Yeah, so this is the general and similar 
20 
principle that they procure irregularly and sometimes goods 
are not delivered, the problem that I have expressed.  But 
here let's say that they change the tact, they changed 
modus operandi. 
In this instance they call for quotations and when 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 91 of 317 
 
we analysed these quotations, there were certain facts, 
which came to the fore.  The first one being that the font 
the manner, the structure of the quotations was actually 
similar. The other concern or what we established was that 
one of the companies that provided one of the quotations 
was not even involved on this, they told us that they are an 
HR consultancy company, and they say that they have 
never even sold an equipment of that particular nature. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright but just stop there, I am 
sorry to do this, but I think maybe you and I are out of sync 
10 
here. I think you are dealing here with paragraphs 146 and 
147 the voice encryption system.  
DR DINTWE:   Oh, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you could go back please to 
paragraph 144 where there was a quotation from the 
Council for Scientific Industrial Research, CSIR, for the 
amount of R7million for a particular software solution, and 
tell the Chair about that incident please, and then we will 
get on to the voice encryption system. 
DR DINTWE:   Alright now…[intervene] 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So at the top of page 820. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, I see that look CSIR is a government 
entity.  It is something on those lines and the researchers 
there will develop some of the solutions for even for State 
information technology agencies or for other government 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 92 of 317 
 
departments.  So in this instance, they had offered the 
Crime Intelligence that we could develop this kind of IT 
solution for yourselves, and it was going to be at around 
R7million but now that offer was then ignored and SUB-CI 
then called for the other potential over and above what 
CSIR would have offered them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For R33million.  
DR DINTWE:   For R33million now this time around. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but to make matters worse, 
you then did an investigation to find out whether this IT 
10 
solution had ever been actually installed. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson I did that and I 
visited personally with members of my office, visited. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what did you discover? 
DR DINTWE:   We discovered that it was never delivered to 
Crime Intelligence.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So quotations go out for an IT 
solution CSIR, say we are provided for R7million. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This particular company says we 
20 
will give it to you for R33million. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is procured from this company, in 
inverted commas. 
DR DINTWE:   It is procured in inverted commas, monies 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 93 of 317 
 
are paid. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Monies are paid but nothing is 
installed on your finding. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you relate that your personal 
visit and your personal investigations in paragraph 145 and 
you say you were informed that the original product no 
longer existed and had since been replaced but you 
couldn't be shown the replacement either, is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:   I could not be shown a replacement as well, 
10 
Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So again, it's just theft.  
DR DINTWE:   Pure theft. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So your conclusion was in 
paragraph 
145, 
that 
the 
amount 
of 
R73million 
was 
fraudulently paid from Crime Intelligence to this company 
for a non-existent product and you then say: 
“IPID has since been investigating this matter that 
20 
has to go it again, not succeeded in securing 
pertinent 
classified 
documents 
relevant 
to 
its 
investigation.” 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What would be secret about these 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 94 of 317 
 
procurement documents? 
DR DINTWE:   I am arguing always argue that you cannot 
over classify this issue, just a pure procurement issue.  
There is nothing National Security about it, there is nothing 
Intelligence about it, it is like procuring a car. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, and then on paragraphs 146 
and 147 on page 820 and following, you deal with the voice 
encryption system, procurement process, what happened 
there just briefly?  You talk about cover quoting. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, but it is the same company now, this 
10 
company gets involved in all these kinds of procurement, 
which I can supplies him and irregular instances not even 
getting delivery but in this instance that system - oh, but 
on the paragraph I am talking about flouting of their 
procurement regulations again. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Which was also existent you say in 
relation to the previous issue that you have discussed the 
software solution, you said that prescripts were not 
followed. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Here prescripts were also not 
followed in relation to the voice encryption system where it 
was procured for about R23 million. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say that all manner of 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 95 of 317 
 
procurement requirements were flouted. 
DR DINTWE:   I submit that Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you say: 
“The system was not procured for any Crime 
Intelligence 
section 
responsible 
for 
any 
counterintelligence function.” 
Is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, that is correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, but…[intervene] 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, so in the instance where I said 
10 
Chairperson, that an end user will be somebody who is 
responsible for that particular thing.  So if you say that it is 
a voice encryption, if you say it is a grabber and we are 
looking at some body as surveillance, you know, and all 
those an issues, but the end user will be somebody 
somewhere. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The cost of this procurement, you 
say in paragraph 146, was R23million.  
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   However you investigated the 
20 
matter and you saw competing quotes one for R58million, 
were those genuine competing quotes? 
DR DINTWE:   They were not genuine and as I say the 
paragraph that we picked up some of the other thing, for 
example, in one of those, there was no VAT number, V-A-T 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 96 of 317 
 
number and it was also apparent that the latter two 
quotations 
were 
for 
purposes 
of 
creating 
fictitious 
competition, 
also 
referred 
to 
as 
cover 
quoting, 
in 
contravention of their applicable Treasury regulations. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that - those were your findings 
in investigating the facts. 
DR DINTWE:   Those were my findings, because the name 
of the director of Company B was also the director of 
Company C. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, alright so a related company 
10 
issues a quote for R58million and I understand what you 
mean by cover quoting it makes the quote for R23 million 
look reasonable.  
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that the point, you are making? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, I must place on record that 
we have a response from the company, the director who is 
Ivana but what they say in this response is: 
“We are giving you this information, we do not know 
20 
whether it is classified or not that is your problem.” 
They say to us.  So as a precaution, we have had to 
consult with the Director General of the SSA, the acting 
Director, General, who first see whether we can deal with 
the whole part, and if so, how we can deal with it. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 97 of 317 
 
So I am not in a position to put that now, we must 
go through the process first and then we will put it up for 
you.  But we might just put it up to you anyway under the 
rubric that it is for your eyes, only.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Can we move on then on page 
8712 to the failure of oversight over the Intelligence 
Services.  Now we have dealt with this piecemeal in 
several parts of your affidavit to date but if you could just 
summarise what you say, in paragraphs, 148 to 150 please, 
10 
and you can do it in summary form because we have dealt 
with these issues. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, and I might need to on paragraph 148, 
that I am not executing that failure only to the Joint 
Standing Committee on Intelligence.  I am saying that we 
have failed also as the OIGI and I think that I would have 
provided reasons what I think were the reasons behind that 
because we were weakened and all those other things but 
the failure there of oversight over this organisation is also 
attributable to us as the office.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, but in relation to that you 
have given evidence to the Chair about your independence, 
or lack of independence, the structural and organisational 
challenges 
you 
face 
as 
the 
office 
of 
the 
OGI 
its 
capacitation and funding, we have dealt with that evidence 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 98 of 317 
 
it is all there. You ask the question in page 8748, you say: 
“The 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
Commission 
may 
reasonably ask how weaponisation and fraud and 
corruption 
in 
the 
Intelligence 
Services 
was 
permitted to continue in the face of the oversight 
responsibilities which should have been exercised 
by the OIGI, that is your office, and what the 
reasons for the failure of such oversight was in the 
circumstances.” 
So you are dealing here with a finger that might be pointed 
10 
at your office.  
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have dealt with issues in 
relation to this earlier in your statement last time you 
appeared before the Chair.  But would the same comments 
that you make now apply to the JSCI with the JSCI is not 
unrelated in this series of events? 
DR DINTWE:   It is related and I think that is where 
previously I said to the Chairperson that no one and no 
one within this fraternity should come to you and mislead 
20 
you that we were not aware of this because on paragraph 
149 I am dealing with the certificates and I am also 
referring to what I would have sent, and I think that I am 
also attaching the letters that will accompany those 
certificates to the Joint Committee on Intelligence. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 99 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say in paragraph 149 if I may 
just read it for the sake of time: 
“The certificates that have been produced and 
presented to the heads of the Intelligence Services, 
the Ministers of the three departments, and the 
JSCI over a period of time, reflect the many 
findings of wrongdoing by the Intelligence Services 
made by my office.  Monies have been stolen from 
the Intelligence Services and in certain instances, 
these monies were used to fund parallel Intelligence 
10 
capacities and to achieve political ends and or to 
fight factional battles. These certificates of different 
Intelligence Services that were issued during my 
tenure 
indicate 
how 
the 
resources 
of 
the 
Intelligence Services were misused, stolen and 
squandered.  These certificates are annexed.” 
Well, they are in the documentation that you will provide to 
the Chair in due course hopefully sooner rather than later. 
You list in paragraph 149.1, 149.2 and 149.3 you list and 
identify the certificates for the years 2016,2017,2018, 2019 
20 
for the three Intelligence structures. That is Defence 
Intelligence, Crime Intelligence and the State Security 
Agency. 
DR DINTWE:   I confirmed that Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 100 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the position that - I am just quickly 
having a look at those paragraphs, is the position that in 
regard to each service that falls under your jurisdiction, 
you have provided certificates for the same period, in 
terms of years, financial years? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph one...[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe – I may be taking you back 
Dr Dintwe but you mentioned under the failure of oversight 
10 
over the Intelligence Services, that you include your own 
office, that it also failed and then you said you could give 
reasons you were weakened and so on.  It may be that you 
dealt with it earlier on but I have forgotten, can you just 
tell me, this is why the reasons why you say your office 
failed? 
DR DINTWE:   It is because Chairperson I mean, if you get 
an office and you get appointed, there is an expectation 
that you should come up with a turnaround general 
strategy and without deviating looking at any reasons to 
20 
justify that I am glad to say that maybe we could even have 
pushed more than this.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  And I know the attitude of the Chairperson I 
have heard you saying, telling other people we will 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 101 of 317 
 
normally say that, but what did you do with the little that 
you had?  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   So I should not come here and say that we 
melt down, we have really got broken down, to me I see 
that as a failure of the OIGI. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, no, I am glad you say that 
because, 
you 
know, 
with 
these 
problems 
that 
the 
Commission is looking at to face the country, we will not 
solve them until - unless people who are leaders are 
10 
prepared to look at themselves, look at their own roles and 
say, I know, I accept that from my side I did not do enough 
here and going forward, this is what I am committed to 
doing to make sure that yesterday or tomorrow is not the 
same as yesterday, you know.  
If we are not prepared to do that, and if leaders are 
not prepared to do that people who are in positions are not 
prepared to do that there is not going to be a change. So I 
am always glad when a leader, somebody in charge does 
not just look at what others have done wrong, but also 
20 
says, have I done enough on my side and what can I do 
differently going forward?  So I am happy that you have 
said that. 
DR DINTWE:   And then there is an example, which further 
elucidate that Chairperson 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 102 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson but for instance, 
over this four years I have struggled to get information, 
when in fact, the oversight act criminalises a refusal by 
any person in decent physical services and I always, you 
know, wanted to regard that as a last resort.  So that is – 
this is an example of a lapse on our side and because it 
does not need money, it needs me to cross the roads, the 
nearest police station, open a case and not wait, not write 
four letters before I can get one signal as an information.  
So we should not be myopic, about the challenges 
10 
facing the office we could have done more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In fact, have you sought to secure 
your powers through Court intervention? 
DR DINTWE:   I have done with the litigation that I would 
have referred to earlier. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 151, on page 822, Dr 
Dintwe, 
you 
deal 
with 
the 
failure 
to 
implement 
the 
recommendations of the OIGI, you have dealt with this 
issue in questions, in answers to questions to the Chair.  
20 
You say at the bottom of paragraph 151: 
“Recommendations made and reports produced by 
the OIGI are largely ignored by the Ministry and the 
Director Generals of the Intelligence Services.” 
Would that comment, apply equally to the JSCI? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 103 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson, there is this 
legal issue that I think that maybe during the arguments, 
the closing arguments maybe the legal team will deal with 
it because if a recommendation is developed and sent to 
their accounting officer for implementation, can we really 
bemoan the failure of the implementation and place it at 
the door of the legislature?  I think that that distinction 
should be made, I think that the Joint Standing Committee 
on Intelligence should only hold the DG’s accountable, as 
to the extent that they fail to implement, because these 
10 
other issues are administrative decisions and so forth, 
which are a sole preview or province of the director, 
Director General's.  I do not know if the if that argument is 
raised whether it will be acceptable, but I did not want to 
venture into that myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, that that is fine.  I mean, the 
- one has got to look at what each body or functionary is 
required to do by law and did they do what they are 
required to do by law or what they were empowered to do 
but did not do.   
20 
So you look at the committee and say what is there 
role, what were they employed to do, what were they apply 
to do, what is it that they did, and what is it that they could 
have done and you look at there the DG’s as well, if they 
should have pursued certain issues with DG’s and they did 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 104 of 317 
 
not then they have valid reasons for not pursuing those 
issues, those are the types of issues, questions that one 
looks at. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And so perhaps my question was 
put in to general a term, as I understand, what you are 
saying is that the Chair has now pointed out is that many 
of your recommendations and reports would be directed 
specifically at functional officers, for example, the Ministry 
and the Director Generals of Intelligence Services, it would 
be 
their 
duty 
to 
consider 
your 
reports 
and 
10 
recommendations and where appropriate to implement. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson, I think that is 
what – not I think rather than to say that the majority of the 
recommendations will go to the accounting officers for 
implementation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but to the extent that they are 
not implemented an oversight body, such as yourself and 
the JSCI, would then come into play and be accountable 
for 
the 
failure 
to 
exercise 
oversight 
over 
the 
non-
implementation of your recommendations. 
20 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct and I think that also in the 
spirit 
of 
legislation, 
you 
remember 
there 
is 
superintendence a role of the Ministers as well.  So in any 
event, if a decision is done, I have recommended to the DG 
the Minister is aware of that recommendation.  I think that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 105 of 317 
 
her role eventually in that office superintendence so she 
has 
more 
powers 
to 
us 
the 
DG, 
why 
are 
you 
not 
implementing this? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then in paragraph 153, you 
say:  
“It is my submission, that it is necessary to provide 
appropriate enforcement mechanisms to the OIGI to 
ensure that its recommendations are implemented, 
and that the failure to do so should be visited with 
serious penalties.” 
10 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, that is that is my submission. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As for your recommendation, the 
Chair will have to think about that further.  Chair it is 1 
o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see it is 1 o'clock.  Do you have an 
idea how much more time you need because if for example, 
you were to be done in 30 minutes, maybe we could delay 
taking lunch and then take lunch after you are finished but 
if it is going to be longer then we maybe could take lunch?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I would be at least another hour 
20 
and I will try my best to finish within that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine let us take the 
lunch adjournment then we will resume at two. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay I have communicated this to 
the next…[intervene] 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 106 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine, so then 3 o’clock would 
be - they could be here.  Okay, we take the lunch 
adjournment, we adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Dr Dintwe much of 
what follows to the conclusion of your affidavit we have dealt 
with albeit piecemeal and out of order already so given the 
constraints that we have in regard to time I am going to 
10 
summarise and extract what I think are important passages 
from your affidavit of course if I leave anything out you will 
take me to task on that issue and intervene. 
 
You deal in paragraph 154 on page 822. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes I – may I please address the Chairperson 
on one point? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Of course. 
DR DINTWE:  In less than a minute.  I did not – I know I am 
surprising the evidence leader I just deliberately did not want 
to discuss this issue with him. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  I want to provide the commission with the date 
on which the submission was signed with regard to the 26 
managers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 107 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:  It just that – it is just that part. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just that – okay no that is fine. 
DR DINTWE:  It was signed on 6 March 2021.  Minister 
approved appointments on the 6 March 2021. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So… 
DR DINTWE:  For the 26 appointments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What document was that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is a submission you say.  Is that 
the submission to the Minister? 
10 
DR DINTWE:  No, no it is an approval. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the actual – the approval of the 
appointment. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the 26 managers. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes on 6 March but on the 26 t h of March 
something happened there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
DR DINTWE:  The – we have what we call a budget 
controller. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  The budget controller wrote to the Minister 
and the DG – the acting DG then saying that most of the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 108 of 317 
 
posts are not funded or were not funded so he was 
recommending that they should be put on hold until due 
diligence was completed.  But that was just … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  A recommendation from the budget controller. 
What we are sitting with it is an approval which is signed on 
the 6t h of March. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  On the 6t h of March. 
DR DINTWE:  6t h of March 2021. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The actual appointment is made by what – 
10 
by – by who – by the DG but the – he must get the approval 
of the Minister or is it the Minister who makes the 
appointment? 
DR DINTWE:  In terms of the signatories the acting DG signs 
as a recommender. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  So – so you will have a compiler Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja 
DR DINTWE:  And then you will have maybe assessed level 
of recommendation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Recommended. 
DR DINTWE:  Maybe from the HR person and then you will 
have the acting DG then who was supposed to recommend – 
he did not do it he raised some concerns and then you have 
got an approval by the Minister dated 6 March. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 109 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So you say in regard to these 26 
managers the acting DG did not recommend – did not sign – 
he had some issues? 
DR DINTWE:  Yes. So what he did is that he scratch both 
sides. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  And then he wrote – ja he wrote amended. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  So which means that in other words why do we 
not say that he chose to – to abstain. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Abstain – to abstain.  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is like spoiling your – your ballot.  
DR DINTWE:  Yes.  Yes.  He spoilt it.   He spoiled his ballot. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He spoilt his ballot.  Okay but the – the 
Minister then approved but it means if I understand you 
correctly in approving the Minister is appointing. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes the people are occupying as we know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  The positions. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius.  So you do not know what the 
response was to the budget controller’s consent. 
DR DINTWE:  No we did not know that.  What we know is 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 110 of 317 
 
that the Minister upon signing that she also made comments 
– handwritten comments and one of the comments there was 
that the concerns raised by the acting DG will be discussed 
between herself and the DG. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
DR DINTWE:  That is all what we know now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  But I would have thought that 
the appointing authority before he or she appoints would 
need to satisfy themselves whether there is budget for these 
posts. 
10 
DR DINTWE:  That is an ideal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  And I think that the conclusion that I am able 
to draw 
now is that she appointed 
and in fact the 
recommendation of the budget controller was ignored. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh alright.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  On page 822 at the 
bottom of the page you deal with the issue of limited access 
to information and you have throughout your evidence have 
raised the issue of the – in regard to the fact that you and 
20 
law enforcement agencies do not have free access to 
information enabling you to do your job adequately.   
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let alone ideally. In paragraph 154 
you say: 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 111 of 317 
 
“Members of my office and I have been 
allowed only restricted or managed access to 
information from the Director Generals and 
other heads of services evidenced by the 
protracted 
delays 
and 
or 
their 
lack 
of 
response 
to 
our 
numerous 
requests 
for 
information.” 
Is that a fair summary of the position? 
DR DINTWE:  It is the summary of the – of our submission 
Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say in paragraph 155: 
“In light of the consistent constructive refusal 
and I will ask you what you mean by that in a 
moment to provide information on the part of 
the heads of services I have come to the 
conclusion that there has been a conscious 
move on their part to progressively and 
incrementally restrict or manage my access 
to information in order to frustrate the OIGI’s 
Intelligence Services oversight mandate.” 
20 
 
Do you persist with that contention? 
DR DINTWE:  Yes I still stand by that contention. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  When you talk about constructive 
refusal what do you mean. 
DR DINTWE:  And I can only explain it but we borrowed that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 112 of 317 
 
word from a constructive dismissal in terms of the labour 
relations you know legislation to say that on face value you 
cannot say it is a dismissal but it is you know done in such a 
manner that it could confuse other people. 
 
So what I mean is that in most cases we will still be 
given information but where there is refusal you will not get 
a letter which says that we will not give you that information.  
Let me make an example. 
 
I will have a letter that – that will reach the 
commission at a later stage where I was requesting 
10 
information with regard to the deployment of operatives at 
party political events for instance. And the letter that I got in 
response was to say that may you please explain how this 
request fall – falls under your mandate.  So I had to explain 
back to them to say that apart from monitoring and all those 
other issues I also have a function called investigation which 
includes maladministration which includes corruption but 
which also includes abuse of power.  Because at that stage I 
had received complain from one of the political parties who 
were saying that we do not even want this number of 
20 
intelligence operatives attending our events.  So – so 
constructive because they will not say that – we are not 
giving it to you but they will say explain to us how does it fit 
into your mandate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So whilst there may not always be a 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 113 of 317 
 
direct refusal of information the conduct of the party from 
whom information is sought might make it clear that you are 
not going to get the information whatever you do. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you told me last time that you are not 
a lawyer but constructive refusal seems also consistent with 
a judgment of the Supreme Court of Appeal that Mr Pretorius 
will probably remember where the Supreme Court of Appeal 
says well if a judge has given a judgment and the party who 
lost applies for leave to appeal and that application for leave 
10 
to appeal is not adjudicated for a long time it is constructive 
refusal of leave to appeal. So – so it has not been decided 
the Judge has not decided that he is refusing leave but 
because it is left hanging for too long it is constructive 
refusal of leave to appeal. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is some interesting example. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes Chairperson.  Can I mention Chairperson 
that this is my third year of completing an undergraduate 
degree in law and a LLB 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is good. 
20 
DR DINTWE:  Yes.  So I just decided to study that yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh no that is good – so good. 
DR DINTWE:  So I am not a lawyer but I do 00:10:56 of law. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja well I have every reason to believe you 
are going to pass and pass well. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 114 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:  Thank you Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We may be the opposite on the other 
hand.   
CHAIRPERSON:  One day. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Lawyers could not con students of 
law.  Paragraph 156 you mention that: 
“In crime intelligence there appears to be a 
reluctance on the part of the divisional 
commissioner’s office to pursue disciplinary 
processes against senior member implicated 
10 
in infractions.” 
 
Is that consistent with your findings? 
DR DINTWE:  It is consistent with my findings Chairperson 
and I think that will also have submissions so affidavit in our 
possession where junior members says that I would have 
stolen this particular amount but it will just be a fraction of 
the amount stolen by somebody senior.  And they just get 
you know they just dismiss them in a short sort of time so 
there is a pattern there and it is our observation and finding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also does it mean there seems to be a 
20 
culture that ah this is small why – why are you bothering 
about it somebody else has taken much more.  Is that part of 
the – of what you are saying that there is that culture with 
the junior members or not? 
DR DINTWE:  Some of them may not take that angle. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 115 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  In arguing they will almost admit – let us say 
they will confess. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  And say that okay I am dismissed – I am here 
– I have stolen but there is somebody somewhere who it is 
known that they would have stolen more than myself but it is 
not – he is not saying that he should not have been 
dismissed.  They only say that our dismissal happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So quickly. 
10 
DR DINTWE:  So quickly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  If compared to senior managers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraphs 158 and 159 on page 
824 you deal with your conclusion that there has been some 
resistance by the intelligence services and you talking there 
crime intelligence I understand to criminal investigation by 
law enforcement agencies.  And you say in paragraph 159: 
“The law enforcement agencies in particular 
20 
IPID and the DPCI that is the Hawks have 
been struggling to investigate and prosecute 
criminal cases of malfeasance and corruption 
committed by crime intelligence officials or 
committed by members of the public with the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 116 of 317 
 
assistance 
of 
the 
officials 
of 
crime 
intelligence.” 
 
And you talk about investigations being stalled or 
delayed by amongst other things refusal to declassify 
documents.  Is that consistent with you experience and 
findings? 
DR DINTWE:  It is consistent with our findings Chairperson 
without mentioning names I think that the Chairperson will be 
aware that there is a former head of crime intelligence who 
is now convicted.  And there is a matter which is enrolled 
10 
which happened more than ten years ago.  So you ask 
yourself why could you not just enrol this particular matter at 
that particular stage. But there is something again where we 
get – we get approached by some of there is this other 
captain who comes to us and he complains – he writes we 
have the file and he says I may have committed this 
particular crime and whatever however our preference – my 
preference is that it is you who should investigate us. So 
they know that we can only make recommendations and he 
even went to an extent because you ask them what kind of 
20 
recourse or recommendation that you are wishing for and he 
says that if you have those powers could you please tell IPID 
that they did not have powers to investigate myself because 
I am incriminating 00:15:23.  So they get to choose between 
these two institutions. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 117 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  On page 824 paragraph 158 you deal 
with the concerted effort as you put it by management of 
crime intelligence to ensure that pending cases do not off 
the ground and avoid detection by oversight bodies.  And you 
go so far as to say it had become clear that the implicated 
persons and entities enjoy the continued protection of the 
divisional management.  You have just referred to one 
exception and General Lazarus and the proceedings against 
him would be another exception. 
DR DINTWE:  That will be another exception Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Matters were pursued against him. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And of course there may be others 
but 
you 
deal 
with 
your 
findings 
I 
presume 
of 
your 
investigations and summarise those in paragraph 159, am I 
correct? 
DR DINTWE:  You are correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And you then go on in 
paragraph 160 on page 824 and following to deal with in 
general 
terms 
the 
refusal 
of 
intelligence 
services 
to 
20 
declassify information that relates to suspicious transactions 
or criminality and you have given examples and you have 
stated that on a few occasions in your evidence.  But for 
example in paragraph 161 you deal with the contention that 
it would be palpably wrong for intelligence services to hide 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 118 of 317 
 
behind classification of documents in instances of suspicion 
of criminality.  Procurement issues for example need not be 
regarded as secret and if there are secret elements they 
could be redacted, am I correct? 
DR DINTWE:  You are – you are correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Issues relating to safe houses and I 
am told by you that many of those issues are contained in 
documents which are refused declassification.  How could 
that be dealt with? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct there is another case that we 
10 
were involved in and I think it is one of the enrolled matters 
now where one of the senior managers traded in his own 
personal vehicle there was a shortfall so he used the monies 
from a service from a particular service to pay for that 
particular shortfall and this case could not be concluded.  
The investigation was concluded long time ago but they 
could not prosecute merely because that administrative part 
was classified also and it has always been hidden under 
information that on face value one may think that it is 
intelligence and it is not intelligence at all – it is a pure 
20 
criminality and theft of state funds. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in relation to safe houses I think 
you suggested in consultation that one could just redact the 
address of that. 
DR DINTWE:  You could do that.  In the documents that I will 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 119 of 317 
 
be submitted or that are in my bundle Chairperson which is 
not in front of us now is that I make an example of them 
purchasing groceries from one of the supermarkets that we 
all go to and they classify that particular submission.  
Instead of just removing the house number and the address 
where these things will be taken to because it is a safe 
house yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  A safe house.  Then in paragraph 163 
you deal with the mis-document and that document as I 
understand it adopted by cabinet on 4 December 1996 is 
10 
available on the internet. 
DR DINTWE:  It is available and it – they only write or wrote 
restricted.  Now restricted documents are not necessarily 
classified documents. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event you say in paragraph 
163  
“The mis-document deals with classification 
and 
declassification 
of 
information. 
 
Of 
particular relevance to the issue at hand as 
paragraph 3 of the mis-document which sets 
20 
out 
guidelines 
on 
the 
procedure 
for 
classification 
and 
the 
declassification 
of 
classified documents.” 
 
And insofar as it is necessary we can deal with that 
in submissions to you Chair. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 120 of 317 
 
“The mis-document provides an explanation 
on classification documents and in particular 
paragraph 
3.4 
gives 
an 
injunction 
that 
security measures are not intended and 
should 
not 
be 
applied 
to 
cover 
up 
maladministration, corruption, criminal action 
etcetera or to protect individuals/officials 
involved in such cases.” 
 
The point about that is that the mis-document 
precludes classification in categories far wider than just 
10 
corruption 
and 
criminal 
action. 
 
It 
includes 
mis-
maladministration and I think regulation 3 of the Security 
Services document goes so far as to say that classification 
cannot be used to preclude or prevent embarrassment to 
officials.  Words to that effect I may not have the precise 
words but the point I – as I have – understand from mis is 
that classification is precluded or prevented or prohibited in 
broader range of cases than simple corruption and criminal. 
DR DINTWE:  I confirm that that is our proposition 
Chairperson. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say in paragraph 165  
“The mis-document enjoins the head of an 
institution 
to 
test 
on 
a 
regular 
basis 
classification of documents generated in the 
institution and further provides that over 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 121 of 317 
 
classification of documents must be guarded 
against.” 
 
It seems that the point that is made there is the duty 
to manage classification as an on-going duty.  It is not as if a 
document once classified it remains classified forever.  Is 
that correct? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson and maybe one 
should hasten to add that what is a secret today may no 
longer – may not be a secret two weeks or two months to 
come you know.  So that is why it enjoins the head of 
10 
services to keep on testing or retesting and identifying those 
that – those issues that should remain classified and those 
that need to be declassified. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in paragraph 167 you refer to the 
judgment of the constitutional court in the Independent 
newspaper versus Minister for intelligence case where the 
Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke laid down several factors to 
be considered when the disclosure of classified documents is 
being dealt with and he lists there a number of factors that 
must be considered when a document which is formerly 
20 
classified is sought to be declassified. 
DR DINTWE:  That is still our submission Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say in any event in 
paragraph 170 it has been said that members of IPID as is 
the case with members of the OIGI have security clearance 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 122 of 317 
 
to the level of top secret.   
 
So there would be no reason for refusing classified 
documents to you.  The law prohibits that anyway but to 
IPID.  They have security clearance anyway as I understand. 
DR DINTWE:  They do have that Chairperson.  There are 
often some internal arrangements such as if one of the 
investigators is still waiting for the re-vetting and so forth 
that they remove them from cases of that – of that nature.  
But they are always alive to the requirement that only people 
with top secret should access these documents in crime 
10 
intelligence environment.  I think that is now happening also 
with the investigative directorate.  It is also happening with 
the Hawks as well to say that if you are waiting please step 
aside for a while until you are re-vetted. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And then in paragraph 171 
you put before the Chair several examples of the mis-use or 
overuse of classification. For example a case involving the 
procurement of blinds and curtains by crime intelligence 
officials.  Any reason why those documents should be 
classified? 
20 
DR DINTWE:  They should not have been classified at all.  
The matter is yet to be prosecuted because we have got the 
Centurion case number and the prosecutors could not 
proceed with that – with that issue.  Ten or so yes that is 
actually 2013 matter. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 123 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Ja and that is because of over-
classification of documents. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson it is over-
classification because it is purchasing of blinds; of curtains. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event you have given 
examples and you have spoken already of examples in 
relation to procurement of IT Solutions and the like.  They 
are there for the record.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So knowledge of curtains that were bought 
is a threat to National Security. 
10 
DR DINTWE:  It cannot – my argument is that it is the 
delivery thereof which becomes a National Security issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To a particular house. 
DR DINTWE:  Place – house yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But not the actual purchase of curtains. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  Chairperson I do not know if I am dealing with 
it but I save to say a critical issue.  We have been dealing 
with a case where the management of crime intelligence 
20 
decided to buy PPE for Covid – now I am talking masks, 
sanitizers and all of those sort of things and they decided to 
use what we call Secret Service account.  Now they have got 
two accounts the other one they call it open account the 
other one they call secret service account and you ask 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 124 of 317 
 
yourself because secret service account is used for cover 
operations. So where do you buy those because from where 
we are sitting as and when you go and buy them it is – it 
could be issued to anybody. What you have to worry about is 
that after the purchase who do you issue to and that is the 
level at which you should start protecting the identity of the 
recipients. But you should not be using the secret account to 
purchase – to purchase those things.  It is happening 
00:28:07. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Understood.  At paragraph 172 you 
10 
deal and that is on page 829 you deal with a – quite an 
ironic situation and that is where the law enforcement 
agencies are saying in relation to criminality, misconduct and 
the like only you as the officer of IGI have jurisdiction.  That 
seems rather strange in the context of the evidence you have 
given.  Could you explain the problems attached to that 
approach? 
DR DINTWE:  Let me explain that and – yes and it is a 
finding of the Mokgoro Commission where we have letters 
that were written by seasoned and very senior prosecutors to 
20 
our office to say that this and that other issue it is – it falls 
under your exclusive jurisdiction.  The police can never ever 
you know investigate a particular matter and I think that the 
Justice Mokgoro would have made a finding on it and it led 
to the removal of two of the senior – very senior prosecutors.  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 125 of 317 
 
So that is an example of that absurdity where people say 
that it is only you because I think that they – they have 
reconciled themselves with the fact that this office is so 
weakened that nothing will happen. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and you have restricted powers 
anyway.  You have no powers to prosecute. 
DR DINTWE:  I cannot prosecute. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Or be disciplined.  You have 
recommendation powers only. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Obviously investigative powers but 
ultimately powers of recommendation.  So do I understand 
it correctly, as you put it in paragraph 173, that: 
“In encountering the investigation efforts by 
IPID and the Hawks an argument is routinely 
profit that these law enforcement agencies do 
not have a legal mandate to investigate any 
conduct of criminality, fraud or malfeasance of 
persons within Crime Intelligence. 
This argument is profit on the basis that the 
20 
OITI 
has 
exclusive 
jurisdiction 
over 
the 
Intelligence 
Service. 
 
In 
bolstering 
this 
argument 
that 
has 
consistently 
been 
maintained that the OITI is the body that is 
legally mandated to have access to classified 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 126 of 317 
 
information of crime intelligence...” 
 
So do I understand it correctly that when it 
comes to prosecution of criminal acts, fraud and corruption 
within the State Security Agency, the response of some law 
enforcement officials is:  We have no jurisdiction.  Go to 
the IGI.  Is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  And Chairperson, this has 
led at a particular point where I convened what we called – 
we 
used 
the 
word 
trapper(?) 
tide(?), 
supper(?) 
tide 
workshop.  [Speaker not clear]  We sat around the table 
10 
because ...[indistinct] kept on using a term – they were 
referring to us as a clearing house.  So whenever I picked 
an investigator approaches them and say that I am 
investigating this particular matter, they will say that but 
the OIGI is our clearing house.   
 
In other words, they were giving me powers to 
decide which information to be given.  They said:  No, no, 
no.  We can provide the information but only subject to you 
going to an OIGI instead of you getting it directly from us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what was your response to 
20 
that? 
DR DINTWE:   I said that we cannot be regarded(?) with 
that and there were a lot of deliberations.  We then made 
resolution about that issue.  They withdrew(?) in that 
meeting, the usage of the concept and we signed those 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 127 of 317 
 
minutes.  They are part and parcel of the documents that I 
would have submitted to the Commission. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  You were told by IPID, and 
you relate this in paragraph 174, that this view that only 
the IPI can deal with the issue of criminality, fraud or 
malfeasance within Crime Intelligence, that this view was 
relied upon in the investigation of the criminal charges 
against the former Divisional Commissioner, General Mduli 
during or about 2011.  Is that correct?  Can you confirm 
that? 
10 
DR DINTWE:   I confirm that, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say it has been raised 
frequently during your tenure. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in response to what you have 
just told the Chair about the use of your offices as a 
clearing 
house 
for 
declassification 
which 
you 
have 
resisted.  Clearly, the duties will lie elsewhere.  Documents 
must be declassified at the Lord Chester and if they no 
longer deserve classification.   
20 
 
In paragraph 177, you say that: 
“In 2018 IPID approached the Minister of 
Police Minister Cele for his intervention who 
referred 
the 
matter 
to 
the 
OIGI 
for 
our 
comments regarding the possible impact of the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 128 of 317 
 
declassification of documents in question to 
national security...” 
 
In my letter dated 5 April 2018, is that letter you 
refer to? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  That is the letter that I 
referred to, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Addressed to the minister.  It will 
be in your documents.   
“I indicated that in instances of suspicion of 
criminality involving classified documents, 
10 
the 
Divisional 
Commissioner 
and/or 
the 
National Commissioner were duty bound to 
reconsider 
earlier 
classification 
of 
documents. 
Moreover, Crime Intelligence should, as a 
general 
rule, 
be 
inclined 
in 
favourable 
classification of documents in order to rely 
for 
proper 
and 
unhindered 
criminal 
investigation 
and 
possible 
criminal 
prosecution...” 
20 
 
So as I understand your position that the duty to 
monitor classification and to declassify documents were 
appropriate, cannot be roistered upon your office. 
DR DINTWE:   That is my submission.  That is correct, 
Chairperson. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 129 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 182, it seems that the 
JSCI became quite active in summoning you to appear 
before it.  What was the issue you were required to 
explain? 
DR DINTWE:   Which paragraph is that? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   182.  Concerning the leakage of 
information.  Just read the paragraph and tell the Chair, 
please, what point you are making there. 
DR DINTWE:   Alright.  Now there was a stage that General 
Jacobs wrote to Parliament and he titled(?) about a 
10 
complaint 
against 
the 
OIGI. 
 
There 
were 
several 
complaints.  The first one, he was complaining that I was 
threatening him.  There was a letter that I – that he thought 
it was a threat.  And secondly, that the information I our 
possession would find itself, you know, somewhere else.   
 
And in this instance, if I have to be specific, is 
that they were part of my certificate that were sent to the 
National Anti-Corruption Hotline of the Public Service 
Commission and I was called to come and account and 
explain whether it was not my office that would have 
20 
leaked that information.  I have no business leaking 
information to that because I have clear reporting lines.  
So I do not need to do that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay.  But anyway, there the JSCI 
was active in calling you to account. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 130 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct.  And my explanation was 
accepted. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
DR DINTWE:   And the allegations were seeing as being 
unsubstantiated.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Then in paragraph 183, on 
page 833 you deal with quite an important topic, really.  
And that is the role of the Auditor General in relation to the 
audit reports of Intelligence Services.  And you say in 
paragraph 184: 
10 
“In 
the 
audit 
reports 
of 
the 
Intelligence 
Services, the Attorney General of South Africa 
has always had to provide qualified audits 
owing to its inability to access certain areas of 
the Intelligence Services that were deemed to 
be sensitive for access by the AGSA...” 
 
And you end the paragraph by saying: 
“After 
protracted 
meetings 
with 
all 
stakeholders including the JSCI, it was agreed 
that the Officer of the Inspector General of 
20 
Intelligence should assist the Auditor General 
of South Africa in the auditing process of the 
Intelligence 
Services 
and 
in 
this 
manner 
provide 
some 
kind 
of 
combined 
audit 
assurance...” 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 131 of 317 
 
 
If you could tell the Chair, please, what is the 
problem here about auditing the Intelligence Services and 
whether the Officer of the Inspector General of Intelligence 
can usefully play a role, what has been tried, what works, 
what does not work.   
 
If you could just tell the Chair that, please.  You 
had come to some conclusions in paragraph 187 as to 
really a method that was tried to deal with the problem of 
security of information on the one hand and the need to 
audit on the other. 
10 
DR DINTWE:   Firstly Chairperson, this amount to a 
legislative 
difficulty 
because 
the 
Auditor 
General 
is 
mandated in terms of the founding legislation.  We are 
mandated with that.  In our legislation the Oversight Act, 
we are not given auditing mandate of function and if you 
like, whether you differentiate it between financial auditing 
performance, audit and all those other things.  We do not 
have any business to do that kind of work.   
 
But maybe let us ask ourselves.  If I had to do 
that 
particular 
work, 
to 
which 
report 
was 
going 
to 
20 
belong(?)?  Because the Auditor General will write their 
own report and we actually write what we call certificate.  
We 
report 
to 
different 
authorities 
in 
Parliament 
or 
committees, if you like, but the most important thing is that 
we do not even have auditing capacity.   
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 132 of 317 
 
 
I am not an auditor myself.  I do not have an 
auditor in my office and I do not see even Treasury 
allowing us to recruit auditors because by legislation we do 
not have that particular, you know, mandate. 
 
But the problem about it, about this practise 
called Combined Audit Assurance is that there was a sort 
of an agreement before my arrival where the Auditor 
General’s Office will then give the so-called working 
documents to our staff members but it is obvious that they 
will really, really conduct what is called a box ticking 
10 
exercise because they did not even understand, they 
cannot even get deeper into this particular issue. 
 
So it was really giving or creating lots and lots 
of problems.  One of those being that the Intelligence 
Services had even reached an agreement, I do not know 
how, with Auditor General but before you even start 
auditing us you can qualify us already or disclaimer or, you 
know, in terms of what they called slush funds in the SSA 
or what they call secret service account and they are 
taking about 10% of the budget allocated to those agents.   
20 
 
So it is the bulk of the money and they created 
deliberately so a blind spot for the Auditor General.  So it 
was only ourselves who could go there and I have to admit 
today that I do not think that we really had capacity to 
audit that particular portion of the budget. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 133 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So that very category of funds that 
you have investigated and shown to be the source of much 
corruption and blatant looting and theft, as you put it, is 
concealed from the Auditor General.  Is that right? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And of course, it stands to reason, 
as I think you said elsewhere, that monies would be 
allocated to those sectors of the SSA operations precisely 
to conceal, to keep them away from auditing processes. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say then in paragraph 187, 
notwithstanding that and notwithstanding the lack of skills 
and experience and expertise in the audit process, your 
office has observed that there was large scale flouting of 
rules and legal prescripts by the Intelligence Services.  It 
was observed that chaos and maladministration thrived and 
you say that in paragraph 187. 
DR DINTWE:   I confirm that, Chairperson.  So when I see 
that we did not have an auditing function, I did not mean 
that we did not book into their books.  We looked into their 
20 
books but we call it something else.  It is oversight but we 
do look at their books.  So you will see that this area albeit 
you know a blind spot to the answer(?) but there is a lot 
happening as far as those portions of the budget were 
concerned. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 134 of 317 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say in paragraph 187 that 
the IGI certificates, those are your reports to various 
instances, have included in them a list of suspicious 
financial transactions and these have been reported to the 
ministers, 
the 
JSCI 
and 
the 
relevant 
heads 
of 
the 
Intelligence Services.  Is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you give one instance here 
where certain of these financial irregularities in your view 
were also reported to the current President while he was 
10 
still the Deputy President. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will deal with that matter in due 
course but having said that.  There must obviously be 
some balance between secrecy on the one hand and the 
need for proper financial auditing on the other.  Quite how 
that problem is to be solved is a matter that the Chair may 
consider.  But do you have any comment in the solution to 
that issue? 
DR DINTWE:   I do have a comment and maybe let me use 
20 
an analogy of a tale which works a dock(?).  The other way 
around and tell you about this meeting that was convened 
by the JSCI Chairperson there.  And the Auditor General 
that is the late Thembekile Kimi Makwetu was there.  I was 
there, representing this office and then there were people 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 135 of 317 
 
from the CFO’s, most importantly, that were sitting there.   
 
And the SSA had gone to do a benchmark with 
the other countries.  Their interest was to establish how do 
these 
other 
countries 
deal 
with 
the 
auditing 
of 
the 
Intelligence Services and they made recommendations.  
That is the reason why the meeting was called, to say that 
we have to also make inputs.   
 
Chairperson, I never go to Cape Town and I did 
not utter a word.  This is the only meeting that I went and I 
never uttered a word in that meeting.  I only introduced 
10 
myself and I never uttered anything because I was very 
much surprised that an intelligence service will go do a 
benchmark, approach a Committee of Parliament and the 
oversight bodies and tell them that this is how we would 
like to be audited and they will be using a particular 
jurisdiction.   
 
It is a country that I will not mention with a 
name, you know, by a name but literature and your OECD 
reports and other transparency, international and all those 
other things, they would have rated that country as number 
20 
one most corrupt country in Africa.  Now there they – and 
said that:  Oh, you have got a nice model.  From this 
particular country.  You know in this country, Auditor 
General do not get involved in the auditing of this 
particular, you know, Intelligence Services. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 136 of 317 
 
 
And the reasons why I did not utter a word, it is 
because I would have caucused between myself and 
Makwetu to say that I feel so much defeated and I do not 
want to be seen as somebody who is resisting this kind of 
arrangement.  And it was himself who then recommended 
that:   
 
You will know I – I hope that you know that we 
cannot 
move 
an 
inch 
before 
there 
is 
a 
legislative 
amendment.  So he explained eloquently to them.  So there 
was no reason for me to do that.  That is why I am saying it 
10 
is an analogy of a tale which work the dock, not the other 
way around.   
 
And I think this led to a lot of you know 
malfeasance against increased(?) it because the services 
had an audacity to tell us as oversight body and a 
parliamentary committee how they should be audited, how 
they should be held accountable. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Is this document, this 
benchmarking report, available? 
DR DINTWE:   I beg your pardon? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The benchmarking report that you 
spoke of. 
DR DINTWE:   Well, it was not my document.  It was not 
given to me.  I never even bothered to request that 
document.  So I do not have it.  It is not there in the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 137 of 317 
 
bundle that I have provided. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I could be wrong.  You mentioned 
that there might be international literature available on how 
internationally and acceptable intelligence services are 
audited. 
DR DINTWE:   No, no I was referring to something else. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
DR DINTWE:   I was saying that the country that was being 
fed of the model that was preferred, that country has been 
ranked as you know number one by literature and some 
10 
research 
conducted 
by, 
for 
example, 
transparency 
international. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It was another comment you made 
that we can pursue that in due course. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 188, you draw a 
conclusion arising out of the latter part of your affidavit.  
You say: 
“The 
covert 
nature 
of 
the 
intelligence 
environment 
makes 
oversight 
of 
the 
20 
Intelligence Services crucial.   
In order for there to be effective oversight over 
the Intelligence Services, it is necessary that 
OIGI be entirely distinct from the SSA and be 
funded separately from it, had full access to 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 138 of 317 
 
all information and documentation and be 
granted powers of enforcements. 
It is also essential that such services be fully 
audited by the Auditor General and that there 
be proper consequent management...” 
 
Presuming you mean consequence management. 
“This includes not only that disciplinary steps 
be taken by those implicated but that law 
enforcement 
agencies 
are 
supported 
by 
declassifying 
documents 
required 
for 
10 
prosecution...” 
 
Is that your conclusion in respect of most, if not 
all, of your evidence? 
DR DINTWE:   That is my conclusion, Chairperson.  And my 
wish is that it is understood again in the context that I 
would have raised earlier to say that we have hope.  We 
did not only come here to assist the Commission.  We also 
have hope that maybe this Commission would be different 
from all other commissions.   
 
It is the first commission that has a rule which 
20 
says that the information gathered here may be used for 
prosecution.  I think that is a novelty as far as this 
Commission is concerned.  So in my conclusion, I am 
saying that this rot should not be allowed to happen again 
in future and we hope that, as I mentioned there, that there 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 139 of 317 
 
will 
be 
proper 
consequent 
management 
now 
moving 
forward.   
 
I personally will not be a beneficiary of this.  I 
will be out of this office on the 15 t h of March 2022 but I will 
be the happiest man if my successor will reap the rewards 
if there are any in terms of strengthening this oversight 
mechanism which is very much crucial in the Intelligence 
space.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, it is necessary to deal just 
very briefly, hopefully, with a few matters that have arisen 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...since Dr Dintwe last gave 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The first I have dealt with and that 
is the company and the director of the company, Ivani, that 
was involved in procurement.  They have presented a 
version.  That can only be given to you or given to the 
Chair for publication, at least, once certain procedures 
20 
have been gone through and perhaps we can do that in 
writing and due course. 
 
The second is that there have been certain 
media statements by Mr Bongo.  I am not going to deal with 
the evidence given through the media.  It matters what be 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 140 of 317 
 
raised before the Commission, they must be raised directly.   
 
Then Mr Arthur Fraser has given a response to 
your evidence.  That document is not before the Chair yet 
but again, it may be necessary to obtain written responses.  
They are not being ignored. 
 
Then I have an affidavit from “Danny” and he 
was 
involved 
in 
the 
vetting 
security 
clearance 
of 
Mr Nxasana and he gives a version that differs from your 
version in some respects and I want to put that version to 
you in summary form.  It is a long affidavit and it will be 
10 
put before the Chair.   
 
He says that around October 2013, he was 
instructed by the then director General to commence a 
vetting process of Mr Nxasana who had been appointed as 
the National Director of Public Prosecutions.  And he says 
there was a vetting field investigator appointed, a unit 
head initiated a polygraph examination, and the polygraph 
examiner found that the subject that Mr Nxasana was being 
truthful.  
 
She was of the opinion that the subject qualified 
20 
for top secret clearance.  And in this phase, the vetting 
evaluator 
made 
a 
recommendation 
that 
a 
security 
clearance be issued.  So that process, that initial process 
in 
October 
2013 
and 
the 
months 
that 
followed, 
recommended 
that 
each 
step 
that 
the 
clearance 
be 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 141 of 317 
 
granted. 
 
He then says the file was handed over the 
Vetting Evaluation Divisional Head and upon consideration 
of all the relevant information contained in the file, the 
recommendation that a security clearance be issued was 
confirmed.  Alright. 
 
The file than gets to “Danny”.  “Danny” says: 
“On consideration of the information provided, 
there were no compelling reasons which could 
influence him not to make the recommendation 
10 
that the security clearance be issued...” 
 
And he, in fact, made a recommendation that 
security clearance of top secret category be granted.  So 
each 
step 
in 
the 
vetting 
process 
resulted 
in 
a 
recommendation and there are several steps that security 
clearance be granted.  But what happened then is that 
“Danny” took the file to Mr Ntombela, the then Director for 
the 
domestic 
branch 
and 
“Danny” 
advised 
of 
the 
recommendations that Mr Nxasana be issued with a top 
security clearance for five years. 
20 
 
What Mr Ntombela then did was he challenged 
the recommendation and findings and indicated that he, 
that is Mr Ntombela, had information, and this he told to 
“Danny”, that Mr Nxasana was involved in a murder case 
which was still pending.  Right?  “Danny” then retorted.  He 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 142 of 317 
 
said: 
“Having regard to the information collected 
and the necessary investigations done, there 
was 
no 
evidence 
of 
information 
which 
implicated 
Mr Nxasana 
in 
the 
allegations 
made...” 
 
And 
the 
person 
who 
was 
alleged 
by 
Mr Ntombela, and this was told to “Danny”, to have made 
these allegations was Mr Thulani Dlomo.  So it appears 
from what “Danny” says, at least, that Mr Thulani Dlomo 
10 
reported something to Mr Ntombela and Mr Ntombela, on 
the strength of that, said no security clearance despite the 
process that had preceded it. 
 
It was at that stage that Mr Ntombela said:  Well, 
go and contact Mr Dlomo.  He is based in Kwazulu-Natal.  
He 
is 
the 
relevant 
information 
who 
has 
information 
regarding this 
murder case or alleged murder case.  
“Danny” then said he appointed a new field investigator to 
conduct it on the basis that the original – that field 
investigator had already submitted a report and was 
20 
therefore...  [Speaker ’s voice drops – unclear] 
 
He then says a meeting was held with Mr Dlomo 
in 
order 
to 
confirm 
the 
information 
received 
from 
Mr Ntombela.  And he says Contrary to the information 
provided by Mr Ntombela – and I am paraphrasing the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 143 of 317 
 
affidavit – Dlomo did not provide any information relating 
to the alleged murder case.  Dlomo advised that they 
approach the police where the case was handled. 
 
So it seems that somewhere along the line 
incorrect 
information 
had 
influenced 
the 
decision 
of 
Mr Ntombela not to grant the security clearance.  You have 
a different version and I will come to the difference in due 
course.  So the further investigations were conducted and 
the field investigator indicated that no information was 
found which implicated Mr Nxasana as per the allegations 
10 
of Mr Ntombela. 
 
So the process was renewed or continued or 
restarted, whatever – however you wish to describe it, but 
there was no basis found for any refusal of a security 
clearance for Mr Nxasana.  So “Danny” then makes a 
second recommendation on his version to Mr Ntombela, 
that a top security clearance be issued as – and again I am 
paraphrasing:  There was no information or evidence which 
indicated that Mr Nxasana should not be granted this 
certificate since these new allegations could not be 
20 
verified.   
 
Nevertheless, 
says 
“Danny” 
in 
his 
affidavit, 
Mr Ntombela decided not to grant the security clearance to 
Mr Nxasana.  “Danny’s” comment is that the decision not to 
grant the security clearance to Mr Nxasana was informed 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 144 of 317 
 
by the facts at their disposal. 
And he goes on to say that he denies, however, that 
he was involved in the decision to deny Mr Nxasana 
security clearance.  In fact he says he was dumbfounded 
when he learned through the news on TV that Mr Nxasana 
had been denied proper security clearance and we know 
that Mr Nxasana later appealed the decision and he was 
granted security clearance. 
 
Now the difference between his version and your 
version is firstly that Danny says he was not involved in 
10 
refusing a security clearance, he had nothing to do with it, 
he merely investigated, further conducted the further 
process and he came to that conclusion.  That is the first 
thing that he says. 
 
The second thing that he says is the record is 
indeed available, he says that that record is with SSA with 
all the records and it seems to be corroborated by the fact 
that he goes into a lot of detail. 
 
And thirdly, and importantly, he says that there was 
no first certificate that was somehow withdrawn, that there 
20 
was no certificate at all, there was only the refusal by Mr 
Ntombela after all the recommendations were made and the 
reversal of that refusal on appeal.   
 
Now I have summarised the different versions.  
From 
the 
point 
of 
view 
of 
the 
Commission, 
these 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 145 of 317 
 
allegations are as serious as the allegations you made but 
what do you say in regard to those differences that I have 
highlighted to you.  Was Danny involved?  Is the record 
available and thirdly, was there a first certificate issued 
and then disregarded in favour of settlement process? 
DR DINTWE:   Chairperson, I had an opportunity to go and 
refresh my mind again because I received – I was made 
aware of this particular affidavit.   
First point, in my evidence I have never said that 
Danny refused the security clearance, I said that the 
10 
process was completed but then he recalled the file and 
allocated it to somebody else.  So in fact you are saying 
the same thing, it is only that I think that we are only 
differing with regard to at what stage did he intervene.  But 
he did intervene and he is confirming it.  I am confirming it 
as well.   
So I have never said that he would have refused.  
Anyway, he does not have powers to refuse because it get 
signed by the DG especially for such senior people.  So Mr 
Nxasana is so senior that an expectation will be that it will 
20 
be sent by DG and not anybody.  By that time Danny was a 
general manager for that, but that is one point. 
The second point with regard to the timeframes, I 
have got difficulty there because he does not tell us on 
what date was security clearance given.  My version is that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 146 of 317 
 
it was issued on the 6 March and …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What year?  2014? 
DR DINTWE:   2014, yes.  Now if you take that date and 
you go through the information that we have just received, 
albeit not complete, you will realise that there will be 
entries beyond the 6 March and that can only suggest one 
thing and one thing only that the investigation with regard 
to Mr Nxasana continued beyond him getting the security 
clearance.   
We cannot say that the process was whether 
10 
stopped or whatever or whatever but the legislation which 
deals with the appointment of the NDPP says that he 
cannot resume his duties until that process is finalised.  So 
if he had provided the date exactly when this thing was 
restarted 
and 
when 
it 
was 
consequently, 
you 
know, 
finalised, we will then be able to see that Mr Nxasana 
would not have been allowed to start with that particular 
process. 
 
At least, the third point, the name of Thulani Dlomo 
is mentioned.  I did not say that Mr Thulani Dlomo was 
20 
involved in refusing, I said that the investigator was sent to 
him to get the names of the people in Kwazulu-Natal that 
could assist with that particular process.  That is what I 
said. 
 
The last point, it is very strange that a DG will 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 147 of 317 
 
refuse to sign.  That is actually – it is a pure administrative 
matter.  This file would have passed through a committee, 
an adjudication committee.  The reason why they sent it to 
there, it is because they want to remove that human 
element so that if I am hated by the Director General, he is 
not given an opportunity to be a sole decision-maker.  So 
my take is that once it has passed this committee, it is as 
good as being accepted and issued. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, I understand. 
DR DINTWE:   I do not see where I am differing with Danny 
10 
if there are any differences it could be about the dates and 
at what stage did [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it may be the issue of whether 
a certificate was actually signed by the Director General 
rather than all the processes being concluded to the point 
where for all intents and purposes the certificate ought to 
have been granted. 
DR DINTWE:   I beg your pardon again, sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So it may be – what Danny says is 
that no certificate was granted in the sense that it was 
20 
signed by the Director General and actually issued to him 
and then taken away or the decision reversed?  You seem 
to be saying that that could be correct but not in the sense 
that all the administrative procedures had been concluded 
in favour of the granting of a certificate. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 148 of 317 
 
DR DINTWE:   That could be correct because even if it is 
correct I do not see a conflict between what I am saying 
and what he is saying so that here we could be talking 
about two different dates but the activity itself took place 
and we are both confirming that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So Danny may say the rubber 
stamp at the end of the process was not there, you are 
saying everything leading up to that required the issue of a 
certificate.   
DR DINTWE:   That is what I am saying, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But it seems that both Danny and 
yourself are very clear that the process and its culmination 
resulted in an outcome that was not justified.   
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, at least now that I had an 
opportunity to look at that particular affidavit, we are both 
saying the same thing again in that regard. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that the Chair will look at in 
relation to other evidence involving Mr Nxasana and we do 
not need to go into that here. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson, but maybe I 
20 
should also mention to say that his version about the 
availability of the documents …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, that is the last issue. 
DR DINTWE:   Ja, at the time that I was conducting this 
monitoring or investigation, if you like, Danny was out of 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 149 of 317 
 
the system.  So there was an acting person.  He has since 
returned, that is the reason why we are using a pseudo 
name, he has since returned but he has returned after I 
had conducted that and there is a written report from an 
acting personnel or the personnel manager who says that 
we could not locate at least a physical file of Mr Nxasana.  
I will be very happy – if he had to cross-examine me on 
that I think I have got to concede to say that you found it, I 
did not find it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you are saying that the 
10 
unavailability or loss of the records was for a particular 
period when Danny was not in office? 
DR DINTWE:    That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, he himself refers to a period 
when he was out of office in his affidavit. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, just one last question, if I 
may, and that is in relation to PAN1, Principal Agent 
Network.  That report, the summary of that report, do you 
have it? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   I do have the summary of that report, 
Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you feel that you can 
legitimately give it to the Commission? 
DR DINTWE:   I suspect that it will be in the documents 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 150 of 317 
 
that I can give. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
DR DINTWE:   And look, it is my document, it is our 
document, I was told declassify, we have got the power to 
put any restrictions if we want to [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   These are events over a decade 
ago, there is controversy over whether they have been 
properly dealt with, there are allegations of criminality or 
maladministration, at least, there does not seem from our 
10 
point of view at least any reason for the continued 
classification of that document. 
DR DINTWE:   As I said earlier that certain issues graduate 
out of national security, I mean, but if you say that you 
have to investigate further criminally and charge person A, 
what is secret about that? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And then finally, if I may just 
ask you, were you present at any stage where the PAN1 
report was presented to any ministerial or other official? 
DR DINTWE:   I was not present, Chairperson. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Thank you, Chair, those 
are the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Dr Dintwe, for 
availing yourself to assist the Commission, we appreciate it 
very much.  Thank you very much, you will ensure that you 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 151 of 317 
 
give us what you may give us lawfully.  Okay, thank you 
very much, you are now excused.  We are going to adjourn 
for about ten minutes to enable the next work stream to set 
up but we will continue on Friday with witnesses connected 
with SSA. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Myburgh, good 
10 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Good afternoon Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we ready? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes we are.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Gama the oath you took 
yesterday will continue to apply today. 
MR GAMA:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, okay, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson, good 
afternoon Mr Gama. 
20 
MR GAMA:     Good afternoon Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I was at the point yesterday of 
taking you through Mr Singh’s version in relation to the 100 
locomotives.   I would like to just finish off on that if I may 
I think I have taken you to one paragraph in one of his 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 152 of 317 
 
affidavits, I would like to take you to a few others.  Could I 
ask you please to turn to Exhibit BB23, Bundle 5C, and 
could I ask you please, Mr Gama, to turn to page 1464, 
one, four, six, four. 
Perhaps, I could just ask you to direct your 
attention to paragraph 151.  Mr Singh says: 
“Moreover, M&S go on a frolic of its own when it 
states that the 20E locomotive proposed by CSR 
required significant modification and could thus not 
have met the requirement of urgency.  In this 
10 
regard, the following should be noted, Sub 1, the 
memorandum at all material times contemplated 
that CSR would be supplying a 21E locomotive and 
not the 20E.  Sub 2, Mitsui had experienced 
significant 
problems 
with 
the 
19E 
and 
15E 
locomotives, procured by Transnet on a previous 
occasion via a confinement process.” 
Can I just ask you to comment on that please, those two 
point? 
MR GAMA:   I think he is correct. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at 152: 
“Importantly, at the time, Sub 1, my confidence 
levels in Mitsui, being able to meet its proposed 
very aggressive delivery schedule was low due to 
the following.” 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 153 of 317 
 
First point: 
“The history of the 110, 19E locomotives described 
above was a problem for me.” 
Next point: 
“This 
delivery 
schedule 
also 
contained 
many 
conditions that needed to be met to achieve it, such 
as subcontract acceptance.” 
Next point: 
“The proposal required the use of existing parts of 
19E locomotives to enable the aggressive delivery 
10 
schedule to be met.” 
And next point: 
“This meant that additional risks will be introduced 
into the coal locomotive fleet that was already 
under resourced.” 
You want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Yeah, I could comment on 1524 and indeed, 
Mitsui had proposed that they would use existing parts of 
the 19E so if those parts ran out means also there was a 
risk in terms of the pricing, and that they have given us 
20 
that it would actually change and increase.  So that 
particular one, I think it is in my knowledge, the other two 
are in Mr Singh's knowledge. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have a comment on the others?  
MR GAMA:   I have no comment.  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 154 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then 153 says: 
“That due to the above factors, I did not believe 
that the Mitsui option would actually result in 
locomotives being delivered as planned and their 
proposal 
and 
mitigated 
the 
risks 
to 
the 
MDS 
volumes.” 
Do you are to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Well, I think the confinement had started as 
early as February of 2013 and I think as time went by, we 
all know that the people who have got a better ability to 
10 
accelerate locomotive delivery is actually the Chinese 
locomotive manufacturers, they have proven time and time, 
again that they can do that quicker.  So it is probably true 
that they would not have been delivered on timeously, even 
the timeframe that actually expired since the confinement 
had initially been motored. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now as I understood from your 
evidence yesterday, at least at the time, when you 
presented the business case you had confidence in Mitsui.  
I think you said with the benefit of hindsight things might 
20 
have changed. 
MR GAMA:   I had confidence in the locomotive. I had 
confidence in their locomotive and it is it had already been 
delivered and it was in operation but from that time, there 
were a lot of post commissioning teething problems that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 155 of 317 
 
arose afterwards with the Mitsui locomotive.  So here 153 
talks specifically to delivery schedules. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, if I could then take you 
please, to some aspects of the Fundudzi Report on the 100 
locomotives.  Could you turn Exhibit BB27.  I just wanted 
to ask your comment, if I could ask you please to turn to 
page 127. 
MR GAMA:   127? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   127, and if I could direct your 
attention Mr Gama, can I just ask you to clarify one or two 
10 
things.  At page 127 go to paragraph 5.6.8.16 I think it is, 
the third last paragraph.  It is apparent from the text that 
Fundudzi asked certain questions of you and you provided 
a written response.   With regard to that paragraph it says 
in his written response: 
“Gama indicated that the technical and operational 
specifications 
and 
requirements 
of 
the 
100 
locomotives were carefully and cogently deliberated 
and agreed upon with the end user.” 
What did what did you mean by that? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Are they talking about the 100 locomotives? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, this relates to the 100. 
MR GAMA:   Yeah, I indicated to you yesterday that after 
the approval by the BADC we then put together technical 
teams that worked with CSR to agree on the technical 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 156 of 317 
 
requirements and to create a prototype, that is what it 
means. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, so in other words, what you 
are talking about there is post approval? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct, yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I then ask you please to go to 
the top of page 128.   
“In his response, Gama further indicated that the 
decision 
to 
confine 
the 
procurement 
of 
100 
locomotives to CSR, was extensively debated and 
10 
considered upon and was arrived at after rational 
consideration 
of 
all 
the 
financial, 
technical, 
operational, legal, and compliance related facts.” 
MR GAMA:   Yeah, I have had occasion to request through 
you the report or the responses that Fundudzi talks about 
or what I do want to say to you at the outset is that a 
whole lot of these quotations when taken out of context, 
and when they are not read with the totality and the actual 
memo that I had sent to them they will send you on a frolic 
of sorts because they can be taken out of context.  
20 
So I want you to be aware of that and to note it, 
because it was when I read the document, that I could see 
that they were quite conservative in terms of the quotation 
they quoted those elements, which if you looked at the 
entire text that they had been looking at, it would give you 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 157 of 317 
 
a very different picture.  
So it is not something that you should rely on 
without looking at the text of the document.  So then 
coming back to this one it is true that the confinement of 
the locomotives was extensively debated, as you know, it 
was initially to Mitsui. 
We spent even more time on Mitsui, the CSR matter 
was an after the decision issue when the decision had 
been taken, and we then had to say a decision is taken 
how do we make sure that we will operationalise the 
10 
division?  And that is really what this means. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, well I raised it only with you, 
because it appeared to me to be different to the evidence 
that you gave yesterday.  But again, if as I understand it, 
you saying it relates more to what you did after the 
decision was taken. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And it is the same answer that you 
gave in relation to Sub 16?  
MR GAMA:   Yes.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second Mr Myburgh.  Do 
you still have that memo or the response that you gave to 
Fundudzi because…[intervene] 
MR GAMA:   I did request a memo, it is also interesting 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 158 of 317 
 
when they say Gama this, Gama that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR GAMA:   In the memo, and I qualified in the name, I 
said, 
I 
am 
not 
going 
to 
talk 
about 
the 
actions 
of 
individuals, in terms of what different individuals did, you 
must go and ask individuals about their issues.  But I am 
saying from a Transnet perspective, what were the issues, 
I did obtain that memo, and I think I obtained it from 
through the Commission.  
 
So I think we would be able to, yeah. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But okay, but no, I raised it because on 
the face of it to I also like Mr Myburgh think when I read 
this it does not - it seems to be different from what you 
said yesterday about the CSR the decision to confine to 
CSR.  But can I find out this?   
Do you agree that this on its own without reading 
the entire memo, namely, what is quoted in the first 
paragraph at page 128 suggests that what you said was 
that you - was that the decision to confine to CSR, as 
opposed to confined in general, irrespective of to whoever 
20 
that 
is 
the 
decision 
that 
this 
says 
was 
extensively 
dissipated.   Do you accept that that is the impression it 
leaves? 
MR GAMA:   That is the impression it leaves gives and I 
think I have said this yesterday to Chair.  The Fundudzi 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 159 of 317 
 
Report is crafted and in a manner and way in which it 
wants to get you to particular outcomes, and it is able to 
exclude very relevant information that would make the 
reader 
actually 
reach 
a 
very 
different 
vision 
if 
the 
information given was taken in its totality.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yeah, no, no, that is fine I just wanted to 
make sure that we have the same understanding. So, but 
what you do say is what you say that when one reads the 
whole document that is not the impression one will get. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is not what you intended it to 
say. 
MR GAMA:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Myburgh.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you but Chairperson this 
is – I would just confirmed the memorandum or Mr Gama's 
responses will be something that he asked us to discover 
which we did.  It has not found its way into the bundle, 
because we thought he might put it out if you wanted to 
rely upon it.  But perhaps for the sake of completeness, we 
20 
can add that document into the end of the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I assume we can we may even be 
able to do that today.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, it can be done, if it is available it 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 160 of 317 
 
can be done, that can be done anytime. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then Mr Gama just two subsequent 
paragraphs: 
“Contrary to Gama’s response, and you've already 
quantified that, the award of the 20 locomotives to 
CSR was later revised, and CSR was requested to 
supply 21E locomotives.  As discussed below, the 
change from 20E to 21E resulted in increase in the 
price of the locomotives and amendments to the 
technical specifications. There is no evidence that 
10 
the technical and financial implications resulting 
from the change in locomotives were discussed in 
the meeting of 24 January 2014.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, also, this is when somebody enters an 
arena that they do not understand, 20E locomotives is a 
GFP 
locomotive 
and 
we 
would 
not 
try 
to 
put 
EFP 
locomotives in a heavy haul line, which is the coal line.  So 
that was never the intent.  The whole issue of the 21E was 
always the intent.  
20 
 
So obviously, if somebody then went and took the 
GFP locomotive, which has a maximum of 22 tons per axle 
versus the 26 tons per axle, the price will change, it will be 
different, but they write here as fact, that which they do not 
understand and then it permeates across the Fundudzi 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 161 of 317 
 
Report. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, and then could I ask you 
please to – well there is a sentence that says: 
“There is no evidence that the technical and 
financial implications resulting from the change 
were discussed in a meeting of 24 January.” 
Are you able to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   The meeting of 24 t h January Chairperson was 
described by me in my affidavit as having had a lot of what 
one may call illogical, if not nonsensical, things that were 
10 
there, it is not clear that even the people who were in the 
meeting understood what they were discussing.  So there 
is not really much that one can say any further about logic. 
There was no logic that took place, when this particular 
matter was discussed, as I looked at the minutes, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well we spoke yesterday, briefly or I 
asked you a question about whether even when a matter 
that was to be deliberated upon by the committee related 
to your division, you would only be able to attend if you 
invited…[intervene] 
20 
MR GAMA:   That is correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And you said yes.  So I guess that when 
you look at the deliberations, and you formed a view that 
you formed which you have just articulated from your point 
of view, it just shows maybe that how important it is that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 162 of 317 
 
maybe the head of the division should be there when the 
matter is dealt with that relates to them because he or she 
would understand issues much better than anybody else.  
MR GAMA:   Yes, you are quite correct I mean there were 
a lot of issues that are just conflated. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Gama could you then 
please go to page 13 and if I could ask you to have a look 
at paragraph 5.6.9.9 it says: 
“According to Gama the memorandum dated 21 
January 2014, confined to CSR was changed at 
10 
Transnet Group and not at TFR.” 
We dealt with that yesterday. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The next paragraph says: 
“We 
determined 
that 
as 
per 
the 
procurement 
procedures manual version two October 2013 and 
2013 ppm requirement, the end user in this case 
TFR, should be the one motivating the procurement 
process to be followed i.e. confinement or tender 
before the memorandum may be taken to Transnet 
20 
Group 
for 
recommendation 
to 
be 
BADC. 
We 
determined that Gama and Gianni as the end users 
did 
not 
motivate 
for 
the 
confinement 
of 
100 
locomotives to CSR.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 163 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:   It is true.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then it says, I think then they go 
off to quote the relevant paragraph: 
“We determined that paragraph 15.1.5 of the 2013 
ppm 
states 
that 
quote, 
the 
submission 
for 
confinement must be fully motivated in writing by 
the end user and the division chief procurement 
officer, 
TFR, 
to 
the 
operation 
division 
main 
acquisition council and the operation divisions chief 
executive officer, TFR for prior written support of 
10 
the recommendation to confined, the submission 
should be submitted on the relevant template under 
cover on the memo to the GCE.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Yeah, so in terms of the 100 locomotives, all 
of those things had been followed but that was only in 
respect of the Mitsui confinements. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  
MR GAMA:   So when it came to the CSR memo that was 
submitted those were then it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does the view you have taken that it 
looks 
like 
nobody 
was 
involved 
in 
that, 
in 
those 
deliberations knew what they were talking about, at least in 
regard to some of the issues relating to this matter suggest 
that maybe even the committee did not have people who 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 164 of 317 
 
have the kind of expertise and knowledge that would have 
enabled them to pick these things up to say, this thing 
does not make sense, this does not make sense and so on.  
MR GAMA:   It would be difficult to speculate Chair 
because it is one of two things, either the minutes are 
written badly and maybe they do not reflect what was 
discussed, or the minutes are written correctly and they 
reflect what was actually discussed, because - so it is one 
of those, but then it would seem to me that the happiness 
that was there was that the confinement was no longer to 
10 
Mitsui, so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, I asked the question, because 
one of the issues that the Commission is going to look at is 
what criteria were followed in the past, in selecting people 
to be appointed to Boards of SOE’s and what qualifications 
should 
be 
- 
what 
qualifications 
were 
required, 
and 
experienced, and so on, and so on.  And as well as what 
skills and expertise and qualifications were required before 
somebody could be put into a particular committee, you 
know because if you took me and put me in an IT 
20 
Committee I would not know what to do. 
But if you are going to put people in a Board or 
committee where certain technical knowledge and expertise 
is required, and they do not have that, then managers can 
do all kinds of things because they do not understand, you 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 165 of 317 
 
know everything is above them.   
So That is why I was asking the question whether 
you think it might reflect that this was to technical and 
maybe the Board Committee members or some of them 
maybe did not have the kind of expertise that would have 
enabled them to pick up that this thing does not make 
sense and so on.  
MR GAMA:   Ja, no Chair I think the matter you raised is 
quite pertinent and it is an important one because the 
qualifications of the Board members that go onto this SOE, 
10 
especially if you get Eskom and Transnet you need heavy 
technical engineering, economics and finance skills that 
are required in those kinds of entities.  
And in order for it, you know, to succeed, so if you 
have a Board member who excel in Bible studies, for 
instance, you might find that they will be good for the 
Ethics Committee, but they might not be able to make input 
in the other aspects of the business.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, thank you, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you I just wanted to make 
20 
sure that I understood your evidence in this regard Mr 
Gama. It is correct that you did attend the meeting of the 
24 t h of January? 
MR GAMA:   It is correct, there was pressure on 
attendance. In my recollection, I do not recall that I was 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 166 of 317 
 
there when this particular 100 locomotive issue was 
discussed because you will see that on the agenda that 
day was also the 10:64 and my stance is that I would have 
been there or called in when the 10:64 deliberation takes 
place.  
So, in most of these meetings, and there you will 
come in, they will tell you that there is a meeting between 
10 and 12, either at ten, or you go you sit outside for an 
hour, you enjoy a tea, and then at some point, and when 
they are ready with a particular item, then they will call you 
10 
in but I have no recollection of being present when the 100 
locomotives was discussed. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I just ask – but if you could turn 
up Exhibit BB4A, I want to go the minutes again. 
MR GAMA:   BB? 
CHAIRPERSON:   BB4A, somebody will help you, while 
they are looking for a file for you, I want to ask the 
question.  If both types of locomotives were to be 
discussed would it have made sense for you to leave 
before the other one was discussed?  I think you said you 
20 
would have been there or you were there for the 1064. 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you do not remember being there 
when the other one was discussed.  So I am just wondering 
whether it would have made sense for you to leave when 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 167 of 317 
 
you knew that they were going to discuss and the other 
one as well.  
MR GAMA:   It may have been discussed before we went in 
for the 1064.  I cannot remember the sequence of the 
meeting minutes when I looked at it in terms of what was 
discussed first.  But I have been more involved on the 
1064 in terms of what was being discussed on that 
particular day.  
 
Remember that, I had even sent a memo the day 
before and I was not really sure when I said no, this thing 
10 
does not make sense. I was not sure that I did not know 
that it was even on the agenda. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I just wanted you to please turn 
in Exhibit BB4A to page 228, it is annexed to Mr Callard’s 
affidavit, the minutes we looked at them yesterday briefly.  
You will see that these are the minutes of the meeting on 
24 January, we identified that Mr Molefe and Singh were 
present and that you were partially in attendance, you and 
Mr Gianni. This meeting if one has regard to the heading 
20 
commenced at 11:50. If you go to the foot of the page, you 
see in italics, Mr Gama and Gianni joined the meeting at 
11:55 minutes, five minutes afterwards. 
 
Go through the document you will see at page 230 at 
paragraph 5.9 that the acquisition of the 599 electric motor – 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 168 of 317 
 
locomotives were discussed.  If you then turn forward to 
page 232 you will see at paragraph 5.2 the acquisition of an 
additional 100 Class 19E electric and 60 Class 43 diesel 
locomotives was discussed.  And then perhaps I could ask 
you to turn all the way forward to page 237.  You will see 
just above paragraph 5.6 again in italics it reflects that 
Messrs Gama and Jiyane were excused from the meeting at 
15:03.   
MR GAMA:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You want to comment on that? 
10 
MR GAMA:  So I think my comments of yesterday might 
remain a positive – also took place a long time where I was 
said these are the kinds of meetings where you spoke when 
you were spoken to as well but I just do not recall this actual 
discussion about the 100. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If I could then take you back to the 
Fundudzi Report and this is the last thing I am going to put 
to you in relation to the 100 locomotives and this report.  
Can you turn please to page 160.  There if I can direct your 
attention to the middle of the page.  It says at paragraph 
20 
5.8.29.4. 
“Transnet would have saved R1.2 billion if it 
procured 100 locomotives from Mitsui.” 
 
Do you have any comment on that? 
MR GAMA:  Ja I think it is a wrong conclusion.  There were 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 169 of 317 
 
certain 
assumptions 
I 
think 
Mr 
Singh’s 
affidavit 
was 
indicating that Mitsui had priced based on assumptions that 
they could use certain existing parts that were in Transnet’s 
possession.   
I do not know how much exactly those were.  It would 
need to be costed in order for – for a statement to be made. 
The potential saving – let us assume it was true but I am – I 
am just saying that the parts need to be taken into account 
because there is a cost to that I do not know maybe they are 
worth 600, 800 million or 1 billion I do not know.   
10 
But when you look at these things you must also look 
at the total cost of ownership.  The frequent taking out of 
locomotives for maintenance and repairs of Mitsui’s actually 
counter products and that cost.   
So you might say I am going to save some money up 
front if you thought you were saving it is like somebody who 
buys a bicycle versus somebody who buys a small VW 
Beetle.  You save some money by buying the bicycle in the 
front but if you had bought the Beetle you might have been 
safer and you might reach certain places a little bit faster.  
20 
So if the total cost of ownership were to be taken into 
account it is unlikely that the conclusion that Fundudzi 
reached could be reached.   
Because as I have said there were a lot of problems.  
In fact I think even now they are still experiencing some 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 170 of 317 
 
problems with these Mitsui locomotives. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I would then like to address briefly the 
issue of the increase in the ETC of the 100 locomotives from 
3.8 billion to 4.8 billion.  Now we saw yesterday that the 
agreement was concluded on the 17 t h of March 2014. 
MR GAMA:  Okay where are we now – which bundle must we 
go to? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No stick – stick with that. 
MR GAMA:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We will come to the relevant part in a 
10 
moment.  So we saw yesterday the LSA’s concluded on 17 
March 2014.  The evidence has been that Mr Singh then 
requested Mr Laher to prepare a memorandum explaining 
why the prices had increased from the business case 
submission and ultimately that memorandum was produced 
and there is reference to it.  If I could ask you to go to page 
141 of the Fundudzi Report.  It says there at paragraph 
5.6.18.8. 
“We determined that Molefe, Singh and Gama 
issued a memorandum to the board on 23 
20 
May recommending approval to increase the 
ETC from 3.8 billion to 4.8.” 
 
Now it refers to Annexure B35 that you were 
furnished with.  You will find that document in another file 
perhaps I could ask you to leave that document open and 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 171 of 317 
 
then if someone can help you find Bundle BB4(f).   This is 
Transnet Bundle 4 here.  Transnet Bundle 4.   
MR GAMA:  BB4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh I am told there is 4(a) and 4(b) 
which one is it? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  4(b).  Could you turn to page 550 that 
is where you will find the memo.   
MR GAMA:  550. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja.  Now let me just take you directly 
to the last page 563. 
10 
MR GAMA:  Sorry I am – page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say 553? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  563 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  563. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is the signature page.  Now you 
will see that there it records: 
“It is recommended that and little b. the BOD 
approves the increase in the estimated total 
cost ETC for the acquisition 100 equivalent 
19E dual voltage electric locomotives for the 
20 
export coal line from 3.871 billion to 4.840 
billion.  Recommended by Mr Singh, yourself 
and Mr Molefe.” 
 
You see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 172 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now this memorandum the evidence 
has been that for about two months from the 17t h of March 
up until the third week or so in May – for two months Mr 
Laher 
assisted 
Mr 
Singh 
in 
putting 
together 
this 
memorandum.  Mr Laher gave evidence that Mr Singh would 
in fact send him updates, changes that had to be made and 
Mr Laher would then type them and effect them.  Would you 
confirm that this is the work of Mr Singh when he was the 
first recommender, do you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes it is a finance and a pricing related matter. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja.  Now Mr Callard gave some 
evidence that he considered the price increase not to be 
justifiable.  Evidence to that effect was also given by an 
expert Mr Chawbe.  Now this is an issue that is being played 
out in our examination you will recall Mr Chairperson of Mr 
Singh because he is the author of this document.  An expert 
report has been put up.  He has filed a comprehensive 
affidavit etcetera.  I do not want to – and you were not 
issued with a 3.3 in respect of Mr Chawbe’s evidence.  I do 
not want to be unfair to you and take you through all of that I 
20 
will just simply ask you to – to comment. There is – there 
has been evidence led that this increase is considered not to 
be justifiable.  Mr Chawbe said that anything above 800 
million would not be justifiable.  Do you have any comment 
that?  I mean I would accept entirely that it is a strict 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 173 of 317 
 
financial issue. 
MR GAMA:  Now who is Mr Chawbe? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  He was the expert who gave evidence. 
MR GAMA:  No I do not know.  What does Mr Laher say? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon. 
MR GAMA:  What does Mr Laher say because he was 
working on the document?  What was Mr Laher’s view? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well Mr Laher’s view as I recall was 
that he did what Mr Singh told him to do. 
MR GAMA:  Oh.  Not very useful.  Okay no I am not able to 
10 
comment on what Mr Chawbe said. I do not know him I do 
not know what he is an expert on. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  I want then to – to turn to the 
procurement of the 1064 locomotives.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we going back to Bundle 6? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am going back to Bundle 6 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And I want to take you to that portion 
of the Fundudzi Report it makes it easy to identify the core 
facts dealing with the 1064.  Can I take you please first to 
20 
page 177.  In fact I will start at 178.  Are you there?   
MR GAMA:  No not yet. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Can I direct your attention please to 
paragraph 5.9.10 towards the foot of the page under the 
heading Business Case/Budget.  Paragraph – first sub-
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 174 of 317 
 
paragraph reads: 
“We were provided with a copy of a business 
case dated 25 April 2013 titled Procurement 
1064 Locomotives for the general freight 
business final version which outlined the 
need for 1064 (465 diesel and 599 electric 
locomotives) 
Annexure 
C25. 
 
The 
said 
business case recommended the purchase of 
1064 locomotives at a total cost of 38.6 
billion excluding potential effects from forex 
10 
hedging, forex escalation and other price 
escalations as per corporate plan.” 
 
Now that business case you find at Exhibit BB4(b).  
Page 401 the annexures to Callard’s affidavit.   
MR GAMA:    BB4(b).   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You have a lot of – a lot of flags and 
dividers.  I think it is probably the first document or close to 
the beginning.  It is page FQC401 Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:  I got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Annexure FC54.  You have it? 
20 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So on the first page if you go to 402 
you will see there procurement of the 1064 locomotives for 
general freight business.  Date of submission 25 April 
addressed to Transnet board of directors.  And this is a 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 175 of 317 
 
document that runs to 115 pages.  Perhaps you could go to 
the end and that is at page 516.  I think I have asked you 
already whether you recall ever signing this business case 
and perhaps in fairness I must mention to you that we for 
some reason have not been able to find the signed version. 
Can you recall ever signing it? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.   
MR GAMA:  I have no recollection.  This was the final one 
that went to the board. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is correct.  So if we can go back 
to the beginning of the business case.  Now I want to take 
you to page 405 because as you know it is this phrase 
excluding that has become contentious.  If you look at 405 
the last paragraph second sentence. 
“Accordingly it is recommended that the 1064 
locomotive business case be approved with 
estimated total costs of the acquisition of 
38.6 
billon 
as 
per 
the 
corporate 
plan 
(excluding the potential effects from forex 
20 
hedging, forex escalation and other price 
escalations.)” 
 
You see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then if I can ask you please to go back 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 176 of 317 
 
to the Fundudzi Report this is at Bundle 6 you should still  
have it open page 177.  177 three paragraphs from the 
bottom. 
“According to Callard the business case 
submitted to the board incorrectly stated that 
the 
ETC 
of 
38.6 
billion 
excluded 
forex 
escalation and other price escalations.” 
 
And the next paragraph. 
“We determined that the final business case 
dated 25 April 2013 submitted to the board 
10 
was amended to state that the ETC of 48.6 
billion excluded the potential effects from 
forex hedging, forex escalation and other 
price escalations.” 
 
You want to comment on those two paragraphs? 
MR GAMA:  The – the 38.6 billion did include some – what 
you call it forex assumption as I understood it.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  It did include some – it should have said it 
excluded borrowing costs because we always excluded 
20 
borrowing costs and that was always determined later. But 
certain assumptions around foreign exchange were always 
made and the 38.6 was a historical number that had been 
developed I think even at the TFR business case was about 
38 billion.  It has some assumptions 
around foreign 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 177 of 317 
 
exchange.  But it did not have everything.  It did not have 
borrowing costs and other things but it did include some 
assumptions around foreign exchange. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So you deal with this in some detail in 
one of your affidavits. 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Let me take you there.  Exhibit BB28 
Bundle 7.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That is Bundle 7. 
MR GAMA:  It is raining files today Chair. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is I am afraid.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hopefully you do not think it is all meant to 
confuse you.   
MR GAMA:  No we shall not be confused.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you got the page Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Page 250.170.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I just mention this while I remember.  I 
hope that Mr Gama and his team did remember the issue of 
that email that we discussed yesterday. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes we have it and we have got it in 
20 
the bundle already. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We will come to that DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Gama you deal with this in 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 178 of 317 
 
paragraph 78.6 and what you dealing with there is the 
creation and the development of the business case.  If you 
go over the page to 171 you will see 123456 lines down on 
the right hand side it says: 
“On 25 April 2013 one year after we handed 
over 
the 
process 
to 
Group 
the 
board 
approved 
the 
business 
case 
for 
the 
acquisition of the 1064 locomotives at an 
estimated 
cost 
of 
R38.6 
billion 
which 
excluded the potential effects from forex 
10 
hedging, forex escalation and other price 
escalations.  The aforesaid approval was 
premised on a memorandum dated 18 April a 
copy of which is annexed.  You say however 
the recommendation to the Transnet board of 
directors contained in paragraph 23 of the 
memorandum has become the source of 
much speculation as to its meaning.  The 
caption which reads and it is what found its 
way into the board approval ETC for the 
20 
acquisition is estimated R38.6 billion as per 
the 
corporate 
plan 
(excluding 
potential 
effects from forex hedging, forex escalation 
and other price escalations) is ambiguous.  I 
have dealt with the ultimate increase in the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 179 of 317 
 
contract value herein above and have made 
my position very clear which is that the cost 
components were in fact included albeit at an 
estimated and assumed values which proved 
inaccurate and with us understating.” 
 
Is that – you stand by that? 
MR GAMA:  Absolutely. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now if I could take you to the minutes 
of the board meeting held on the 25 t h of April 2013 which we 
have already references in the Fundudzi Report.  These 
10 
minutes you will be assisted you find in Bundle BB4(a).  Oh 
sorry BB4(g) I beg your pardon.  Pierre it is that file.  Could I 
ask you please to turn to page 59.  You will see at page 59 
that this is a minute of the special board of directors of 
Transnet meeting held on 25 April 2013.  You will see that 
present were inter alia Mr Molefe, Mr Sharma and Mr Singh 
and there was partial attendance by yourself and Mr Peter.  
You see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now this meeting said in terms of the 
20 
heading to have started at 14:20.  If you go to page 60 the 
next page you will see just above paragraph 4.4.3 it records 
that Mr Gama joined the meeting at 14:50.  You see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then if you go to the following 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 180 of 317 
 
page 61 you will see right at the end that the meeting closed 
at 14:45. 
MR GAMA:  15:45. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon 15:45.  So on the 
face of it you were at that meeting for just short of an hour, 
is that correct: 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The resolution that was adopted 
appears just above the heading close at page 61 and it 
contains this sentence that we have been discussing. 
10 
“The business case for the acquisition of the 
1064 locomotives for TFR’s general freight 
business at an estimated cost 38.6 billion as 
per corporate plan.” 
 
And then the contentious piece. 
“Excluding 
potential 
effects 
for 
forex 
hedging, forex escalation and other price 
escalations. 
 
The 
submission 
of 
PFMA 
application to the shareholder Minister for 
approval.” 
20 
 
You see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And it says… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburgh I do not see that. 
Are you still at page 50? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 181 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am at page 61 – the page numbers 
are difficult to read. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know this is 61 and they have 51. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well yes it is 51 and 61.  I think the 
official page number Chairperson is YM61. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If you will see it has got a line through 
it and then there is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Handwritten 51.  I think it should 
10 
actually be 61.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So where about on the page were 
you reading? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If you go to just above the heading 
close at the foot of the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You go up about five lines or so you 
will see there is a heading resolved that the board approved 
the following. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay yes.  Okay. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So what the board approved there was 
the business case an estimated cost of 38.6 billion and then 
you have the contentious phrase excluding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which was contrary to the business case 
document. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 182 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  So Mr Gama I just want to ask 
you then were you present when this resolution was 
adopted? 
MR GAMA:  I think the resolution came with the – what you 
call it – the business case that was submitted yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So why did you not correct that 
statement? 
MR GAMA:  The statement is not incorrect.  That is why I 
say it is ambiguous because a lot of people nowadays they 
are trying to interpret what it means. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – you will have to just speak to it a 
little bit more because my understanding was exactly that 
you were saying earlier on the business case has formulated 
I think at TFR made certain assumptions. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You make that point.  But I thought you 
said that ...[indistinct – word cut off] even if it is not all, 
these things that this phrase in the minutes says:  I 
excluded.  I thought you were saying that they were 
included at that stage.  So I may have misunderstood you.  
20 
So we might have to just talk to it more. 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  No, the statement is not incorrect.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   The statement is correct that it explaining(?) 
potential effects from forex hedging, forex escalation and 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 183 of 317 
 
other prices escalation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR GAMA:   And that is why I said it is ambiguous because 
then to some people they think that it would have included 
all of the forex assumptions.  There were – there was an 
inclusion of certain forex assumptions but not everything.  
So the statement in itself, as adopted by the board on that 
day, was not incorrect.  That is why I said it is ambiguous 
because – and it has led to a lot of [laughs] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, oh ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR GAMA:   ...consternation because people have tried – 
are trying to say it was 38.6 billion.  Everything that has to 
do with forex ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...into account. 
MR 
GAMA: 
 
 
Ja. 
 
I 
am 
saying 
there 
was 
forex 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Taking in account. 
MR GAMA:   ...taking into account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But there was some forex not taking into 
account. 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes because the world changed.  So let us put 
it a date on this because I think it is important. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR GAMA:   So the date of this is the 25 t h of April 2013.  
So there is that discussion.  On the Business Case, you 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 184 of 317 
 
will 
see 
that 
there 
are 
certain 
assumptions. 
 
The 
assumptions are what is the Rand/Dollar spot rate, and 
then in there it also gives you an assumption of what is the 
future.  What is the likely?  Because this is the world of 
speculation.  What is the likely foreign exchange?  I think 
it says – I do not have the numbers in front of me but if we 
go back to that file, Mr Myburgh, where you talked about – 
I just want to take you very briefly to that.  It is on my 
statement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...the Business Case?  [Speaker 
10 
unclear – microphone not switched on] 
MR GAMA:   Yes. To the Business Case.  I think that is 
what will elucidate ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You find that passage ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...not the issues... 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is Exhibit BB-4(b).   
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Uhm ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...first document. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what bundle is it? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   BB-4(b). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  Mr Callard’s annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And have we got the page or is 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 185 of 317 
 
that the beginning? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The Business Case...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   At the beginning. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ... starts at page 402. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.   
MR GAMA:   Okay.  It will be page 435. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But before going there, I just wanted to 
go to page 405 because I know Mr Myburgh draw attention 
to that.  I see there at the last page that says excluding 
the potential effects from forex hedging, forex escalation 
10 
and other price escalations.  But you say we must go to 
435? 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  So Chair that phrase of 38.6 excluding, 
it is going to resonate right until the end. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   So it is there and I am saying there is a 
source of ambiguity in it because there are people who 
have come here and said to you the foreign exchange was 
included and then they have given you the impression that 
whatever calculation that would have been made on the 
20 
25 t h of April or the 18 t h of April, to be specific, because 
that is the date on which the Business Case had been 
prepared, that the actual exchange rate would remain fixed 
during that period.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 186 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:   I do not – just want to assist the Commission 
in terms of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but before you proceed.  I do not 
think anybody thinks that they were saying the exchange 
rate would remain fixed.  My understanding is that when 
you talk about what certain items having been excluded or 
included, my understanding is that people are talking about 
what was taking into account and what was not taking into 
account with an understanding that its estimates. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there are assumptions but if you did 
not include in your calculations and assumptions certain 
items, then they say you have excluded them. 
MR GAMA:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I just wanted to mention that. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is my understanding. 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  No, no that is why Chair I say it is 
ambiguous.  I think – that is why I say it is ambiguous.  
Can I take the Chair to page 442? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   442? 
MR GAMA:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   At the top, it says Forex Risk Mitigation.  Do 
you see that? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 187 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
MR GAMA:   If we – and they tried to explain what it 
means.  If you go down to the middle of the page, there is 
somewhere where it says Exhibit 29. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR GAMA:   And then it says the Rand/Dollar exchange 
rate, one Dollar is R 9,13.  And then it says:  A year from 
now it will be R 9.59.  And then it goes on and it says:  In 
year seven – year seven would be 2002, last year.  In year 
seven it would be R 12.55.  So those were the assumptions 
10 
what they call a forward curve that were used in the 
Business Case.   
 
The assumption being in 2014 the Rand will be 
R 9.59, in 2015 the Rand will be R 10,00 to the Dollar.  The 
Dollar will be R 10.52 in 2016 and that in 2017 it would be 
R 11,00 and that in 2017 it would be R 11.48.  in 2018 it 
will be R 11.98.   
 
So those were the assumptions that were used in 
this Business Case.  What then happened – so in here is 
included those assumptions.  So it is true.  In the Business 
20 
Case – the Business Case says 38 billion but it includes 
those things that were assumed on that day.  It excludes 
any forex escalations that are beyond their assumptions.   
 
So it means on the day that they actually had to 
enter into an contract based on commitments, they are 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 188 of 317 
 
going to use new curves, new exchange rate curves.  You 
will know Chair that the Rand, even now as we speak, it is 
sitting at about R 18,80.  I am not sure what it is but it is 
coming from around R 18,00 or R 17,00 and it has been 
there for quite a long time.   
 
So there were a lot of things that happened after 
the Business Case to the time that the contract were then 
entered into.  So, yes, we all agree.  I am not amongst 
those who are saying there was no foreign exchange 
assumption.  I am saying there was foreign exchange 
10 
assumption in the Business Case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR GAMA:   All I am saying is that it was understated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, because I was about to say 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   And the fact – and perhaps inaccurate 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   ...in a sense. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was about to say.  As far as the 
20 
Rand/Dollar exchange is concerned, what you have been 
saying does not seem to me to going to inclusion or 
exclusion. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It simply goes to whether your estimates 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 189 of 317 
 
proved to be correct or not. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And of course with these things it is not 
– you never have certainty. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know, it is a certain estimate. 
MR GAMA:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And obviously, you have to adjust when 
you come to the day. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say what is the – what is today’s rate. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it seems to me that, based on what 
you are saying, one would not say – one would say it was 
included but maybe the estimation might have been lower 
than what it should have been. 
MR GAMA:   Ye, it was understated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   And hence, there was the effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR GAMA:   The effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   Excluding the effect ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   ...of foreign exchange hedging. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 190 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   The word effect is important. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Well ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   So all I am saying is that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   ...the statement in itself is not incorrect, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR GAMA:   It says the effects, because what these 
people knew was that the numbers are likely to change but 
10 
I do not think anybody would have assumed to would have 
known by how much.  So you go on the assumption.  So 
that is really what I want to say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Mr Myburgh. 
MR GAMA:   ...based on that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, what I think that what Mr Gama 
has put to you, you have shown us with reference to 442 
that foreign escalation was considered in the Business 
Case ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...in arriving at the figure of 38.6.  
The point is that 442 does not tell you what 405 which says 
that it excluded the potential effects of foreign escalation.  
And the evidence is that that purpose, that preamble, that 
was a – it should not change and there is evidence to the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 191 of 317 
 
effect that, just as I have put to you now, it is at odds with 
the Business Case.  So Mr Gama, perhaps I can ask you to 
comment on that before I put something else to you. 
MR GAMA:   Sorry, what are you saying? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   It may have been challenged but as I have 
said to you Chair, at best we are dealing with ambiguity 
here.  I know that foreign exchange assumptions were 
made in the Business Case.  But then there are people who 
would then want to say to you that because they were 
10 
made then it means the numbers must be fixed at 38.6 
billion.   
CHAIRPERSON:   ...anybody says that Mr Gama.   
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Nobody says that. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Nobody is saying that. 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  So they were made but at the time of the 
actual contract – so I have said to the Commission in the 
past few days that there is the investment decision.  So 
20 
there is an investment decision.  It is made at 38.6 billion 
excluding the potential effects.  I would have probably 
worded it differently.   
 
I would have said it excludes hedge purging 
costs and excludes - costs and leave it at that because 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 192 of 317 
 
part of the forex is really the effects of the forex.  When 
you enter into what we then will call the procurement 
decision, on that day there is a new forward curve of forex 
that is then used and then it means the effects - the effects 
is the delta between the forex curve on the date of the 
procurement decision versus the date of the investment 
decision.   
 
So that the investment decision is 23 April 2013 
or whatever the date was, close to that.  And then the 
procurement decision is the one that is taken on the 
10 
17 t h of March of 2014, which is a year later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes but we are not dealing with that 
now.  We are dealing with the Business Case that is 
presented to the board on the 25 t h of April 2013 and the 
assumption is ...[indistinct] that.   
MR GAMA:   Ja.  So I will repeat myself.  I think we should 
not be dogmatic about this.  The effects – to say excluding 
the effects.  I do not think there is anything incorrect in 
that.  The foreign exchange assumptions had been made.  
20 
They were encapsulated in the actual Business Case.  That 
was the investment decision that was made on a particular 
day based on the foreign exchange curve that we have 
discussed at 422.   
 
Because I will then take you to the document 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 193 of 317 
 
that I said was presented by Laher and Smit, where they 
then come up with a new investment curve – I mean, a 
foreign exchange curve.   
CHAIRPERSON:   When you said there was some foreign 
exchange that was taken into account, other foreign 
exchange...  [Speaker ’s voice drops – unclear]  What were 
you talking about? 
MR GAMA:   So the assumptions were of the Rand that 
would remain relatively strong if you look at 422 Chair.  If 
you look at the numbers. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR GAMA:   Except that by 2020, the Rand/Dollar would 
be R 12.55. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I understand ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that is part of ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Yes.  So and that was taken into account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, on the ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   In the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...account. 
20 
[Speakers intervening each other – unclear] 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  What was not taken into account is this 
delta that we then are talking about.  In fact, in reality, the 
Rand the depreciated much, much faster in real life and 
that then the assumptions that were made here.  And that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 194 of 317 
 
is why it is important when you look at this, you must also 
then reflect on the other document that I referred to which 
the Treasury Team then produced on the day when the 
contract was actually entered into. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  Well, again, I just want to put 
to you again.  What we are looking at now is the position 
as of 25 April 2015.  Bu Mr Gama, do you not put it simply 
and most eloquently in your affidavit, where you say:   
“I have made my position very clear, which is 
10 
that the costs components... [And we are 
talking about these ones.] ...were in fact 
included albeit at estimated and assumed 
values which proved inaccurate and were thus 
understated...” 
 
Is it not as simple as that? 
MR GAMA:   That is why I have said about six times, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.   
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So they were included? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   They say here that they were 
excluded.  It is as simple as that. 
MR GAMA:   I am saying to you Mr Myburgh.  To say 
excluding the potential effects is not incorrect.  That is all I 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 195 of 317 
 
am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying that what you say in the 
paragraph that Mr Myburgh has read from your affidavit is 
the same as what they say in the minutes? 
MR GAMA:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Saying you are saying the same thing? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, it is not incorrect Chair.  It just says as of 
this day things look like this but we do not know the 
potential effects going forward. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  I would just ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR GAMA:   But I know that this thing could have been 
worded 
much 
more 
eloquently. 
 
It 
was 
not 
worded 
eloquently at all. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, let me just take you to some of 
the evidence that has been led.  Mr Laher and Mr Mole and 
Mr Callard were requested in 2018 to undertake an 
investigation to determine if the Business Case of 38.6 
ETC included forex hedging and escalation and they found 
that it did.  Do you agree or disagree with that evidence? 
MR GAMA:   No, we are in agreement with that.  There is 
20 
no need ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  You are reading from where 
now Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am paraphrasing the evidence that 
has been given. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 196 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will remember that evidence has 
been given, Chairperson, that in 2018 Mr Laher, Mr Mole 
and 
Mr 
Callard 
were 
requested 
to 
undertake 
an 
investigation to determine if the Business Case, ETC of 
38.6 included forex hedging and escalation and they 
concluded that it did.  Mr Gama does not disagree with 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   There has also been evidence by 
Dr Fine of McKinsey, who testified that the Business Case 
ETC 
of 
38.6 
also 
included, 
he 
said, 
hedging 
and 
escalation.  You would not disagree with that? 
MR GAMA:   No, we do not disagree with that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And the expert, Mr Chawde, 
also came to that conclusion.   
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I take it you would not disagree with 
that? 
20 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Mr Chair, I ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   I do not know. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   I have been rather patient listening to 
Mr Myburgh put it to Mr Gama that various other persons 
have said certain things.  It started initially with Mr 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 197 of 317 
 
Chawde – if my pronunciation is correct – said X, Y, Z.  
There is no reasoning to provide the basis upon which that 
testimony was proffered in the first place.   
 
What we clearly see now is that there is a 
different appreciation, approach and perhaps interpretation 
to the concept, what was and what was not included.  But 
to simply put to a witness:  Well, somebody else said this.  
Without providing the context in which he said why he said 
that, is unfair.   
 
Particularly, in the context of what we are 
10 
dealing with here and that is the depreciation of the Rand.  
Perhaps to be fair to Mr Gama.  It should be put to him on 
what basis, if it is contended for which I believe it is, that 
his testimony in this regard is not acceptable.  On what 
basis measured against the other evidence, which is now 
being put to him, not in a proper context.  It is not 
acceptable.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWAGE:   Be fair to Mr Gama. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think that given that Mr Gama has 
20 
deposed to an affidavit dealing with these issues and has 
expressed his views, ordinarily there should be nothing 
wrong with putting somebody else’s view or conclusion and 
say:  What do you say to that?  But if Mr Gama says I 
agree because he – maybe it accords with his own view in 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 198 of 317 
 
his affidavit, there might be no need to go to the context.   
 
But if he says:  Well, I have difficulty with that or 
I would like to know the context.  Then it becomes 
important to look at the context.  But it may be that initially 
if one puts it and he says I have no problem because he 
has applied his mind to it when he was deposing to his 
affidavit, there might be no problem.   
 
But if he says:  No, I would like context or I do 
not agree.  Then context might become important but – so 
that is how I would look at it.  Let me hear what Mr 
10 
Myburgh says. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, Chairperson this is not really 
contentious because I put this to Mr Gama and he agreed.  
He does not disagree with the fact that the ETC of 38.6 in 
fact included foreign hedging and escalation costs.  He 
does not disagree with that.  His own affidavit says that.  
His case is:  Well, it is ambiguous and it could have been 
put better.  But this is not contentious.  He accepted that 
evidence.   
ADV OLDWAGE:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think where we have a problem(?), he 
can put it or where something that consider contentious, 
let us – we will look at that. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   I am startled by this submission that this 
is 
not 
contentious 
when 
the 
witness 
said 
but 
it 
is 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 199 of 317 
 
ambiguous.  It is capable of more than one interpretation.  
Do not insist on one interpretation alone.  I am telling you.  
There is a reason I say that it is ambiguous.  How can that 
not be contentious with respect?  It does ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
remember 
just 
earlier 
on 
Mr Myburgh read mister – a passage from Mr Gama’s own 
affidavit and he confirmed it, he stood by it and it was in 
accordance, as I understood it, at least with those who 
said this features were included.   
ADV OLDWAGE:   Mr Chair, with respect.  I have no 
10 
difficulty with that.  I settled this affidavit.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   The position is.  I – my complaint 
relates to what is being put to Mr Gama with reference to 
the testimony of other persons and he will, no doubt, 
understand that he has got to consider his position very 
carefully to simply acknowledge that it is right or wrong 
without knowing the context within which that evidence was 
given.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us do it this way.  Mr Gama, if 
20 
you are not able to say you agree or you do not agree 
without the context, say so and then the context can be put 
to you but if you know that you do not have a problem with 
what is put to you, you can then give your view.  Okay?  
But if you want context, say so. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 200 of 317 
 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
MR GAMA:   Yes but perhaps I can be of assistance, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   When Mr Myburgh started, he referred to 
somebody, Chobe or whatever it is.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   And we agreed that I have not had sight of 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of his ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...over whatever ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Testimony ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...testimony, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR GAMA:   So what we are saying here is.  It must not 
then be brought in because we – it is something that I have 
not seen.  And I am not likely to have any view.  I may 
have a view. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   But I have not seen it.  And Mr Myburgh 
himself said when he started that he is not going to put 
20 
that to me because he knows that I have not seen it, 
whatever it is that this Chobe or... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, certainly.  I am going to put to 
you also what Mr Molefe had to say about this because he 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 201 of 317 
 
was questioned about this – the very same phrase but let – 
one of our researches will find the full passage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that I can read it to you.  I do not 
want to just paraphrase.  Let me come back to that. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is the Business Case ETC.  I 
now want to deal with the increase in that ETC.  Could I 
ask you, please, to go to the Fundudzi Report at 183?  
That is – I beg your pardon.  Chairperson, it is Bundle 6. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I saw it, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So it is BB-27.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if you have a look at 183, there 
is a heading at paragraph 5.9.12:  Increase and Estimated 
Total Costs.  It says that: 
“Based on documentation reviewed, we have 
determined that on 23 May 2014, Molefe 
addressed 
the 
memorandum 
to 
BADEC, 
requesting the committee to the board and 
20 
increase in the ETC for the acquisition of the 
1064 Locomotives for the GFB from 38.6 
billion to 54.5 billion. 
The memorandum was signed by Gama, Singh 
and Molefe...” 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 202 of 317 
 
 
And then it quotes from that.  Perhaps, let us go to 
that memorandum.  You will find it again as part of 
Mr Callard’s annexures at BB-4(b).  If I could ask you, 
please, to turn up page 714?  You will see at page 731 that 
recommended by Singh and then signed by you and Mr 
Molefe and the recommendation is, it will be: 
“The BADC recommends an increase in the ETC for 
the 
acquisition 
for 
the 
1064 
locomotives 
on 
Transnet Freight Rail’s general freight business 
from 38.6 billion to 54.5 billion to the board of 
10 
directors for approval.” 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now what I have seen amongst the 
documents is will you accept that a similar memorandum, 
in I think almost identical terms, was then prepared and 
recommended by the three of you for the board.  I can take 
you there.  Perhaps you can leave that open for a moment. 
MR GAMA:   Is it – ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is to the BADC.  What you 
20 
find is if you could go to EXHIBIT BB8, you will find a 
corresponding memorandum to the board.  BB8(b)1.  Could 
you please – can you help Mr Gama turn to page 165?  Red 
numbers, 165.  You will see that this is addressed whereas 
the memorandum in Callard’s bundle is addressed to 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 203 of 317 
 
BADC, this is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, Mr Myburgh?  It looks like 
there are two files and she is not sure which one you are 
referring to. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is BB8(b)1 and the 2.  If you will 
turn to page 165 please, red numbers.  It is in the first 
divider, 165.  Mr Gama, are you there? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So what you will see is that this is 
the corresponding memo.  Callard’s annexure relates to the 
10 
BADC, this annexure is to the board.  If you go to page 182 
you will see that it is the same recommendation and it is 
signed by the three of you.  Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And would you confirm that... 
MR GAMA:   Absolutely. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If it is the same memorandum? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   We will come back to the contents of 
these memos in a moment.  Could I ask you please to go 
20 
back to the Fundudzi report and I have taken you to 
paragraph 5.9.12.1 that deals with the BADC memo, we 
have now identified the corresponding one to the board. 
MR GAMA:   What page is Fundudzi? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   183. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 204 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then there is a heading BADC 
Meeting of 26 May, paragraph 5.9.12.3: 
“We determined that on 26 May Molefe and Singh 
attended a BADC meeting where the above request 
to increase the ETC was tabled.  We determine that 
Gama did not attend that meeting.” 
Would you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:   Okay, I think it is probably based on the 
minutes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if you go to the board 
meeting where your recommendation presumably served.  
Board meeting of 28 May, paragraph 5.9.12.7: 
“On 28 May 2014 the board noted the reasons for 
the increase in the ETC and approved an increase 
in ETC for acquisition of 1064 locomotive with a 
GFB from 38.6 to 54.5.” 
Now we determined that as with the BADC of 26 May 2014 
Gama did not attend this board meeting and then they set 
out who was present.  Do you see that? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Present in the schedule, amongst 
others, Mr Molefe and Mr Singh and then over the page, Mr 
Sharma.  Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 205 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now perhaps we could – we can use 
either of these memos, let us use the one given that they 
are the same, contained in Mr Callard’s annexures, page 
714.  At paragraph 14 – and sorry, let me …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, is that 714? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   714 of Callard’s annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR GAMA:   That is BB4(b), Chairperson.  Mr Gama, 
perhaps I should preface this with the following.  Mr Laher 
also gave evidence that this memorandum was prepared in 
10 
a similar way to the one in relation to the increase in the 
ETC of 100 locomotives.  They were prepared roughly at 
the same time and his evidence was the same as I have 
described to you and that is that after the conclusion of the 
LSAs and for a period of a month or two, he liaised with Mr 
Singh and Mr Singh, I think he even used the word, 
pedantic, he would provide him with the text, he would 
provide him with amendments and he would then type it up.  
Would you accept that this, as reflected, as him being the 
first recommender is again like in relation to the 100 
20 
locomotives the work of Mr Singh? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, it is work of financial people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja.  Now if you go to paragraph 14 
at page 5715, it records: 
“The 
acquisition 
of 
the 
1064 
locomotives 
was 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 206 of 317 
 
approved by the board of directors in April 2013 at 
a cost of 38.6.  This excluded the following costs.” 
And amongst them are the costs of hedging and foreign 
exchange.  Do you see that?  We have debated that issue. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if you go to paragraph 23 
at page 717 …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   But I think also importantly, one of the things 
that I had said is that it also excluded the cost of changes 
in economic condition. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   Between the approval of the business case 
and the award of the contracts which was highlighted 
there, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, absolutely.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I may have missed this, Mr Myburgh and 
Mr Gama, when you were elaborating or dealing with your 
understanding of the phrase excluding blah, blah, blah, 
that we found at page 002 or was it 05?   
MR GAMA:   002, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   002, ja, you were saying that it was 
included, you said the features – you made the example of 
the Forex, you said some was included or some features 
were included, others were not included under Forex but I 
do not think you got to talk about other items that they said 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 207 of 317 
 
were excluded to indicate whether your view as the same 
in regard to the other items other than Forex. 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  No, those things, as I said, they were all 
included albeit the estimation and the assumptions of the 
values that were put in the original business case.  They 
were somewhat understated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   Because that is from the period between the 
time when the actual business case was made and the 
award of the contracts. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what you said in respect of Forex 
applies to the other items as well. 
MR GAMA:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, if I could – so what this 
motivates for is an increase.  Perhaps if you go to the 
recommendation it states it most clearly at page 731.  
Says: 
20 
“The BADC take note that the main reasons for the 
increase in the ETC is due to the exclusion of the 
following costs.” 
And first the cost of hedging and then the cost of future 
escalations. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 208 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:   The cost of hedging for foreign exchange 
movement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   The word movement is very important. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That was the exclusion of that and 
the exclusion of the cost of future inflationary increases – 
escalations, I beg your pardon. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And it is on that basis that it also 
BADC recommends an increase, is that correct?  
MR GAMA:   Yes and also the cost of the Transnet 
engineering that had been excluded in terms of their 
scope, ja, and then the economic conditions, the changes 
in economic conditions. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you were not present at the 
BADC meeting or the board meeting but certainly there has 
been evidence and it has been put or will be put to Singh 
and Molefe that they misrepresented the position to BADC 
20 
and the board insofar as they contended that the business 
case, reason for the increase was that the business case 
excluded Forex hedging and escalation.  Do you want to 
comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I am unable to comment on what they 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 209 of 317 
 
have said.  I think I have said my understanding of this. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But you signed both this memo and 
the one to the board. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, Mr Gama, just dealing with the 
justifiability of the entries on 38.6 to 54.5, the situation is 
the same and perhaps more acute as it is in relation to the 
100 locomotives.  So perhaps I can explain it this way.  
Again Mr Chawde, gave evidence about this increase, an 
expert, given that these two memos were the work of Mr 
10 
Singh and it is really a financial issue.  That evidence was 
presented to Mr Singh.  Mr Singh has – Chairperson, I do 
not know if you have yet to see this, I do not think it has 
been introduced into evidence but Mr Singh has produced 
himself an expert who has given a contrary expert report 
and those things are still going to be dealt with with Mr 
Singh when he returns to testify the week after next.   
 
So I do not want tax you about things and you are 
correct, you were not given Chawde’s report, I do not want 
to tax you about that, but is this like with the 100 
20 
locomotives an issue that you are happy to leave to be 
fought out there or is there any comment that you have in 
relation to the justifiability of this increase? 
MR GAMA:   The only thing that I want to say, I think it is 
okay for the financial people to discuss this.  The only 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 210 of 317 
 
thing that I want to say from where I see it, Chair, and 
which is contained in my affidavit is the following.  If you 
go to my affidavit, page 250.174. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remind me what bundle it is or have 
you got it? 
MR GAMA:   BB28. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay, she has got it.  Ja, what 
page should we go to? 
MR GAMA:   250.174. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MR GAMA:   I have, Chair, entered, I think, into evidence, 
if you go to 174, 78.11 and I have said that request 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   174 being the page and 78.11 being the 
paragraph? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, the paragraph 78.11 on page 174. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   That a question that has arisen is how the 
estimated cost in the investment case, estimated 38, 
escalated to 49.54 billion because I think those are the 
20 
true numbers that must be compared.  It moved from 38.6 
billion to 49.54 billion and then I have said that there was 
a report that was given to me prior to signature of those 
memos that Mr Myburgh talks about.  That report was from 
the finance negotiating team and it is entered here was 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 211 of 317 
 
SG5 and it appears, Chair, on page 250.200. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have got it. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, up to page 250.220.  You will see, Chair, 
at 220 that although this one is not signed because it is – 
it was an electronic – it is signed by Mr Danie Smit who is 
the Deputy Treasurer and Mr Yusuf Laher, TFR Finance.   
 
In this document, Chair, is what was explained to 
me prior to signature of that document that went to the 
board.  So I just want to say before we rest the matter to 
then indicate to the Chair that that is the document which 
10 
then contained a breakdown of the final base costs which 
had moved – the base costs that moved to about 40 billion 
and then they then allowed all of the other escalations and 
it went to 49.54 billion. 
 
So that was the contract value, 49.54 billion was 
the contract value which was entered into with all of the 
OEMs on that date of the 17 March 2014, 49.54 billion.  So 
it had moved just over 10 billion from 38 to 49.54 billion 
and then what was then added to that was what is called 
the 10% contingency which came to about 4.954 something 
20 
something and then that then moved it to the 54 billion.  So 
I am quite happy, Mr Myburgh, that you then deal with it 
with the finance people, but I just wanted to make sure that 
I entered this and indicate to you, Chair, in terms of the 
inputs that were given to me in terms of my signing that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 212 of 317 
 
particular memo to the BADC and the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright then just on this – lastly on 
the memo, can I just ask you please to go to page 727, it is 
FQC727.  There are a number of …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, is that a different bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is bundle BB4(b). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got the page number? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   727, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, could I ask you to have a 
10 
look at 727 and paragraph 80?  
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This has become a contentious 
issue, a hurdle rate.  Paragraph 80 says: 
“The updated NPV results in a positive NPV of 
11.68 billion at the new hurdle rate of 15.2% and 
22.71 billion at the TFR WACC of 12.6%.  The NPV 
would become negative, R1.76 billion at the original 
hurdle rate of 18.56.” 
So you see that the sums are done here on an so-called 
20 
updated NPV and hurdle rate of 15.2 versus the so-called 
original 18.56.  Do you see that?  Now this again is 
something that is going to be dealt with with Mr Singh.  Do 
you have any comment?  The issue in contention is when 
the hurdle rate became effective and whether or not it is 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 213 of 317 
 
underpinned by a policy document.  Do you have any 
comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   The hurdle rates, they are issued by the 
finance department. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR GAMA:   On an annual basis, so Mr Singh is the 
correct person to speak to. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then there are two other issues 
which also featured with Mr Molefe and will with Mr Singh 
and that is the issue of the conclusion of the LSAs before 
10 
obtaining board approval.  But I think you mentioned 
yesterday that you yourself did not sign the LSAs, they 
were signed by Mr Singh and Mr Molefe, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   I think that is what you said that you observed 
that my signature was not on them, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I can take you to one of the 
agreements if you... 
MR GAMA:   No, it is fine, I believe you, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, it gets you off the hook.  We 
can save some time. 
20 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the other – another 
contentious issue relates to the failure to obtain ministerial 
approval but again I think Mr Molefe, he accepted that the 
obligation to do that rested on him, it did not rest on you.  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 214 of 317 
 
Would you accept that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I accept that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that brings me to just one thing 
that I want to ask you about and that is the issue of batch 
pricing.  You have mentioned – and we know that it was a 
significant contributor to the increase in the ETC.  Now this 
is something that is dealt with in the MNS report.  Perhaps 
I could just ask you to go there.  This is bundle 6, EXHIBIT 
BB27, the one that contains the reports.  And if I could ask 
you to turn to page 312, please?  And you see there, if I 
10 
can take you to the foot of the page, paragraph 2.4.6: 
“One of the significant drivers of the price increase 
was 
payment 
for 
batch 
price 
adjustment 
also 
referred to as batch pricing as a result of the 
splitting of the awards amongst the four bidders.  
Transnet’s position on the payment of extra costs 
for 
reduction 
in 
batch 
quantities 
was 
clearly 
articulated in the RFP and negotiations baseline 
worksheet.” 
Next subparagraph: 
20 
“The RFP provided as follows. ‘Transnet requires 
flexibility in exercising options for the acquisition of 
the 
locomotives. 
 
These 
options 
may 
include 
suspending 
or 
postponing 
the 
delivery 
of 
the 
locomotive until a later date or changing quantities.’ 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 215 of 317 
 
The 
emphasised 
portion 
is 
this. 
 
‘Transnet, 
however, does not expect to pay a price premium 
should it exercise any of these options.” 
The next subparagraph: 
“It has been subsequently argued by Messrs Gama 
and Laher that batch pricing was justifiable on the 
basis 
that 
the 
board 
had 
approved 
the 
recommendation to split the award amongst four 
OEMs.  Therefore the argument they advance is 
that 
the 
reduction 
in 
the 
quantities 
of 
the 
10 
locomotives 
awarded 
to 
each 
of 
the 
OEM’s 
necessitated the OEMs to increase their prices.” 
Next subparagraph: 
“This justification is untenable on the grounds that 
Transnet adopted the position of not paying a price 
premium with full knowledge of the right it reserved 
itself in the RFP to split the award to more than one 
supplier the effect of which would result in lesser 
quantities of locomotives being awarded to the 
OEMs.  The board’s approval of the splitting of the 
20 
award should not be misconstrued as authorisation 
to commit Transnet to batch pricing more so given 
the fact that the authors of the memorandum to the 
board did not bring it to the attention of the board 
that the RFP prohibited Transnet from paying a 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 216 of 317 
 
premium for changing the locomotive quantities.” 
Next subparagraph: 
“Committing Transnet to batch pricing contrary to 
the 
provisions 
of 
the 
RFP 
on 
its 
own 
also 
compromised 
the 
fairness 
of 
the 
procurement 
process and constituted an irregularity because the 
request 
for 
proposals 
read 
together 
with 
the 
constitutional 
and 
legislative 
procurement 
provisions thus constituted the legally binding and 
enforceable framework within which tenders had to 
10 
be 
submitted, 
evaluated 
and 
awarded. 
 
In 
amplification of the Transnet position adopted in the 
RFP for the non-payment of batch pricing, the 
negotiations baseline worksheet, price was provided 
...[intervenes – word cut-off] first of the PTN Team 
to provide guidance specifically on batch pricing, 
the table below is a relevance extract of the terms 
of reference for negotiating batch pricing.” 
Then we have the table and the commentary under that is: 
“This table indicates that one of the objectives set 
20 
out for the negotiating team on batch pricing was to 
ensure that batch pricing must be removed and the 
price must remain fixed as if the order is placed for 
the full 465 diesel and 599 electric locomotives.  
This position is in line with the responses MNS 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 217 of 317 
 
Attorneys received during the interviews with some 
of the technical personnel at TRF mainly Messrs 
Callard, Pillay, Harris that the cost of procuring a 
smaller batch of locomotives should not have a 
material effect on the overall transaction as long as 
the smaller batch was within the 100 locomotive 
threshold.” 
Do you want to just comment on that, I know you deal with 
it in your affidavit? 
MR GAMA:   Sorry Mr Myburgh ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Okay you also said something ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I said I think you deal with it also in 
your affidavit. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I think dealt with it in my affidavit, I  
have nothing to add, other than what I have said in my 
affidavit. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, then let’s go there.  Sorry, I 
have got myself swamped with files, just give me a 
moment.  What page are you at?  So you are presumably 
20 
Mr Gama in Bundle 7, Exhibit BB28?   Your file. 
MR GAMA:   BB28. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you found it Mr Gama?   
MR GAMA:   Maybe it was at the beginning of the file.  I 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 218 of 317 
 
think it could be in another affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   Is it something your junior Mr 
Myburgh could look for while you continue with other 
questions, or not?  Or you would prefer to try and deal with 
it now? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am not able to find it offhand, I 
think I might have had in mind where Mr Gama deals at 
some length with the accelerated delivery schedule, I am 
not sure offhand, perhaps his counsel can help us as to 
where Mr Gama – bearing in mind he filed more than one 
10 
affidavit, I assume it must be, if it is here it must be in the 
affidavit responding to Mohamedi and Callard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I intended that we would take a break at 
six, a ten minutes break, maybe we should take it now that 
might help with looking for it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, shall we say ten minutes or shall we 
say fifteen up to six? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Fifteen Chairperson if possible yes, 
fifteen I think would be ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   To give you more time to look, ja.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV OLDWAGE:   Chair if I might be of assistance, it was 
dealt with in – with reference to the evidence of Mr Callard  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 219 of 317 
 
and in particular his statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWAGE:  And that is to be found, it commences at 
page ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You understand ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWAGE:   250.148. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to start with the bundle, 
what bundle it is? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   It is BB28. 
CHAIRPERSON:   BB28. 
10 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Indeed, page 250.148, that’s where we 
commence dealing with Mr Callard’s ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   2508? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   250.148 
CHAIRPERSON:   250.158. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   250.148. 
CHAIRPERSON:   148.  Yes that is where it starts. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, do you have the specific part 
where he deals with it or shall we take the break and then 
20 
it will be easier to find it? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   I will find it for you shortly, but I don’t 
want to waste your time Mr Chair, if  a short adjournment is 
appropriate we would appreciate that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well okay let’s take the normal 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 220 of 317 
 
break we were going to take then, fifteen minutes and then 
we come back.   
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let’s continue.  Sorry the aircon 
noise, they will attend to it, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama do you want to comment on 
the issue of batch pricing? 
MR GAMA:   Thank you Mr Myburgh.  Before the break 
10 
Chair we ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   We were looking for that part in the 
affidavit that gives the ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Yes, so if we start at page 250.166 and we go 
to paragraph 72.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   Let’s go to line 1, 2, 3, 4, let’s start with the 
5 t h line where it reads that: 
“an anomaly contained in Callard’s email of 26 
March 2018 is the allegation that Transnet overpaid 
20 
in the region of R10billion for the 1064 acquisition.  
As this version is somewhat contradicted by the 
later allegation in the same email of Callard’s where 
he records that the 49billion price tag was arrived 
at because four OEM’s had been contracted for the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 221 of 317 
 
supply of the locomotives instead of two.   Neither 
an overpayment is not established to have occurred 
at least on Callard’s version.” 
The issue Chair of splitting the award I think MNS agrees 
that splitting the award, postponing it, all of that it was 
provided for in the RFP, and that the Board being the entity 
that approved the RFP could also vary the RFP.  I know 
that when the negotiating teams went to negotiate and if an 
ordinary ...[indistinct] came, if I wanted to buy 12 000 tons 
of something they will say 12 000 tons you can pay 350, I 
10 
am just making an example, per ton, but if somebody 
comes and says no I want to buy 100 ton they will tell you 
it’s 500 per ton, it is just an ordinary rule of discount 
pricing, when people buy in bulk and people don’t buy in 
bulk and they know that the – when that decision was made 
to split to two each so people will say look you’re going to 
pay 600 of these things, now you are telling me that you 
are only going to buy 300 and they refused to stick to the 
original price, or the price did go up as a result of that but 
it was a strategic decision that was taken and then in the 
20 
document that I referred you to Chair, that Laher and Smith 
did the reconciliation.   
 
It contained all of this financial transactions and it 
showed the pro’s and cons of each in some detail, which 
then came to the pricing that it came to, so there were 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 222 of 317 
 
certain savings on certain things because for instance 
there was acceleration etcetera and there were certain 
higher costs but at the end in terms of their detailed 
breakdown that they indicated yes you do pay more if you 
pay lesser quantities, but I don’t think we should fault the 
teams, the negotiating teams in terms of that, because I 
know that they tried but they couldn’t hold the same price 
with lower quantities.    
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Mr Gama I perhaps just want to 
put this to you for your comment, the problem that allowing 
10 
the OEM’s to increase their prices at the negotiation stage 
could result in their bid prices increasing beyond those of 
the unsuccessful bidders, that’s really the problem and that 
is certainly the evidence of Mr Laher. 
 
So in other words you split the batches, the prices 
then went up, this happens during the negotiations stage. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, so everybody would have increased the 
prices, these ones were now short-listed because their 
prices were lower already than the other ones so even if 
they then went up, even with the other ones, those higher 
20 
prices would have gone up even higher, so there is no 
prejudice that you suffer when you’re negotiating with a 
lower price supplier versus a higher price supplier, and I 
don’t think that the numbers were you know were big 
significant sort of numbers but I do know that the supplier 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 223 of 317 
 
did refuse to stick to the original price when the quantities 
were reduced. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right do you have anything further 
to add to that? 
MR GAMA:   Let me see.  The final thing Chair that one 
needs to – because you get MNS and Fundudzi they 
become experts after the fact and sometimes what is not 
taken into account is what happened in the negotiation and 
I think if we just turn to page 250.172 at paragraph 78.9 
and sorry, we turn over the page to page 173, in the middle 
10 
of the page after dealing with the ...[indistinct] I indicate 
Chair that in addition there was an independent review of 
the processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is in the middle of the first 
paragraph at page 173. 
MR GAMA:  At 173 yes in the middle of the first paragraph.  
It says: 
“In addition there was an independent review of the 
processes by a high value tender audit team.” 
And they have annexed a copy of a report, which says an 
20 
example of the contract award report of that team, of the 
high value team, which demonstrates their satisfactory 
assessment of the process and in particular they provide 
an audit trail to support any changes from the initial 
business case, and to obtain that satisfactory assessment 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 224 of 317 
 
the results of real time assurance at each stage of the 
Gateway review must indicate sufficient or full compliance 
to the actual team methodology and/or the procurement 
procedures manual to mitigate and manage potential risks 
to which the process is exposed. 
 
There 
ought 
not 
to 
be 
any 
non-compliance 
witnesses, there must be compliance with statutes and 
regulations and the team must have been fully engaged in 
order for the ...[indistinct] team to express an opinion, so 
as executives we would rely on such reports which confirm 
10 
that all due processes had been followed and that in 
particular any changes from the initial business case were 
investigated and supported by means of an audit trail, so I 
think that is also an important safeguard that is there 
where you have independent teams so when somebody 
says there was batch pricing and it changed you can go 
back to the ...[indistinct] team, they are independent and 
you can ask them as well, and I don’t know whether any of 
those have actually been asked to come here just to relate 
how that process works because people just say there was 
20 
a deviation of this and this and that, but it is as if this was 
just happening in a vacuum that there was no safeguards 
that had been put in place in order to look at this, so I 
think it is just also an important aspect Chair to deal with 
but I take the point that the – if there is reliance on the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 225 of 317 
 
financials as the numbers changed when people then tell 
you that no the escalation is – and the rand depreciation 
and there is still price change to so much those were dealt 
with by the Treasury and Finance teams. 
 
Thank you Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right Mr Gama I would like now to 
turn to the last locomotive topic thankfully, and that relates 
to the relocation in particular of CNR South Africa from 
Pretoria to Durban.  Now this is dealt with as you know by 
Mr Gonsalves, can I ask you perhaps just to pick out his 
10 
file, that is Exhibit BB5, you do deal with it in your affidavit 
and I will come back to that.  Right, you have BB5? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, the page number? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well perhaps you can just go to the 
first page.  What I am going to try and do Mr Gama, I have 
got these topics that I still have to deal with, I am going to 
try and summarise or the background at least, and then get 
to what I want to deal with.  What Mr Gonsalves affidavit 
reflects from a broad overview is that on the 11 t h of March 
2014 CNR submits an initial costing of 9.7million for the 
20 
relocation, we then see on the 25 t h of April 2014 CNR 
concludes a business development service agreement with 
Becks, with the project benchmark being 580million.  In 
July 2015 a costing of R647million was submitted to 
Transnet and ultimately you agreed in signing the variation 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 226 of 317 
 
order on the 23 r d of July 2015 and the net effect of this 
then was that Becks was a commission of R67million.  We 
have been through this affidavit, would you accept that 
broad outline? 
 
I suppose the important thing is your signature of 
the variation order, let me take you to that document, that 
you find at page 261, that is where you become directly 
involved.  You see at 261 you write to CNR Rolling Stock 
South Africa and it is headed variation order to finalise the 
relocation, 
the 
construction 
of 
the 
233 
Class 
45-E 
10 
locomotives by CNR Rolling Stock South Africa, who 
...[indistinct] facility in Durban and then you say in the 
middle of the page: 
“Accepted variation order is as follows, EFR Class 
45D locomotives supplied in Durban variation order 
for an amount of R647 181 494.” 
And then after that it sets out the payment terms, do you 
see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you sign this on the 23 r d of July 
20 
205. 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now we do have a short set of 
documents that are contained in your bundle, perhaps I 
could take you to them and those documents you find 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 227 of 317 
 
towards the end of your exhibit 28, at page 250.401, and 
the documents start with a memorandum and what we have 
is there seems to be two signature pages, at 404 there is a 
signature on the 9 t h of June 2015 and then at 405 there 
appears to be another undated signature where there is a 
handwritten 
annotation, 
is 
that 
your 
handwriting 
at 
250.405? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So which of these two pages then 
would be the official page, for want of a better description, 
10 
would it be 405? 
MR GAMA:   When you say the official page ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well in the sense that there’s two 
pages, the one is signed and dated by you, the other is 
signed and not dated and then there is an annotation, I am 
not trying to make an issue of it I just want to know would 
one read them together or is 405 with the annotation. 
MR GAMA:   No, no let me help you there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sure. 
MR GAMA:   The – as I understand it I think the issues 
20 
may be exactly the same. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, no certainly. 
MR GAMA:   The one of 405 I made some comments. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Oh I see, so 405 relates to BT? 
MR GAMA:   It is an earlier version. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 228 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   Where I say to the team how does this relate 
to the delegation by the Board for me to deal with this, as 
there is no reference to it in this memo, and the I also say 
to them does this apply to both BT and CNR. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   So if an earlier version, it is in May of 2015. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   And that is when the team is coming to me to 
say look please approve the final team to negotiate the 
10 
relocation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
MR GAMA:   And they tell me who the people are, and they 
are saying when we negotiate up to a maximum of this 
number can we go and negotiate. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay so I understand what you are 
saying, so 405 is an earlier version. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And 404 was then the one that you 
signed later. 
20 
MR GAMA:  I find that in June but there is another one that 
I signed as the formal approval.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes I ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   After they come back and they say we have 
now negotiated. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 229 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I just ask you just to read into 
the record if you don’t mind your handwritten annotation at 
405.  
MR GAMA:   It says I need clarity on one, does this apply 
to both CNR and BT, number two, the amount referred to 
635 is still under negotiation with a question mark. 
CHAIRPERSON:   635million? 
MR GAMA:   635million ja, and then three, how does this 
relate to the delegation by the ADC/Board for me to deal 
with this matter as there is no reference to it in this 
10 
manner, or approved on the basis that the limit in three is 
not exceeded and I am informed of the final negotiation 
outcome, so this was to approve that the negotiating team 
goes in and have further discussions with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With the – would it be correct that 
probably you first sign and then it occurred to you that you 
needed clarification of certain matters and that is why you 
make those notes because otherwise you wouldn’t sign 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   No you always sign, you always sign, you can 
20 
say either approved or not approved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so I thought maybe if you are not 
approving or this one it says approved, or not approved, it 
is not clear what you were saying. 
MR GAMA:   Ja so I say to them it is approved on the basis 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 230 of 317 
 
that the amount in three is not exceeded and I am informed 
of the final negotiation outcomes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it was implied that they would need 
to come back to you? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so they couldn’t take your signature 
and go somewhere and say this has been approved. 
MR GAMA:   No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so from that point of view it is not 
finally approved. 
10 
MR GAMA:    It is not finally approved, but it is an 
approval of the negotiating team that they can go and 
negotiate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if you can go back to 404, 
so subsequently on the 9 t h of June 2015 you approved of a 
recommendation that reads: 
“Request the Group Chief Executive to approve the 
following;  
[a] 
The team to negotiate the relocation to 
20 
Durban with CNR; 
[b] 
Variation 
order 
in 
order 
to 
finalise 
the 
relocation 
of 
the 
programme 
for 
the 
construction of 233 Class 45-E locomotives 
to 
Durban 
to 
a 
maximum 
value 
of 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 231 of 317 
 
R696 784 286, separate submission has to 
be prepared or has been prepared for BT; 
and  
[c] 
Letter to be issued to CNR to commence 
negotiation 
for 
the 
relocation 
of 
the 
programme. 
Is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is in 9 June.  I want to then 
take you ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR GAMA:   So this one unfortunately I don’t see a date, I 
am not sure which one came before the other, but I think 
later on we will make a comparison of them. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right, what you see then at page 
406, 350.406, is an email from Mr Pita on the 20 t h of June. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On what page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   250.406. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Pita was the Chief Financial 
Officer is that correct? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Not on that date. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  What was his position then? 
MR GAMA:   On that date he was the Group Chief Supply 
Chain Officer. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you have seen this email, I 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 232 of 317 
 
mean what he sets out, received a proposal and he raises 
a number of queries, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So for example in the 4 t h paragraph 
he says get a list of suppliers they are using in Gauteng 
and total material they expect from them, as they say 
they’re moving 1.3million material but it doesn’t make 
sense because they don’t have many suppliers set up as 
yet, per my info.  And he raises a number of issues along 
those lines, correct? 
10 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And he in this email if you go for 
example over the page at 407, he says at the top Yusuf to 
check the assumptions, the last paragraph Yusuf to check 
financial – finance costing, do you see that?  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That I assume was Yusuf Laher? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, right. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then what we see ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Try not lower your voice Mr Gama, try 
20 
not lower your voice, so that whatever you ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Am I too far? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think your voice went lower. 
MR GAMA:  Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Myburgh? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 233 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, and then at 408 the next day 
Mr Laher responds, the second half of the page, from Yusuf 
Laher on 21 June 2015, he says: 
“Dear all, 
My comments as follows.” 
And he lists 18 issues, do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And he questions really in 18 
respects the price that has been submitted.  He raises a 
number of queries. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let’s take one for example, 
increasing the team size does not make sense considering 
the learning curve will mitigate this requirement in a short 
time.  Two, negotiating with suppliers will eliminate the 
inflationary costs related to the four different ...[indistinct] 
etcetera, do you agree with that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I note it, I see it yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And then if you go to page 
410 you will see towards the bottom of the page that 
20 
there’s an email to inter alia Mr Laher and it says: 
“Please find attached revised CNR proposal.” 
And then in the middle of the page on the 25 t h of June Mr 
Laher responds and says: 
“Hi Lindiwe, 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 234 of 317 
 
Their proposal has not changed from the previous 
submission except for their new offer on payment 
terms.  As such the comments per my email over 
the weekend still apply.” 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   I see that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is on the 25 t h of June, if I could 
then ask you to turn to page 250.412, it is 25 June, then 
Gary Pita on the 10 t h of July sends an email to Lindiwe and 
the second paragraph says, right at the bottom of the 
10 
page: 
“Can I ask that you update all the documentation, ie 
memo, for us to send to the Acting GCE for 
approval of the CNR DT proposal and letter from 
GCE to CNR and DT accepting proposals in order to 
save time.  Should the team ...[indistinct] be happy 
with the proposal we can then effect sign off 
quickly.  Please also ensure that the TIS sign-off 
from Emma is included in the memo.” 
Do you see that? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now just ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   I think also what y9ou should say to the Chair 
is that all of this communication that you are asking me to 
see and note is between the negotiating team members. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 235 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  Alright, well in fact I was going 
to get to that because I see that some of these emails are 
copied to Mr Singh, you see in fact at this very page, 
250.412, that email is cc’d to him. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Was he a member of the negotiating 
team? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And we see at 250.4.1.10 also the 
bottom email was also sent to Mr Singh.  Correct? 
10 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then what we have in chronological 
order is the next memorandum to you that you find at page 
250.415 and this you signed on the 23rd of July 2015, that 
you find at 250.418, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that – that memorandum relates to 
– to Bombardier Transport. 
MR GAMA:  That is correct yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You get a similar memorandum if you 
20 
page a little bit further at 250.419 you get a similar 
memorandum in relation to CNR.  There you see the 
signature 23 July 2015 you see that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Requesting the recommendation – the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 236 of 317 
 
acting Group Chief Executive to note the final outcome of the 
negotiation for the relocation to Durban with CNR approved 
variation order and the amount there is 647 million.  You see 
that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now it does appear that CNR 
concludes a business development service agreement with 
BECS and the money flows have or will provide evidence 
that BECS is a Gupta linked company.  Did you know 
anything 
about 
this 
business 
development 
supply 
10 
agreement? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And do you accept that ultimately 
BECS was paid an amount of some 67 million? 
MR GAMA:  Ja I have never seen the actual report Mr 
Goncalves or I do not know how to say his name I think it is 
Goncalves or Goncalves he did come to say to me that there 
was this anomaly that there were people that had been paid 
to negotiate this relocation and that is when I then – we had 
Werksmans doing investigations within Transnet at that time 
20 
so I also asked them to look into this particular matter as 
well but unfortunately I have never received the final report 
on that but I did ask that it be investigated.  So if you say 
there was an amount that you have seen somewhere I am 
not in a position to deny or confirm it.  But Mr Goncalves 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 237 of 317 
 
raised it with me very sharply in a meeting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright well the evidence that the 
money flows team will lead is that BECS was paid I assume 
this is including VAT some 76 million and of this 62 million 
was paid to a number of so called first level laundering 
entities.  Do you have any comment on that? 
MR GAMA:  No.  I do not know anything about it ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Do you know of any involvement by 
BECS – do you know of anything that they may have done to 
secure this variation order and this amount? 
10 
MR GAMA:  No I do not know them – I do not who they are.  
I was told by Mr Goncalves that they were these people.  I 
do not know whether they even met with my negotiating team 
of they were working for CNR I am – I do not know who they 
are. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How is that the negotiations were 
conducted in such a way that it would allow for a commission 
of this size 67 million? 
MR GAMA:  You asking me?  I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Or are you surprised by the fact that 
20 
there was that amount? 
MR GAMA:  I was – I was very surprised I mean I was very, 
very surprised. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Gama do I understand from what 
you say in your affidavit that you relied on the people who 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 238 of 317 
 
put – reports to you and recommendations made to you 
yourself did you know of Mr Laher’s concerns? 
MR GAMA:  Mr? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Laher’s concerns. 
MR GAMA:  No I did not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you know of Mr Peter’s concerns? 
MR GAMA:  No I did not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Have you got any idea how those 
concerns were resolved? 
MR GAMA:  No.  I do not know how they were resolved.  I 
10 
am – I see that Mr Laher was not a signatory to the 
documents – the negotiation documents but Mr Peter was. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  So but all of these memos that you have read to 
me 
I 
have 
only 
known 
about 
them 
because 
of 
the 
commission.  So you have sent me these documents.  I was 
not aware of their existence prior to that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright then can I take you – you deal 
with this in your affidavit perhaps you can address that if you 
would like to.  Go to your Exhibit 28 and turn up page 146. 
20 
MR GAMA:  Perhaps before we do that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  Just as a matter of – of record so that there is 
clarity on it.  The – the memos that I sign on the 23 rd of July 
that you referred to one is for CNR and the other one is for 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 239 of 317 
 
BT which is Bombardier.  So what is really in front of me on 
that day is the amount of 618 million which is for BT and an 
amount of 647 million well that is the maximum values of 647 
million for CNR. So for the approval you are doing a 
comparison of the two in terms of relocation and thinking 
they look very close to one another.  That is really what is in 
my mind at the time when one is signing that particular 
document.  But also you have a team of five negotiators that 
have been busy with this for more than a year by the Chair 
because you come to July 2015 they say they started the 
10 
negotiations in 2014.  So that is what is at my mind so I just 
want to record that at this point before we continue.  Yes Mr 
Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Perhaps I could ask you just to go to 
the POI Bundle the one with the reports in.  Bundle 6 Exhibit 
27. MNS deal with this in a so called relocation report. Could 
I just take you please to page 427.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That is Bundle 6? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Bundle 6 Chairperson yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  42? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  427.  At paragraph 2.8 I just want to – 
to get your comment on it.  There it says: 
“The Transnet personnel had constituted the 
relocation negotiating team were – and it 
lists six people including Singh and Peter.” 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 240 of 317 
 
 
Does that accord with your recollection? 
MR GAMA:  Yes those are the people who signed the memo. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then I had said I would take you to 
your affidavit.  You deal with this at page 146.  That is at the 
beginning of Exhibit 28.  Not 250.146 but 146.  And this is in 
response to Mr Molefe and deal with this at some – some 
length running from page  
MR GAMA:  It starts at age 146. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja in fact I – on the right hand side 
yes. 
10 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Running through to I think it is 154. 
MR GAMA:    Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you end off actually by referring to 
Mr Laher’s concerns which you say you had no knowledge 
of.  Is there anything in particular that you would like to deal 
with in these pages? 
MR GAMA:  Maybe just a high level. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  I am not going to go into detail onto it. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sure. 
MR GAMA:  So the – the relocation is initiated by Mr Vallihu 
who was the Chief Executive of Transnet Engineering when 
he writes to Mr Molefe requesting to relocate the assemble 
line for Bombardier and China North Rail.  Because at the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 241 of 317 
 
close of the locomotive tender it had been assumed that 
everybody 
was 
going 
to 
manufacture 
in 
Pretoria 
– 
Kuduspoort.  However CSR and TE already had assemble 
lines in Pretoria and they only needed to be rigid just a little 
bit 
and 
then 
they 
were 
able 
to 
continue 
with 
their 
manufacturing.  With the other two CNR and BT they did not 
have any assembly facilities so they had to move to Durban.  
So – but he puts all of that in his memo to say there are 
competitions concerns.  You do not want one diesel 
manufacturer looking over the shoulder of another it is better 
10 
to relocate to this other places.  So that is how it starts. 
 
The – it ends up with the – the letters that you 
showed me where after the 23r d of July then wrote back to 
BR and CNR indicating to them that these are the maximum 
amounts that were approved for them and that they would be 
paid periodically. 
 
The – so the rationale of all of that I think was well 
documented and well-motivated by Mr Vallihu in this – in his 
letters that when they asked for the – for the relocation. 
 
So at a time then enter Mr Goncalves where he came 
20 
through with one or two of his other partner and then he 
informed us that there had been this involvement of BEX – 
B-E-X or BEX Business Expansion Structure something. And 
then at that time that is when I then asked that Werksmans 
investigate I have attached SSG9 the – a letter – a first 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 242 of 317 
 
report from Werksmans where they said that they have 
commenced with the investigation and that they were going 
to engage with Mr Goncalves so that they can get more 
information and start with that process. 
 
And at some point in the commission you were also 
informed Chair that there was no relocation.  But I think we 
can agree that there was a relocation to Wentworth and that 
is where these two entities were in terms of the relocation 
program. 
 
The obligations for payments where they fell within 
10 
the divisions to then say as and when certain things 
happened and they should be paid.  But at some point I then 
decided that since we are doing this investigation and there 
were these allegations that came about as a result of BEX I 
then asked the CE of TFR Mr Ravi Nair to stop all payments 
to these two entities both BT and CNR so that we can have 
some kind of understanding of what the relocating program 
amounts were and whether or not we had – they had not 
been inflated to us. 
 
So that was done and they stopped those payments 
20 
and they wrote to – they suspended those payments and 
they only – they said to them we would only pay you just for 
the delivery of locomotives and none of the relocation until a 
time when we are clearer. 
 
As I have said to you Chair I am unable to give you a 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 243 of 317 
 
full report because I never saw the – the full report from – 
what is his name – Werksmans in terms of the finalisation. 
 
And also in the – I have also indicated that it has 
subsequently emerged following the submission of a detailed 
motivation that during the – and during the commission’s 
hearings that Yusuf Laher one of the financial executives 
had raised certain objections and highlighted certain issues 
of concern which were brought to the attention of the team 
that was working on the recommendation and does not 
appear to me that his concerns were ever addressed. 
10 
 
But at that time of signing I had no knowledge of his 
concerns and I had no reason to doubt the bona fide’s of the 
high level team that was involved in the negotiation of the 
relocation costs and I had no cause to be concerned at that 
time up until the time that Mr Goncalves visited me and then 
that is when I learnt that there was a commission agent that 
was used.  And so I had just looked at the two amounts that 
they were almost similar to one another.  But it seems now 
from what transpired that we probably could have paid less 
for the – for the CNR portion at least. 
20 
 
But each one of them and I have attached for the 
commission the actual proposal for BT and CNR they are all 
– they are marked and they are in this particular – I do not 
know – I do not wish for us to go through them but you will 
see that they are almost very similar and they are almost on 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 244 of 317 
 
par with each other. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And Mr Gama you also deal with this 
further at page 165 in dealing directly with Mr Goncalves’ 
statement.  Perhaps if you want to – if there is anything you 
want to deal with at paragraphs 47 and 48 it seems that 
these are things you have –  
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   We have already traversed by and 
large. 
MR GAMA:  Yes I already traversed them and you did 
10 
indicate that amongst them there were two issues really 
there. 
 
The first issue was that there had not been any 
consensus between CNR and its partners – the local 
partners Goncalves included about the appointment of this 
BEX. 
 
And then the main thing that was significant to me 
and to Transnet was that in this 2015 proposal I think I was 
now talking to him in 2017 and he was then saying that look 
that variation agreement there was the presence of BEX who 
20 
end the commission and therefore maybe if they had not 
been there the costs would have been lower. 
 
If you go my paragraph 48.2 then they say they 
requested the Chief of Legal at Transnet be fully briefed to 
ensure that investigation is carried out into CNR and BEX 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 245 of 317 
 
involvement in the CNR consortium. 
 
As I have indicated I however never received a 
preliminary nor final report from Werksmans who had been 
instructed in this regards.  Werksmans had advised at the 
time that there was a delay due to waiting for information 
from the high value tender teams. But by then we had also 
taken the decision to stop any further payments to both CNR 
as well as BT that related to the relocation process pending 
the outcome of the Werksmans Report. 
 
I think that is a fair summary. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Can I just before I conclude 
on this can I ask I have seen reference and some documents 
to the effect that in addition to concluding these LSA’s with 
the OEM’s you also concluded maintenance contracts, is that 
right? 
MR GAMA:  Yes with OEM’s yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So those were separate contracts? 
MR GAMA:  Ja those – those are for after sales service they 
kick in two or three years after the locomotives have started 
working because they relate to the maintenance. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What I must just mention to you if you 
want to comment you can is that money flows evidence 
shows that Mr Essa also concluded BDSA’s in relation to the 
maintenance contract. 
MR GAMA:  BD 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 246 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Business Development Services 
Agreements. 
MR GAMA:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In other words these… 
MR GAMA:  Okay as it is commission agreements. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
These 
commission 
kickback 
agreements ja. 
MR GAMA:  No I am not – I was not aware of that either. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So you were talking about the 67 or so 
million that BEX was paid and you said well perhaps it could 
10 
have been lower if it had not been for that.  I just want to – 
to put this to you.  Money flows intends to lead evidence 
which will demonstrate that the total – the grand total of all 
kickbacks paid to the Gupta enterprise relating to the 95 
locomotives, 
the 
100 
locomotives, 
the 
359 
and 
232 
locomotives that being part of the 1064, the attendant 
maintenance contract that you have spoken about and the 
CNR relocation costs that we have spoken about the grand 
total is just short of R3.5 billion. 
MR GAMA:  Eish. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I mean that must come as a real shock. 
MR GAMA:  Ja.  So these – these money flows are monies 
that have flown to these different letter box companies that 
you are talking about. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.   
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 247 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:  Ja. It is shocking. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I want now to turn to the issue of T-
Systems.  T-Systems is dealt with as you know by Ms 
Macede.  Can I ask you please to turn up file BB – sorry 
Exhibit BB11.  Ja.  So could I ask you to go to page 1.  Now 
Mr Gama I am going to try and paraphrase the evidence of 
Ms Macede I mean a lot of this is not in dispute and there is 
a lot of common ground between two of you. 
 
Perhaps you could go to page 5 and you will see that 
she says that Transnet issued and approved a RFP with the 
10 
provision of IP Data Services to Transnet in November 2015.  
I just ask you to confirm that we know that the entity that 
held the contract before them was T-Systems.  They had had 
a five year contract which had been extended I think by two 
years would you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And she says at 13 a tender related to 
the outsourcing of Data Services for the whole of Transnet. 
 
If you go to page 6 paragraph 14.1 the estimated cost 
of this tender was 1.85 billion over five years.  She goes on 
20 
to explain at paragraph 16 that there were seven bidders 
including T-Systems and Gajema. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  She then goes on to explain that two 
bidders 
were 
shortlisted. 
 
That 
being 
T-Systems 
and 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 248 of 317 
 
Ubunthu.  And over the page – page 8 Ubunthu withdrew and 
was then replaced by the third highest ranking bidder 
Gajema. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So now it was Gajema and T-Systems. 
MR GAMA:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  She says at paragraph 20 that on the 
22n d of September 2016 she was presented with a complete 
file of the evaluation process by Mr Thomas requesting my 
signature on the recommendation to award the tender to T-
10 
Systems.  You confirm that. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then she says at page 9 at the top that 
this recommendation was not in line with the evaluation 
outcome of the process and she explains at paragraph 22.1 
that Gajema provided the lowest price bid in the 00:29:17 
stage scoring a final score of 99%.  T-Systems scored a final 
score of 85.07%.  You see that. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  She then says at paragraph 25 on 
20 
page 10 just below the quoted part she has explained that 
she had her misgivings but she says I then appended my 
signature to the recommendation letter this is in respect of 
T-Systems but made the following comments at the bottom of 
the letter.  Do you see that? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 249 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   She says at 26 that: 
“The discomfort I had about the fact that I 
signed 
the 
recommendations 
to 
T-Systems 
even though I had made my point clear, led me 
to writing a detailed response to each and 
every risk raised, explaining why the risks 
highlighted were not risks in my view...” 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at paragraph 28, at page 11, 
she says that roundabout this time, she held a meeting 
with you at the Tintswalo Hotel in Waterfall Estate.  She 
says: 
“During this meeting, Mr Gama tested a few 
things 
with 
me, 
like, 
the 
dangerous 
of 
procurement, my level of conviction, given my 
view about the risks, and where the tender 
process was. 
I 
gave 
him 
my 
assurance 
based 
on 
the 
20 
Transnet procurement processes followed, the 
relevance of some of the risks raised, the 
decision to award the tender Gijima was the 
right way...” 
 
Do you see that? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 250 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then she says at paragraph 30: 
“The next time I interacted with this process 
during or about late December 2016 was in 
Mr Gama’s office where he called both the GC-
SEO, Mr Thomas and me to the office. 
Mr Gama recommended that in my capacity as 
the GCIO and the business owner of the 
tender, I should be allowed to go and test the 
identified risks with Gijima...” 
10 
 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at 31 she says that: 
“On the 23 r d of January, GC-SEO called a 
meeting with Gijima in Transnet Engineering 
offices and they worked through the risks that 
had been identified in relation to Gijima...” 
 
And then at 32 she says: 
“At this point, Gijima was excused and a 
formal resolution was then taken at the end of 
20 
the meeting by the Transnet Team that all risks 
had been mitigated and that the tender can be 
awarded to Gijima...” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 251 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   She says at 33: 
“On or around February 2017, just before the 
sitting of the Group Leadership Team, there 
were two separate memoranda drawn up with 
different 
recommendations 
for 
Mr 
Gama’s 
signature. 
The one recommendation was from Mr Peter 
into whom the procurement function reported 
and the other memorandum from me. 
The one memorandum addressed to Mr Gama 
10 
from Peter, Thomas and myself recommended 
that the tender be awarded to T-Systems...” 
 
And then she says in the next sub-paragraph: 
“The 
other 
memorandum 
that 
I 
prepared 
recommended that the tender be awarded to 
Gijima...” 
MR GAMA:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sub-three.  I suppose quite smartly.  
You, according to her, made an emphatic point that you 
wanted to sign only one memorandum to the ADC and not 
20 
two memoranda.  Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at 34: 
“Mr 
Peter 
and 
I 
finally 
signed 
dated 
8 February 2017, 
recommending 
that 
the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 252 of 317 
 
tender be awarded to Gijima...” 
 
Then over the page under the heading, Decision 
by the ADC to award the tender to the second placed 
bidder.  That is T-Systems.  She says that: 
“On 
13 
February 
2017, 
the 
tender 
was 
presented to the ADC. 
I attended this meeting with ADC members...” 
 
And she sets out the persons that were present 
at that meeting, and we see that at 35.1, Mr Stanley Shane 
by that time, if I understand correctly, he was the 
10 
Chairperson of the BADC.  Is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You were present at this meeting? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at 35.4, Mr Zanool(?) 
Nugby(?).  Was he a member, a Transnet Board member 
and a member also of the BADC? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.  She then says at paragraph 
38 over the page: 
20 
“The tender was discussed in detail during this 
meeting. 
Both Mr Thomas and I were granted the 
opportunity to make verbal submissions to the 
ABDC(sic) and to answer questions...: 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 253 of 317 
 
 
She says that: 
“During this meeting, Mr Gama sent me a 
message or Whatsapp to tell me to “stop 
fighting because it was clear what the board 
wanted”...” 
 
She says she only saw this afterwards.  At 39: 
“The transcript of the recording is attached. 
Despite my earnest attempts to convey to the 
ABC that due processes was followed and that 
the 
risks 
identified 
after 
the 
evaluation 
10 
process had been addressed and that the 
tender should be awarded to Gijima as the 
winner. 
The ABC decided otherwise. 
A copy of the ABC recommendation to the 
board is dated and attached, et cetera...” 
 
She says at 40: 
“When the ABC recommended to the board to 
grant final award to T-Systems, although I 
attended, I able(?) to say because it was now 
20 
the ADC recommending to the board and not 
management. 
I 
have 
since 
noted 
that 
the 
ADC’s 
recommendation to the board was signed by 
Mr Gama and Mr Peter, both of whom were 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 254 of 317 
 
Executive Board members...” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then she says at paragraph 44: 
“Objections 
by 
Gijima 
and 
unsuccessful 
negotiations with T-Systems: 
I 
was 
not 
personally 
involved 
in 
the 
subsequent events described below. 
I was, however, made aware of the events by 
Mr Selinga of Transnet Legal and Mr Gama, 
10 
who were the recipients of updates in respect 
thereof...” 
 
She mentions Gijima’s objection to not being 
awarded the tender.  The matter was escalated to the 
Transnet Ombudsman and to National Treasury.  Over the 
page: 
“National Treasury informed Transnet it will not 
be allowed to extend the agreement with T-
Systems further than May 2018 and National 
Treasury 
informed 
the 
Transnet 
Board 
of 
20 
Directors that its decision to award the tender 
to T-Systems 
was 
wrong 
and 
directed 
to 
Transnet to rescind the decision and award the 
tender to Gijima...” 
 
She says at 45: 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 255 of 317 
 
“The 
board 
then 
took 
a 
decision 
on 
27 September 2017 to rescind the award to T-
Systems and award the tender to Gijima...” 
 
Then she talks about settlement negotiations 
that were unsuccessful and then if you go to page 19 she 
talks about the fact that a new board was appointed in 
2018 and then it would appear that a decision was taken to 
seek to review and set aside the award to T-Systems and 
instead to appoint Gijima and she mentions at paragraph 
60, and I will come to the judgment in a moment: 
10 
“I have since learnt about the high court 
judgment delivered on 12 December which 
reviewed and set aside the decision to award 
the tender to T-Systems...” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now you have provided a response 
to this in two places.  Could I ask you to turn to Exhibit 
28? 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you deal with the issue first at 
page 154 and this is in response to Mr Molefe.  It is quite a 
crisp response.  You say at 34.1: 
“As management, we submitted a proposal to 
the 
Board 
Acquisitions 
and 
Disposal 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 256 of 317 
 
Committee 
indicating 
that 
the 
adjudication 
process had submitted Gijima as entity to 
appointment as the preferred bidder for the 
Data Services Tender...” 
 
You say: 
“It is up to Mr Stanley Shane, the Chairperson 
of 
the 
Board 
Acquisitions 
and 
Disposal 
Committee. 
A private meeting between myself and Linda 
Mbasa, the Chairperson of the board, advised 
10 
that the Non-Executive Members of the board 
would 
not 
follow 
management’s 
recommendation for the appointment of Gijima 
and would rather appoint T-Systems...” 
 
Is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say at 34.3: 
“The reasoning of the board’s decision not to 
implement management’s recommendation was 
varied and is dealt with more fully herein 
20 
below in regard to Mosidi’s testimony...” 
 
And then you say that: 
“Management addressed a letter to National 
Treasury, the latter having agreed with the 
recommendation that Gijima be appointed...” 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 257 of 317 
 
 
And you go onto say: 
“In fact, litigation was subsequently pursued in 
the South Gauteng High Court which ultimately 
resulted in a declaration(?) order appointing 
Gijima on the basis of management’s initial 
recommendation...” 
MR GAMA:   That is correct.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You confirm that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I confirm that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the other place that you 
10 
deal with this, is when you respond to Ms Mosidi.  Could I 
ask you please to turn to page 159? 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you deal with this from 159 
through to 156.  Perhaps I could invite you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
I 
am 
sorry. 
 
Did 
you 
say 
from 
...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   One, five – page 159.  I beg your 
pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   To page 165. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraphs 38, Chairperson, to 46.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now perhaps I could ask you to go 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 258 of 317 
 
through this.  It seems that the first paragraph 38 is very 
much background that we might already have traversed.  If 
suitable to you, could you start by taking us through from 
paragraph 39 at page 160, where you deal with the meeting 
that you had at the Tintswalo Hotel? 
MR GAMA:   No, thank you.  When I wrote this affidavit, I 
had not been provided with the viva voce testimony of 
Mosidi but I have, subsequent to that, I think in the past 
two days or so, have been provided with aspects of it as it 
relates to that aspect about the Tintswalo Hotel meeting.  I 
10 
think we should call it that.   
 
The context of that meeting, simply Chair, is that 
Ms Mosidi was new at Transnet and she had signed a 
document that she did not believe in but had nevertheless 
signed it and it was in front of me and that, one, that why 
she had signed a document that she did not believe in 
because she signed it and then wrote other things next to 
it.  So... 
 
And I have gone through the document but I 
myself was going through the document and had many 
20 
questions around it.  And I think that is the document she 
refers to as a document of September or August 2016. 
 
I 
got 
a 
sense 
that 
she 
may 
have 
been 
intimidated to sign the document.  [laughs]  Or was not too 
sure but because she was new and so I got the sense that 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 259 of 317 
 
maybe I needed to engage with her and perhaps I could 
learn(?) from her what the issues were.  I did not want to 
influence her in any way in terms of whatever decision that 
she needed to take and I think that she has said to you, 
Chair, this Commission that she believed so as well. 
 
So she had signed this document despite her 
discomfort.  So I thought that maybe she had been 
intimidated one way or the other but also I wanted her to 
have comfort that she can disagree with things and I 
needed to get a sense of whether she had that courage to 
10 
be able to disagree with things and to put facts on her own 
in order for her to be able to make those decisions. 
 
Now I have seen Chair, you have made her, 
especially when she spoke to you, she changed her 
statements many times.  [laughs]  Whenever you would ask 
her questions then she would go with what you thought 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR GAMA:   ...was correct but I think in terms of what you 
may have wanted but at the end, I think she looked like 
20 
she was prone to some of your influence, Chair.  [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR 
GAMA:  
 In terms of 
some of the viva 
voce 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...there are many witnesses who have 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 260 of 317 
 
appeared before me. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have no recollection of what you are 
talking about ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...personally(?) ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
I 
ask 
witnesses 
questions 
and 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...they may or may not think what is 
behind the questions. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  But obviously, there is no desire to 
make them change what they intend to say, if it is the truth. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR GAMA:   So.  But in any event, I think, as I say, she 
did change her statements many times.  But the key thing, 
because I saw there is something – there is a reference 
20 
which is not in the affidavit of hers but there is a reference 
in the viva voce to a five million or something about danger 
and all of that and I do not know what she herself probably 
thought but at best, I may have said to her:  Do you know 
that people – when you are adjudicating a big tender like 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 261 of 317 
 
this, people are not scared to spend five million just to 
survey – put surveillance on you?  [laughs]  At best.   
 
But she – there were issues about dangers and 
all of that but I think they are neither here nor there.  My 
intention was to assure her that she needed to – and I 
think that is also the sense that she got, finally, when she 
wrapped up her testimony and with you here.   
 
So I walked away from that Tintswalo meeting, 
thinking that she would have that courage, at least, to 
interrogate the procurement processes and to make sure 
10 
that she does not compromise any governance and that 
was my sense, if we deal with that aspect.  If we then 
move to the next aspect of ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [Speaker ’s microphone not switched 
on – unclear] 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, perhaps we should just 
perhaps deal with the viva voce evidence and you can then 
comment on it.  I mean, I think you have dealt with it 
broadly. 
20 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I have dealt with it broadly because I do 
not know how much time you have. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, let us go to page 250.428.  It 
is almost right at the end of your bundle.  That is a 
transcript of her evidence. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 262 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:   250 point...? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   428. 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So at line 20 at page 428, she is 
now ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   I am not there yet, sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You are not... 
MR GAMA:   Okay, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So at about line 20 and for the sake 
of trying to save some time, we get to the key passage.  
10 
She talks – now she has gone to the hotel and she is 
looking for you, she finds you and she says at line 20: 
“Good evening, sir. 
And you then said: 
“Look, Makano.  I just want to understand that, 
one, you are convinced that your decision 
about T-Systems is the right one? 
Two, remember procurement is dangerous.  It 
is a very dangerous process. 
If, for example, you scuttle a party, which by 
20 
now people would have shared maybe five 
million, five million, five million and you come 
and you scuttle that party, you would have 
endangered your life. 
So are you sure?   
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 263 of 317 
 
Are you certain that you have done your due 
diligence 
in 
terms 
of 
interrogating 
this 
process?  
Are you comfortable in terms of where you are 
going to land? 
Because I would like to make you sensitive as 
a new person to the dangers of procurement 
as well, et cetera...” 
 
You want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I think – I mean, straight up, as I 
10 
indicated to you, there was not any discussion about 
decisions relating to the entities, as she will prove herself 
in the same viva voce testimony.  If you – so I deny any 
discussions.  In fact, as I say to you, there is nothing 
about sharing of money.  At best, I think, what I could have 
said is.  People are willing to pay lots of money to do 
surveillance on people who are making decisions about 
procurement. 
 
But really, the context of this is a simple thing 
which deals with whether she was intimated because I was 
20 
very worries that she had find a document that she did not 
believe in.  So if you – for instance, if we just – if we go to 
page 160. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that 250.160? 
MR GAMA:   250.430. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 264 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   250...  H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Oh, I am with you.  So you are 
talking about the transcript number? 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  Sorry, I used the transcript. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  The number at the bottom.  
Okay.   
MR GAMA:   Chairperson, I was in – at the bottom there 
where 
you 
had 
to 
by 
references 
to 
procurement 
is 
dangerous and if you scuttle, that term, that certain people 
10 
may have already divided the proceeds.  I deny that there 
was such a discussion.  Then she says no the whole 
discussion rattled her.  But if you then move further to 
page – to the next page.  The Chairperson says in the 
middle: 
“Oh, earlier on, you said by the whole talk? 
You say you were rattled by the whole talk?  
And I was wondering if you mean the whole 
discussion 
but 
you 
mean 
this 
particular 
statement, that is what rattled you?...” 
20 
 
And she says: 
“No, those particular statements, Chair...” 
 
If you then go further down, the Chair says: 
“That evening, did you go into the particular 
detail of the risks?” 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 265 of 317 
 
 
And then she says: 
“We did not even go into some.  
He was just saying:  Are you sure?   
Can I look you in the eye? 
Are you certain that you are right? 
That is what I think you are saying.   
Are you aware of the danger of going against 
the tide?...” 
 
So for me, Chair, it is actually the other way 
around.  As I have said to you, she had signed the 
10 
document but she did not agree with and that is what had 
worried me and I had wanted to talk to her to say:  Look, 
you do not need to find things that you do not agree with.  
It is better not to sign them.  But she was new and I 
wanted to engage with her and give her some comfort in 
terms of the – but if you go further, she asks – you ask her, 
Chair: 
“Did you ultimately sign the document?” 
 
She says: 
“No.” 
20 
 
That is at the bottom of the next page at 432.  
So it is very clear that at the end she understood that our 
discussions were really just around her and the kind of 
assurance that I required in order for her to do her work 
properly.  So the other issue is about startling and people 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 266 of 317 
 
sharing.  I really do not know where she got that from.  I 
deny that but I think, as I say, when I look at 166 Chair, 
which is at page 436.  She eventually says – you ask her: 
“On your analyses, what was the purpose of 
that meeting?” 
 
And then she says: 
“I would give you two views. 
One, either that he was actually testing as a 
new Executive to Transnet whether I would do 
due process and whether I can stand even 
10 
when it is difficult to and stand up to any 
questioning or interrogation...” 
 
She nailed it there that that is what it was all 
about.  And I think we need to go no further than that.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Well, then let us get to the 
part of your affidavit where you deal with Mr Shane.  If you 
can go, please, to page 161, paragraph 42? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that...  The one with ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...we are going back to the same bundle. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, 161.  It is right in the front, 
20 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just before you – and I am going to 
come back to this but have you come to learn that 
Mr Shane is actually a well-known Gupta associate?  Have 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 267 of 317 
 
you come to learn that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I have not come to learn that.  [laughs] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But you have heard ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   I have read things that are suspected, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So just so that we understand this.  
Did Mr Shane, did he replace – who did he replace as the 
Chairperson of the BADC? 
MR GAMA:   No, he did not replace anyone.  There was a 
new board.  I think there has been this tendency where 
there is a new board and you get completely new people.  
10 
But the one that – in the board previously, that is the same 
role that Mr Sharma had played.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay so when I talk about 
replacement, I do not mean it literally.  So we know he 
succeeded ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Yes, that is ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...Mr Sharma? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So can we deal with 
paragraph 42, please? 
MR GAMA:   So at paragraph 42, I just indicate that before 
the commencement of the – of that ADC meeting, which 
was on the 13 t h of February, I was requested by Mr Shane 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 268 of 317 
 
when I arrived that the meeting be adjourned so that he 
would have a brief session with me.  So I had a discussion 
with Shane in the presence of the board’s Chairperson, 
Mabaso.  Mr Shane indicated that the non-executive 
directors 
would 
vote 
to 
overturn 
the 
decision 
and 
recommendation that had been made by management to 
award the contract to the FirstRand bidder which was 
Gijima, this was now after the December discussion that 
we had had with Mosidi and after she had determined that 
the risks were actually manageable.  
10 
 
Mr Shane indicated that as non-executives they had 
a 
right 
to 
overturn 
the 
recommendations 
of 
the 
management and so to overrule, the two of us, who were 
the two executives that were members of the board and 
that the majority of the non-executives could be overruled 
by them in circumstances where they, as non-execs, 
believed that management had not properly assessed the 
risks. 
 
And then he then indicated at the board meeting he 
would also recommend that the decision that had been 
20 
made by management also be overturned because as non-
execs they had the right to do that, so that was the whole 
gist of it because he believed that we did not assess the 
risk properly.   
 
So during that meeting I then outlined to Mr Shane 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 269 of 317 
 
all of the processes that had taken leading to the decision 
to award the IT data services tender to Gijima and I 
indicated that there was adjudication, there was a lot of 
discussions that took place amongst the people and that 
the decision had not been taken lightly, we had taken it 
after following proper and due processes. 
 
He indicated that no, look, his reading of that whole 
process was that T-Systems would have won this tender 
had it not been for the fact that Ubuntu Technologies had 
withdrawn at some point. 
10 
 
And then he then had certain concerns about Gijima 
that he came up with and in particular he said look, you 
could wake up tomorrow morning and Transnet cannot even 
send an email because you have got a new contractor.  
That would be a disaster to the reputation of Transnet just 
as an example. 
 
The meeting became and tense and he said to us – 
to me, look, it does not really matter what we as 
management thought about Gijima and that he thinks that 
T-Systems should continue with this because in any event 
20 
the ultimate decision lay with the board and not with us 
and he did not want to expose Transnet to any form of risk. 
 
So I indicated to him that look, it would be difficult 
to change that decision and there would be consequences 
because that decision conflicted with the outcome of a due 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 270 of 317 
 
process.   
 
So we then resumed with the meeting at the ADC 
and then Mosidi and Thomas then came in.  We granted 
them the opportunity to make their verbal submissions.  I 
did not tell them that I had had this meeting which wanted 
to overturn the decision.  So they came in in support of a 
decision to award to Gijima and they continued to support 
that recommendation because that was the outcome and I 
was hoping that maybe Shane would have considered or 
reconsidered his stance in terms of overturning that 
10 
particular decision. 
 
It was a long drawn out meeting, there was a lot of 
talk and discussions.  At the end when Mosidi was 
persisting, you know, a lot with the argument, I then sent 
to her that SMS to say look, we may have to look at other 
ways to deal with this, it is not going to help if you 
continue to argue in this case because it was clear to me 
that there was not anything that was going to change the 
Chairperson’s mind around this particular thing, he was 
convinced that it needed to change. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it more the Chairperson who was 
having this maybe heated debate with them or the whole 
committee? 
MR GAMA:   It was more led by Mr Shane as the 
Chairperson of the committee.  Ja. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 271 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, continue? 
MR GAMA:   So I then say at paragraph 43 that: 
“The protestations that Mosidi had at the ADC 
meeting were no different to what I had raised in my 
private meeting with Shane.” 
So we agree with that, said that no contestation.   
 
Then we then submitted a new memo to the board 
which was submitted by myself and Peter and we indicated 
in that submission, if you go to page 164, Chair, at the top 
at 44.2 and 44.3.  We indicated in that memo – and that is 
10 
captured at paragraph 38 and 39 of the memo that: 
“Management had recommended that Gijima be 
awarded the contract as they were the preferred 
bidder and which was in line with the procurement 
procedures manual.  We then also informed the 
board that the ADC did not support management’s 
recommendation for the award of the contract to the 
FirstRand bidder and we advised them on the basis 
upon which the ADC did not agree.  At the end the 
board carried the recommendation of the ADC and 
20 
they appointed T-Systems instead of Gijima.  Less 
than 10 days after that Gijima protested, they wrote 
to the Transnet ombudsman.” 
I advised them that since this decision had been made by 
the board, which is the accounting authority, that they 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 272 of 317 
 
needed to refer that matter to the National Treasury 
because we could not make any decision that was counter 
to a decision that the board had already made. 
“And ultimately and after numerous discussions the 
board agreed that management had been correct in 
recommending the award to Gijima and after the 
National Treasury had intervened.  And then at time 
T-Systems communicated its view that they would 
challenge the overturning of their appointment by 
the board because they believed that they had won 
10 
this thing on merit. 
Ultimately at the end of it all I applied to the South 
Gauteng Court for a declaratory order to set aside the 
decision of the board to award the contract to T-Systems 
and I think the board concurred with that because there 
were certain issues that they could not – they were scared 
that they would be sued by T-Systems because there was 
now a change in the award.  I then learnt that at some 
point I think in 2018 or the beginning of 2019 the 
declaratory order was actually issues as per the prayers 
20 
that were made to the court. 
 
So I think that is an overview of that matter, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I ask you – let us go to the 
judgment, that you find at page 214 of EXHIBIT BB11, 
annexure to Ms Mosidi’s affidavit. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 273 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I have got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So if you turn forward in this 
judgment to page 225 you will see at paragraph 29, 225, 
that Transnet submits that it acted unlawfully in deciding to 
award the tender to T-Systems which was not the highest 
scoring bidder.  Now that was the contention.  And then 
over the page at paragraph 30, the court found that: 
“The crux of the review is that T-Systems was not 
the highest scoring bidder, Transnet acted on its 
own understanding of its authority...” 
10 
Etcetera and then the court quotes a section, which 
permits a deviation from the basic principle that the award 
must be made to the highest scoring bidder, that section 
provides that once the bids had been scored at the award 
stage of the process the contract: 
“Must be awarded to the bidder who scored the 
highest points unless objective criteria in addition 
to those contemplated in paragraphs (d) and (d) 
justify the award to another bidder.” 
And ultimately what the court concluded is that there was 
20 
no such justification, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I think the issue of the risks that had 
been identified, the court would have felt and we agreed 
with it that the risks did not amount to objective criteria. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now I want to take you to something 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 274 of 317 
 
different and that is at page 229.  At paragraph 38: 
“One is left wondering...” 
Said the court. 
“...whether the ADC was not being driven by 
extraneous considerations in this instance despite 
management’s satisfaction with Gijima’s response 
that the tender should be awarded to the lower 
scoring bidder.  This is not merely fleeting fancy, 
Transnet annexed to its papers a transcript of the 
meeting of the ADC held in February 2017 shortly 
10 
before the decision to recommend the award of 
tender to T-Systems.  The transcript reflects the 
Chair of the committee, Mr Shane, making the 
following comments, amongst others.” 
I am just going to then read the underlined portions of the 
quote: 
“I will say that again slowly.  They are not alien to 
suing their customers, okay?  I am happier with the 
risk of getting sued by Gijima who did not get the 
contract than us getting rid of the incumbent we 
20 
helped to create.” 
The next emphasised statement by Mr Shane: 
“I will tell you what my understanding at the time of 
putting this thing out to tender was, that we wanted 
to keep T-Systems honest, that was the actual 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 275 of 317 
 
motivation.” 
And over the page the court says: 
In the light of these remarks, the recommendation 
by the ADC, which was ultimately adopted by the 
board 
and 
implemented, 
was 
not 
only 
clearly 
irrational but also tainted by bias in favour of the 
incumbent supplier of IT services, T-Systems.  To 
permit such a tainted decision to stand would be 
inimitable to the constitutional requirement that 
tender 
processes 
should 
be 
fair, 
equitable, 
10 
transparent, competitive and cost effective.  For 
this reason too I am satisfied that Transnet acted 
unlawfully in deciding to award the tender to T-
Systems.” 
Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I want to just then take you to the 
transcript that the court refers to and that you find at page 
137. 
MR GAMA:   Of the Mosidi file? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what is the page number? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   137 the transcript starts and Mr 
Shane speaks a lot in this transcript and says a number of 
things but I just want to point out to you at page 145, Mr 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 276 of 317 
 
Nugdi(?) also addresses the committee, you see at page 
145 from line 12, the whole of 146, 147.  At 147 at the top 
he says: 
“The most important thing to me, the most important 
challenge that I have, the most important issue I 
have is around the risk of changing from one 
supplier to another and I am not for one moment 
suggesting that the incumbent automatically went – 
there should be an element of process which I 
agree with a hundred percent and the process was 
10 
followed but I do not see apples being compared 
here and to me the risk is very bad here.” 
This similar sentiment expressed by Mr Shane, is that 
correct?  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So I now want to just mention to you 
what the money flows investigation has revealed and some 
evidence has been led in this stream about this.  So what 
the investigation reveals, Mr Gama, is that from mid-2012 
to mid-2015 T-Systems made regular monthly payments of 
20 
more than R80 000 to Zestilor.  Zestilor is company that 
was owned by Salim Essa’s wife.  So more than R3 million 
was paid over that period.  Those monthly deposits were 
used to, amongst other things, fund payments to Mr Essa 
over that three year period.  He received payments of more 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 277 of 317 
 
than half a million rand. 
 
The evidence, Mr Chair, you will remember that has 
been led in this stream is there was then a time when T-
Systems ceded to Zestilor the equipment sale and rental 
elements of the MSA that it had with Transnet. 
 
The money flows team have also investigated this 
particular transaction and they have come to conclusion 
analysing the Transnet, as the court did, that Mr Shane 
motivated strongly in favour of keeping the contract with T-
Systems.  Their investigation has revealed that Mr Shane 
10 
is a Gupta associate.  What the investigation has also 
shown is that there is strong evidence suggesting that Mr 
Nugdi had by February 2017 been operating as a money 
launderer for the Gupta enterprise and had used his 
company, Leboshile(?) Technologies to expatriate more 
than R5 million in proceeds of kickbacks paid to the Gupta 
enterprise in respect of corruptly procured public sector 
contract.  Do you have any comment on that, Mr Gama? 
MR GAMA:   No, I am not aware of it.  As you say this is 
what has been established but I think it is quite shocking if 
20 
it is true that there were these types of things that were 
happening.   
Chair, I think one of the things that we had started 
to do at Transnet before I left were to look at a list of some 
of these vendors and – because there were lots of 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 278 of 317 
 
allegations in terms of different entities and I opened at 
the Hillbrow police station on the 21 November 2017 to 
look at all of the allegations that had levelled especially 
against entities that were doing business with Transnet.   
But I think what one had found was that Transnet 
itself did not appear to have been paying Commissions to 
anybody but that it was entities that were contracted to 
Transnet that were paying outside people and it seemed 
that there was a modus operandi that seemed to indicate 
that perhaps there were internal people, I do not know 
10 
who, who provided information to these entities in terms of 
saying maybe you are going to be awarded this tender.   
In order for you to be awarded this tender, you 
know, we think have influence and then these people 
maybe were gullible.  It would just seem that there was 
some kind of information that would leak to third parties 
because all of these entities, most of them that were being 
paid, that were recorded as being paid, they did not do any 
business with Transnet.   
So 
our 
people 
had 
made 
those 
preliminary 
20 
investigations that – I mean, those preliminary findings, 
our auditors, internally, that there was such a thing but we 
could not pin down in terms of who and how and where 
some of this seemed to be happening because we could 
also not find that in terms of the procurement processes 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 279 of 317 
 
themselves that there was something amiss in terms of 
maybe inflation of prices.   
The process seemed to go well inside the tender 
process but there still emerged all of these entities that 
seemed to have been paid by contractors of Transnet.  The 
contractors were paid to third parties.  Obviously at 
Transnet we could not police that because we did not know 
but those were some of the preliminary things that we 
found. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
10 
MR GAMA:   But I do not know that actual people or the 
individuals that would have been involved. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I want to then turn to my last main 
topic and then there are just a few things that I need to 
sweep up after that, concluding questions that I want to 
ask you.  The last main topic I want to deal with is Nkonki.  
Could I ask you please …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe this would be a convenient time 
to take another ten minutes adjournment? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Certainly, Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take a ten minutes adjournment 
and then we will resume.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let’s continue. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 280 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Alright, Mr 
Gama please could you go, I think you have been provided 
with Exhibit BB3a – so affidavit of Mr Mohamed Mohamedi.  
Could I ask you to turn to page 29 please.  Mr Mohamedi 
says at paragraph 5.11 under the heading Nkonki: 
“In March of 2018 the Auditor General of South 
Africa announced the termination of contracts with 
Nkonki as a result of the negative publicity and the 
association with the Guptas.  Transnet followed suit 
and terminated the internal Audit contracts with 
10 
Nkonki as well.” 
The next sub-paragraph he says: 
“I have reviewed some of the contracts that Nkonki 
had with Transnet and noted the following: 
Next sub-paragraph: 
“In  January 2017 Transnet received unsolicited 
bids from Nkonki and Oliver Wyman for a variety of 
proposed 
services 
including 
supply 
chain 
efficiencies, coal and iron, ore, lime volume and 
tariff optimisation.” 
20 
Next sub-paragraph: 
“At that time Nkonki had an existing contract to 
provide Transnet internal audit function.   In a 
memorandum dated February 2017 addressed to the 
ADC Transnet Executives proposed that Transnet 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 281 of 317 
 
utilise the existing internal audit contract with these 
unsolicited proposals.  It was argued that the 
existing contract allowed for non-audit ancillary 
services.   In February 2017 the ADC approved the 
use of Nkonki as consultants and delegated the GC 
and Mr Gama at the time to sign a letter of intent 
for 
an 
amount 
not 
exceeding 
ZAR500million.  
Extract of the ADC minutes is attached.” 
Next sub-paragraph: 
“The initial contract amends 1 August 2013 for a 
10 
period of five years, total value of 500million, the 
suggested extensions meant an increase in value of 
100% and a further 20 month extension to 2 March 
2020.” 
And the last sub-paragraph: 
“Today Transnet has remitted R26.1million for these 
related 
services 
with 
a 
further 
R60million 
outstanding as Transnet has disputed this amount.   
Mr Mohamedi then opines that firstly Transnet’s 
acceptance of Nkonki’s unsolicited bid did not 
20 
comply with the National Treasury Practice Note as 
the unsolicited proposal did not inter alia contain 
any innovative solution and secondly the 100% 
increase in the value of Nkonki’s contract is a 
contravention of Treasury Practice Note 3 that limits 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 282 of 317 
 
the variation of contracts to a maximum of 15% or 
15million.” 
Now I would just like to take you then to the practice note 
and treasury instruction, and could I ask you about your 
bundle, Exhibit 28 and ask you to go to page 250.82. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   250, just hang on Chairperson.  Yes, 
250.82.  Are you there Mr Gama? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So this is the Treasury Practice Note 
10 
11 of 2008/9, if you go to page 83 it says: 
“Institutions 
are 
not 
obliged 
to 
consider 
an 
unsolicited 
proposal 
but 
may 
consider 
such 
a 
proposal only if it meets the following requirements; 
peer business case, innovative design, innovative 
approach, product or the service presents a new 
and cost effective method of service delivery.” 
And then at page 84 it says at 3.1: 
“The accounting officer or accounting authority must 
reject an unsolicited proposal if the proposal relates 
20 
to known institutional requirements that came within 
a reasonable and practical limits be acquired by 
conventional competitive bidding methods.   Relates 
to 
products 
or 
services 
which 
are 
generally 
available among other issues.” 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 283 of 317 
 
And then at paragraph 4.2 at page 85 the unsolicited 
proposal must be considered as appropriate in terms of the 
following; compliant unsolicited proposal bid, and you will 
see at the end 4.2.1.1, it says namely the product or 
service is unique, innovative and provided by a sole 
provider who may enter into direct negotiations with the 
proponent outside of a more competitive bidding process. 
 
Can I ask you please to go to Exhibit BB3b, the 
annexures to Mr Mohamedi’s affidavit.   I beg your pardon, 
in fact it may be [c].  Sorry Chairperson there seems to be 
10 
a – can you give me, is that [c]?   I’ve got it, sorry.  I do 
apologise.  It is Exhibit BB3b, and Chairperson could we 
turn please to page 571.   Now you will see at 571 this is a 
memorandum to BADEC which Mr Mohamedi spoke about, 
if 
we 
could 
go 
to 
575 
you 
will 
see 
there’s 
a 
recommendation that is signed by you on the 7 t h of 
February 2017 and ultimately that is accepted by BADEC if 
you go to page 579, you will see it is an excerpt of minutes 
of the BADEC meeting held on 13 February 2017, records 
resolved that the committee approve and appoint Nkonki 
20 
Incorporated for consultancy services up to a maximum of 
500million as follows. 
 
Now ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Which page are you at? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   579 after ...[indistinct]. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 284 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:   Okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So if you go back to the memorandum 
at 571 certainly on the face of it, it doesn’t appear that this 
recommending memo deals with the requirements of the 
National Treasury practice note in relation to unsolicited 
bids. 
MR GAMA:   You know Mr Myburgh when Mr Mohamedi 
came here he was very desperate to ingratiate himself with 
the Chairman of the Board of Transnet, because he was 
acting GCE and he wanted to be appointed as the GCE, 
10 
and he may have in his frustration given you a lot of things 
that sounds to me like a man who was there but then starts 
saying no there was this and this, I have investigated this, 
but never said anything when it was happening, wanting to 
give you the impression that he was a bystander, an 
innocent one. 
 
If you go to the Treasury note I don’t know this 
treasury note whether it applies to Transnet, I have never 
seen it and it says 2008/2009, Transnet is a Schedule 2 
entity.  This applies to Schedule 3A, 4B, 3C and 3D entities 
20 
in terms of the PFMA, so I don’t know whether any of this 
thing applies to Transnet or not, because what you have 
put here before me is for Schedule 3 entities. 
 
The second issue that I want to indicate it is quite 
normal for entities that we do audit work, we also do non-
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 285 of 317 
 
audit work, provided that the audit committee agrees that 
they should do, and also it limits the amount of work that 
they should do, so by the time you see this it might have 
been presented to the Acquisition Committee, it is at the 
recommendation of the Audit Committee to say let us use 
this entity.  Nkonki used to be a very good brand, at the 
beginning of time and I am sure its founders would also 
agree and the directors and workers who worked there 
would also agree.   But obviously at a point in time we then 
learnt that it had gone rogue in one way or the other, there 
10 
were those allegations.   
 
At the time when we learnt that it had gone rogue 
we 
terminated 
the 
contractual 
relationship 
between 
Transnet, 
I 
terminated 
that 
contractual 
relationship 
between 
Transnet 
and 
Nkonki 
when 
we 
learnt 
that 
something could be amiss, because we also needed protect 
the reputation of Transnet.  I don’t know whether the 
Auditor General terminated before us or not but I suspect 
we terminated even before the  Auditor General. 
 
And at the time according to Mr Mohamedi an 
20 
amount of R26million had been spent on the work that had 
been agreed for them to do.  There was quite a stringent 
manner in which anybody could be paid, I hear there’s a lot 
of discussion about innovation or innovative but as I said 
Transnet is a Schedule entity in terms of the PFMA, I don’t 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 286 of 317 
 
know if this applies to Transnet, I have never seen it, but 
because the documents that we sign are also signed by 
compliance people, and they would have known before it 
came to me they would have known whether it or not this 
could be done or not, so I don’t know Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remember whether irrespective 
of whether this note from – an instruction note from 
Treasury applies or not, whether Transnet had a policy on 
how to deal with unsolicited proposals. 
MR GAMA:  I think Transnet did have a policy to deal with 
10 
unsolicited proposals, and I don’t know how this proposal 
actually came about, but there was a policy I couldn’t – I 
wouldn’t be able to say to you that this was an unsolicited 
proposal or not, I wouldn’t be able to say to you whether it 
was not from the people that went to Nkonki to say look 
since you are inside and you are trying to do certain things 
maybe you would be better able to do this you know to do 
this, I don’t know the genesis of this particular thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you remember what, whether – 
would you remember any important features of that policy 
20 
or that is something you cannot remember now?  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No I can’t remember now but the 
custodians would have been the procurement sort of thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then let’s deal with the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 287 of 317 
 
National Treasury instruction.  I will have to investigate the 
points you made about whether the practice note applies to 
the schedule 2 entity. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I think you would have to put one that 
schedule 2 so that we would know, because we can spend 
a lot of time discussing something that where Transnet is 
excluded.  Personally I have never seen this but it says 
2008/2009 which is 12 years ago. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let’s turn to the National Treasury 
10 
instruction that you find at page 250.94.   Could I ask you 
please to go to page 250.97. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that in a different bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is in Mr Gama’s bundle B28, I am 
sorry DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  At 250? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It starts at 250.94, I am going to 
take Mr Gama if I might to 250.97. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It says at paragraph 9.1 the 
20 
accounting officer/accounting authority must ensure that 
contracts are not varied by more than 20% or 20million, 
including VAT for construction related goods, works and 
services and/or services and 15% or 15million including 
VAT all other goods and services of the original contract 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 288 of 317 
 
name.  Any deviation and excess of the prescribed 
threshold will only be allowed in exceptional cases, subject 
to prior written approval from the relevant treasury.  Did 
you  have regard to this? 
MR GAMA:   Again Chair I don’t know to whom this was 
applicable to, but I have a recollection at a point in time 
where these deviations or variations where some of these 
notes took place, that there were representations to the 
National Treasury in terms of saying is it the 20% or is it 
the 20million or the 15% or the 15million, because for an 
10 
entity 
as 
large 
as 
Transnet 
if 
it 
is 
at 
15% 
it 
is 
understandable, it is acceptable, you do get involved with 
those kinds of things, but in terms of construction related 
goods Transnet had its own set of rules that had been 
approved, 
that were 
different, so 
any 
application 
to 
Transnet of this I don’t know.   I have just forgotten what it 
was called, something, something E, I can’t remember, or 
construction 
related, 
but 
an 
amount 
of 
15million 
or 
20million variation for contracts, I mean let’s take the IT 
data term that we have just been talking about.  It was 
20 
about 1.8billion.   If you applied 15% of it, it would take 
you to about 240million, so – but if you then said no it is 
the 20million or the 20% then you started getting into some 
difficulties, so some of these things are a bit difficult, and I 
don’t know as we sit here about applicability because as I 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 289 of 317 
 
am saying the memo’s that I am looking at, the compliance 
people have signed them in, and they always had the duty 
to then say can this be done or not and we take the cue 
from them as well that before you do the business 
transaction the compliance has looked at it, so I don’t 
know Chair in terms of applicability, but I do know that 
there was a huge protest at some point around the 20% or 
20million which one is applicable because if your contracts 
were R100million or less then it makes sense but for the 
big contracts and then a lot of the things the contracts 
10 
were bigger than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know normally when you put as S & 
H and say all amounts you would ...[indistinct] what would 
follow after that is whichever is the higher or bigger or 
lesser depending on what you want to say, so I don’t know 
whether they have left that out or whether when you read it 
you are supposed to – it is implied to sa ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   The higher or ... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whichever is the higher, because maybe 
you say whichever is the lower it wouldn’t make much 
20 
sense I am not sure.    
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I really don’t know and as I say 
Chair hindsight is a perfect science, where somebody says 
okay let’s look at certain things my way hindsight, the most 
important thing is to be able to deal with the things at the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 290 of 317 
 
time when they are being dealt with, and it is important for 
the compliance people to make sure that they have dealt 
with it, because we could sit here for a very long time, 
dealing with something where there’s an actual exclusion, I 
don’t know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, of course you would appreciate that 
– or a comment, or the Commission, part of why we have to 
do that even with hindsight is to establish where things did 
go wrong, how they went wrong and what it is that could 
have been done to prevent them from happening and what 
10 
measures would be put in place to make sure that in the 
future the same things don’t happen, so you have to say 
okay this is what happened and how did it happen, people 
were supposed to ensure that it – certain requirements 
were met, not do their job, and so on, so ja, okay.  Mr 
Myburgh?    
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes thank you Chairperson.   Mr 
Gama if I could ask you to turn to your bundle at page 
250.146, that is where you respond to Mr Mohamedi, 
paragraph 5.11 which I have read the whole thing to you. 
20 
MR GAMA:   250 point? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   250.146, and your response spans 
two pages on.   Do you want to deal with that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry his réponse is on what page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   250.146. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 291 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  This is your response to paragraph 
5.11 of Mr Mohamedi that I read to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR GAMA:   This is in relation to Nkonki? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I indicate that that memo emanated from 
the GCFO and it was supported by the Chief Legal Counsel 
of Transnet, and that was the typed signatory to it, and it 
was submitted to the acquisition and disposals committee, 
10 
it was a project which was part of the cost savings and 
efficiency 
drive 
for 
the 
optimisation 
of 
supply 
chain 
management within Transnet and we had hoped that we 
could save up to R5billion per annum. 
 
The proposal had first been taken to the Audit 
Committee as I have already indicated, to permit Nkonki to 
perform certain non-audit related services.   I have dealt 
with some of those issues, part of the issues with this 
renegotiation of the Kumba Iron Ore contract, the Anglo 
American 
contract 
in 
terms 
of 
which 
this 
evergreen 
20 
contract with Kumba they paid market related rates for 
portions 
of 
the 
iron 
ore 
haulage 
which 
rates 
were 
significantly 
below 
the 
market 
price 
that 
Kumba’s 
competitors such as Assmang were paying for the same 
service. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 292 of 317 
 
 
We estimated that an additional R1 billion per annum 
could be paid by Kumba to Transnet and in fact since 2005 
per annum those amounts would have been recoverable and 
Kumba had failed to regularise the – this position ostensibly 
relying on the contract with Transnet and the termination 
date saying that they only want to deal with it in 2028 when 
the existing contract expires. 
 
So this was as a result of that contract which had 
been entered in a hurry and in haste in 2005 which we 
believed was exclusionary and anti-competitive to transport 
10 
iron ore to Saldanha.  
 
And really what Transnet was trying to do at that 
time was to remove and embed a derivative on the original 
pricing mechanism which was linked to the US Dollar and 
therefore certain – it gave rise to certain embedded 
derivatives. 
 
So the – the funding for this work it was emphasised 
that once the cost savings had been raised then the people 
would be paid from there so that they would 00:01:49 and 
that there would be a formula that would be utilised to pay 
20 
for it. 
 
So it was a matter that failed to be considered by 
the two committees of the board.  So one being the Audit 
Committee and the other one being the Acquisitions and 
Disposal Committee. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 293 of 317 
 
 
And so it remains my understanding Chair that the 
costs would have been funded from saving and that no 
payments would have been made if no savings or if there 
was no revenue enhancement that had been made. 
 
So if they failed to negotiate a higher prices or 
tariffs in terms of coal and iron ore then they would not be 
paid. 
 
There was also a regime a very strict regime and 
formula which had been developed I think one of the fellows 
Patrick Dada had been asked to work on formula in terms of 
10 
how we would pay this so that we do not just pay people 
and let the different leaders in the business were to assess 
and evaluate the extent of saving generated and the 
compensation due as a result of this 00:03:07. 
 
So the assertion by Mohamedi that although the 500 
million budget but only 26 million was paid to me is without 
doubt as a result of the stringent measures that were 
introduced governing such expenditure. 
 
But as I had said to you earlier Chair it later 
transpired – I do not know whether it was 2017 or early in 
20 
2018 that Nkonki’s ownership had changed when we had 
paid that 26 million by that time.  And some of those things 
had not been declared and it had gone rogue and we 
terminated the relationship between Transnet and Nkonki. 
 
So that is really the effect of it as Mr Myburgh has 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 294 of 317 
 
requested for me to comment. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now Mr Gama this – this particular 
transaction has also been investigated by money flows.  
Now I wanted just to put to you whether you were aware 
that in 2016 the year before this Trillian acquired the 
auditing firm Nkonki.  Trillian.  
MR GAMA:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That as you know Mr Essa through 
Trillian Holdings was a 60% shareholder in that business. 
MR GAMA:  Of Nkonki. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Of Trillian. 
MR GAMA:  No, no you saying Trillian had acquired  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Trillian acquired Nkonki in 2016. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You know that Mr Essa was a 
shareholder at Trillian. 
MR GAMA:  Yes no we have dealt with that issue yesterday.  
No what I am saying Trillian acquiring Nkonki because 
remember Nkonki is a firm of accountants and auditors.  So 
for me it would be – it would have been absurd that such a 
20 
thing had happened but it was widely reported in the 
newspapers 
afterwards 
but 
I 
did 
not 
know 
when 
it 
happened.  But at the time when we terminated those were 
part of the considerations that enabled us to terminate the 
relationship. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 295 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In your answer to Mr Mohamedi's 
paragraph 5.11 you do not take issue with his statement 
that Nkonki bid was unsolicited. 
MR GAMA:  Sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When you answer paragraph 5.11 of 
Mr Mohamedi you do not take issue with his statement that 
Transnet received an unsolicited bid from Nkonki. 
MR GAMA:  I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right. 
MR GAMA:  Whether it was unsolicited I have said to you 
10 
before that it may even have been Transnet’s people that 
thought they were appoint – approaching an accounting firm 
that could assist them.  I did not know anything about the 
solicitation or otherwise that is why I was not going to 
comment on something I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright I have got a few things here 
and there to deal with.  Could I ask you again in your 
bundle to go to page 250.438.  We have done some further 
investigations into this JZ Foundation donation.  There you 
will find an affidavit from Nomvelo Makhunga she was the 
20 
person who put up a response before  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just for the transcribers Makhunga will be 
M-a-k-h-u-n-g-a and Nomvelo N-o-m-v-e-l-o.  You know 
sometimes when you read the transcript you find that you 
cannot even make head or tail of what they have written 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 296 of 317 
 
because they did not know the spelling.  Ja okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chair.  So what she does in 
this affidavit is she refers over the page at 439 at paragraph 
5 to her response which we went through previously and 
then at paragraph 6 she says that Mr Zepho Ndlovu a 
general manager represented Transnet at the event and she 
sets out the other attendees.  Do you know Mr Zepho 
Ndlovu? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What was his position? 
10 
MR GAMA:  I think he was one of the three people that we 
had said last time that he could have been involved.  He 
was a general manager at the Transnet port terminal. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  General manager. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At Transnet port terminal. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then what we have also managed 
to find is the delegation of authority that you see at page 
250.444, do you see that? 
20 
MR GAMA:  Yes but it is irrelevant for our purposes is it 
not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No it is not.   
MR GAMA:  Why? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Because there is no delegation of 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 297 of 317 
 
authority covering 20 June. 
MR GAMA:  Sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  This is the delegation of authority 
there is not a delegation of authority covering the 20 t h of 
June. 
MR GAMA:  There would have been a delegated authority 
between the 15 t h of June to the 21 s t of June. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That would… 
MR GAMA:  This is a different matter.  It falls outside the 
dates that we are dealing with and therefore it is irrelevant 
10 
for our discussion. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Well I just want to put to you 
Mr Gama that we have not been able to find a delegation of 
authority.  I have specifically asked the investigators they 
specifically 
asked 
Transnet 
this 
is 
the 
delegation 
of 
authority that we have been provided with. 
MR GAMA:  Yes but it is for the wrong period Mr Myburgh 
that is all I am saying. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay well let us then deal with this.  
There was a delegation of authority from 27 June to 12 July, 
20 
is that correct as per page 444? 
MR GAMA:  I do not know what is the relevance of this? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama was there a – does page 
444 reflect a delegation of authority during the period 27 
June to 12 July? 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 298 of 317 
 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that was signed by you on the 
14 t h of June. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So what were you doing during the 
period 27 June to 12 July? 
MR GAMA:  You have not given me an opportunity to go and 
check that.  Did you ask me to check that?  I have not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Or is this when you were in Russia? 
MR GAMA:  Sorry – no I was in Russia between the 15 t h of 
10 
June and the 21 s t of June. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then after that? 
MR GAMA:  In St Petersburg and then I came back to the 
country. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  And then I just wanted to 
show you we will have to investigate that further – here is 
the program which has been found at 445 and 446.  And you 
see at 446 there you are reflected as a speaker. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So is it your case then that Mr Zepho 
20 
Ndlovu was appointed – you gave him the delegated 
authority of the acting Group Chief Executive on – for the 
pair 20 June – is that case. 
MR GAMA:  No it is not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So who was – who was the acting 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 299 of 317 
 
Group Chief Executive on the 20 t h June? 
MR GAMA:  I asked Mr Karl Socikwa who was the CEO of 
(inaudible). 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon. 
MR GAMA:  I asked Mr Karl Socikwa who was the CEO of 
the Transnet port terminal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To act in your position. 
MR GAMA:  To act in my position and to represent me at 
this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the – at this function. 
10 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  He was unable to do so he requested Mr 
Ndlovu he gave him the speech that would have been made 
there and Mr Ndlovu made the speech at this place.  And 
that speech was made on the 20t h of June 2015. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then the last two documents 
250.447 – 448 this we thank – we received from you if I can 
start at 448.  You see on the 15t h of February 2018 you wrote 
presumably to the Oberio Hotel and you said  
“I stayed at your hotel in Dubai from the 
evening of 22 January to 24 January Bill No 
20 
so and so has been replaced – has been 
misplaced and I request a copy of the 
receipt.  I stayed in room 1601.” 
And then if you go to 447 at the bottom of the page.  They 
responded and presumably they provided you then with the 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 300 of 317 
 
document.  Is that correct. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that is the document at page 
250.341. 
MR GAMA:  250.450. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  250.341. 
MR GAMA:  Okay I thought they have just attached the 
document at the back of this thing here. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon I did not see that. 
MR GAMA:  Is it not easier to … 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am with you.  Alright it is the – well it 
is the same document that we have at 250.341. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Of course it does not reflect who paid 
this. 
MR GAMA:    Sorry let us – this 250. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  250.341.  Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:  250.341.  I think it is the same document. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes it is. 
MR GAMA:  At 250.450. Mr Myburgh yesterday you – you 
20 
said you wanted to ascertain that it came it from the hotel. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No I .. 
MR GAMA:  It says that the balance in this thing is nil. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  And you – you said that is not what you are – 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 301 of 317 
 
you are contesting – you are contesting the fact that you are 
agreeing that it came from the hotel so I have given you the 
emails. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes absolutely.  No I appreciate that.  
The point is it does not reflect who paid the bill.  It is a 
simple point. 
ADV OLDWAGE:  Chair this is – this is ridiculous.  It really 
is ridiculous in the extreme and I must object to what is 
being put here. 
 
Firstly let us consider where this document came 
10 
from.  There is no signature appended to this document by 
virtue of when it was created.  Surely Mr Myburgh must 
understand that that is the answer to this ridiculous 
proposition that he is putting. 
 
Secondly these accounts do not reflect who actually 
made the payment.  So you cannot put that proposition with 
the greatest of respect. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But that is the very proposition I am 
putting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  My Myburgh there is  … 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is precisely the proposition that I 
am putting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That it does not tell you who has paid 
and it is not ridiculous. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 302 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Because there at least two documents 
that show that at least the month and two months after Mr 
Gama stayed a schedule was being sent to Sahara saying 
the amount is still outstanding.  So it is oh more than 
possible that Sahara then settled it and you get a nil 
balance.  It is a simple proposition. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It does not tell you who paid. 
MR GAMA:  Ja. 
10 
ADV OLDWAGE:  Mr Chair this is – Mr Myburgh is not 
getting my objection.  He is missing the point with respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay what is your objection? 
ADV OLDWAGE:  I am saying simply this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV OLDWAGE:  He has accepted that this emanated from 
the hotel.  That was… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Absolutely. 
ADV OLDWAGE:  That was his submission last night.  In the 
ordinary course a document like this would not indicate that.  
20 
That is the first issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would not indicate what? 
ADV OLDWAGE:  Who – in fact if you have regard to when 
this 
document 
was 
created. 
 
On 
Mr 
Myburgh’s 
own 
submission it would not reflect who had made this payment 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 303 of 317 
 
but no invoice issued by a hotel reflects who actually made 
the payment because there is no provision for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is the position not that we saw 
another one that showed – or was it an email that showed 
that was it Sahara or somebody who had paid? 
ADV OLDWAGE:  No Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What – what – there was something that 
referred to either Sahara or somebody connected with the 
Gupta’s that we dealt with last time. 
ADV OLDWAGE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Either an email or the invoice I cannot 
remember which one. 
ADV OLDWAGE:  No there was a schedule that was 
forwarded to the as I understood it the CEO of Sahara 
Computers and that was calling for payment of three hotel 
bills by three individuals.  So that is something different.  
But there is something more concerning about this.  This 
commission has wide ranging powers.  I find it strange that it 
is not put to Mr Gama that the hotel is in fact confirmed that 
he has not paid this bill because it is clear what Mr Myburgh 
20 
is driving at here.  That Mr Gama is not being truthful about 
payment of this account. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he has not said so.  He has not said 
so. 
ADV OLDWAGE:  He is driving at Mr Chair with respect. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 304 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us see if and when he gets there.  
But later on you – you may re-examine to clarify whatever 
issues might not have been clarified.  Okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright thank you.  That brings us to 
the end of those documents.  I want to just take you to… 
MR GAMA:    Sorry can I just say to you that that document 
it has a date on it.  The date is on the date that I checked 
out.  It says on the 24t h of January 2016 paid.  There is the 
amount and it says the balance in AED nil.  That is what that 
document says. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama I want to take you to one or 
two other issues.  Could I ask you please to turn to Bundle 
BB4(f) one of the investigators picked it out.  Quite a difficult 
– have you got it?  BB4(f).  Do you have it Mr Gama? 
MR GAMA:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I ask you please to turn page 
87.  It relates to the role that you played in relation to the 
1064 locomotives and particularly in relation to the tender 
evaluation process.  This is a – a memorandum to the board 
of directors from Mr Molefe dated the 17t h of January subject 
20 
Request for approval to negotiate and award business to the 
shortlisted tenderers for the supply of the 599 Coco New 
Voltage locomotives for general freight business.  The 
purpose of the memo is to provide an update to the board of 
directors on the tender evaluation process.  Note and 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 305 of 317 
 
approve the tender evaluation process from step 1 up to step 
6 
to 
the 
Transnet 
board 
of 
directors. 
 Approve 
the 
recommendation of the shortlist tenderers as a result of the 
tender and evaluation process for negotiations and award of 
business and delegate all powers etcetera.  I just want to 
confirm that you were a signatory to this document.  You 
were part of the recommending team that you see at page 
95.  Would you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:  Ja I see this document for the first time now but 
yes that is my signature. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja well it arises from evidence that you 
have given about your role.  That in – that relates to the 599 
locomotives. 
 
You 
will 
see 
at 
page 
100 
a 
similar 
memorandum in relation to the 465 diesel locomotives.  Your 
signature appears at page 108.  You confirm that? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then I want to end with something that 
you asked me. You said that if I was of the view that you 
knew of this corruption and money laundering then I should 
put it you.  Remember saying that? 
20 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So I think it is important Mr Gama that 
I perhaps explain this.  That different to normal court 
proceedings evidence leaders do not have a client who has a 
particular version. Our client is the general public.  So we do 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 306 of 317 
 
not have a particular version ultimately it will be for the 
Chairperson to assess all of the evidence and determine 
whether you may or may not have known.  Now I just want to 
discuss a few things in that regard with you. 
 
As I understand is it is your evidence that you were 
completely unaware of this if money flows certainly is to 
believed what is corruption and money laundering.  Is my 
understanding of your evidence correct? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Oppose something ultimately that the 
10 
Chairperson would have to consider is how could you have 
been unaware of this when it was done on such a grand 
scale?  It spanned many years as we have seen.  It went 
through various different phases.  It involved numerous 
contracts.  How could you have been unaware?  Did you not 
have an inkling that something was untoward? 
MR GAMA:  No I did not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Not an inkling? 
MR GAMA:  I did not.  Not at all. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So… 
20 
MR GAMA:  As we sit here we sit here with the benefit of 
hindsight where people say how could so many have not 
known because one was not involved in it.  One was just 
working doing their work not knowing that there is anything 
in the background. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 307 of 317 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But Mr Gama you have seen literally at 
every turn – in fact every contract that we have discussed 
over the space of the last few days is tainted with corruption 
and money laundering.   
MR GAMA:  Ja that is what the money flow teams as you say 
have found out.  I have said to you earlier that my own sense 
with a lot of these was that the processes themselves were 
followed properly inside the NDT but that our contractor had 
commission agreements with third parties and something that 
we ourselves probably could not have been able to police or 
10 
we did not understand and we did not know anything about 
it. That is what I have said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The other thing I just want to ask your 
comment on I suppose another thing that would have to be 
considered carefully by the commission is Mr Essa on the 
money flows analysis and investigation we know has been 
dubbed as the Gupta Money laundering Lieutenant and you 
have seen that at least on the face of it he is behind almost 
all of these contracts that we have been discussing and 
issues we have been discussing.  Suppose a potential 
20 
challenge is that Mr Essa was well-known to you.  He was 
also well-known to other senior members of Transnet.  It is 
not that this is someone who it is not like an intellect scam 
that you dealing with an unidentified person.  This is Mr Essa 
you have seen him in meetings with Regiments.  You have 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 308 of 317 
 
seen him in Mr Singh’s office.  You have been taken by him 
to Gupta’s.  You have met with him in Dubai and so it goes 
on and on. 
MR GAMA:  No it does not go and on and on.  It is 
somebody that I have met three or four times which I have 
told this commission.  I did not know any other thing that he 
does other than what he said he does.  I have not had any 
relationship of any sort or nature with him.  I do not know 
what it is and I am not familiar with all of these money flows 
and the money laundering and all of that aspects of him.  He 
10 
has not shared, it was not what we discussed.  And you 
would also see that entities that he was involved in, when 
certain things happened that I believe imputed the integrity 
of Transnet, they terminated those contracts.  Not once.  I 
have told you about terminating the Regiments’ contract in 
2016 and the Trillian’s contract in 2016.   
 
And when Nkonki issue arose, I also terminated 
that contract.  So I do not think that those are the actions 
of something who was in any way, form in cahoots with the 
so-called Mr Essa. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And another thing, I suppose, that 
would have to be considered is that in order to pull off 
grand scale corruption and money laundering, literally, of 
mega-proportions, one would need some sort of insight and 
insistence, presumably.  One would need some people 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 309 of 317 
 
within Transnet to be on your side.   
MR GAMA:   And that was not me.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then presumable if there was 
internal assistance, there would need to be some sort of 
quid pro quo.  What is your comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, it was not me.  I was not involved in that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I suppose that then brings us to the 
evidence of your driver and ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Yes, what about the evidence of my driver? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, we have been through that. 
10 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I have indicated to you about the driver, 
that sometimes he uses real events that took place and 
then he puts flavour into it and then he alleges that certain 
things that did not happen, he says that is what happened.  
I have dealt with those issues.  I have shown you where he 
supposes I could have been at two places at the same 
time.  So...  And I have also shown the Chair that there are 
other motives in as far as the driver is concerned.  I have 
indicated those issues and I have shared it very freely with 
the Chairperson. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And, I mean, as you know your 
predecessor, Mr Molefe, has also been here implicated to a 
greater or lesser degree his Chief Financial Officer, 
Mr Singh, has been implicated.  Mr Peter too has been 
implicated.  We will hear from him next week.  It is 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 310 of 317 
 
evidence of drivers in relation to them as well. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I can only talk about myself.  I cannot talk 
about other people.  It is me that I talk about.  It is me that 
I know.  I cannot talk for other people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then perhaps, let me just finally 
put to you.  We have been talking now about your peers, 
your colleagues, some of your subordinates.  But going up 
a level, you may have heard the evidence of Ms Gigaba in 
relation – the relationship between Mr Gigaba and the 
Guptas.   
10 
 
You may have heard that, and of course we are 
still to hear from Mr Gigaba, and her evidence is still to be 
tested but if I was to summarise.  Her evidence is to the 
effect that Mr Gigaba well and truly captured by the 
Guptas.   
 
That he was told that if you do not do as we say, 
and this is when he was the Minister of the DPE, his 
portfolio included Transnet, then you will be send back to 
Home Affairs.  There is evidence against him by her of him 
also receiving cash, even at that level, Mr Gama. 
20 
MR GAMA:   You would have to put those things to 
Mr Gigaba 
himself 
and 
find 
out 
the 
truthfulness 
or 
otherwise of those issues with him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That completes our questioning.  
There is just one last thing I need to do. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 311 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, could I ask you, please, to 
go back to your Exhibit 28?  Previously, I have taken you 
through your first affidavit and you said you had nothing to 
add to that.  Your second affidavit, you will find at page 
116.  And then there is an introduction and then the first 
thing that you deal with is the Barbara Hogan statement at 
page 123.  I think we have gone through that or you have 
dealt with that in the context of the first part of my 
examination of you relating to your reinstatement.  Do you 
10 
agree with that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And just let me make it clear that 
these affidavits must be stand as read and they will, 
obviously, be considered by the Commission but I just want 
to make sure that there is – there may not be anything that 
you need to or want to add.  Then what you do at para – 
sorry, at page 133 is you deal with Mr Molefe.   
 
Certainly in your opening statement you dealt 
with much of this stuff and a lot of what he had to say was 
20 
of quite a general nature.  But in the context of your 
response to him, for example, at page 144.  We have dealt 
with what you had to say about the hundred locomotives.  
Another example at page 146 at paragraphs or at your 
paragraph 33.   
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 312 of 317 
 
 
We have dealt with relocation which spans a 
number of pages.  And then at 154 you respond to T-
Systems, what he has to say about that.  That we have 
dealt with.  You deal at paragraph 35 with three separate 
civil claims.  I do not think this is something that you have 
dealt with.  You want to say something about that? 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Or can we take it as read? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, it is something I shared ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR GAMA:   ...with the Commission, yes.  You can take it 
as read. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at page 159, you deal with 
Mosidi’s statement and we have gone through that in some 
detail previously.  If you go to page 165, you deal with 
Gonsalves’ statement.  That we have gone through.  And 
then at 166, you deal with Witness 2.  We have dealt with 
that.  So is there anything in this affidavit that you feel you 
would like to address? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Mr Chair, I think in fairness to Mr Gama.  
20 
He must be given an opportunity to consider.  He should 
not be under pressure now to make that determination.  
There is the issue of re-examination which I will address 
you on in a moment when I have that opportunity but he 
will consider his position and as advised to your response 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 313 of 317 
 
by way of either an affidavit or the re-examination... 
[Speaker ’s voice drops – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no he is not being put under 
pressure.  All Mr Myburgh is saying is.  When he said he 
had reached the end of his questions, he could have said 
that is it but he just thought just in case there is something 
that he missed and Mr Gama might wish to say something.  
And obviously, if Mr Gama says:  At the moment I cannot 
think of anything we have left out in terms of re-
examination or arrangements for affidavits.  That can 
10 
always 
be 
dealt 
with. 
 
So 
Mr 
Gama, 
if 
there 
is 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   It will be difficult. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry? 
MR GAMA:   I am saying it will be difficult for me, just 
going through this in lightning speed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...anything has been omitted or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is why Mr Myburgh was just 
trying to make sure that in case he has missed out 
20 
something if you remember something, you can deal with it.  
But there is the opportunity to clarify something when your 
counsel re-examines you ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...or in terms of arrangements that will 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 314 of 317 
 
be made to file an affidavit. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  So in relation to your third 
affidavit, that deals with Mohamedi and Callard and we 
have traversed much of that already.  If your counsel has 
something he wants to put to you in addition to evidence 
that you have given, of course, he can do that.  And then 
your fourth affidavit, which you will find at page 250.262, 
that deals with Witness 2 and something that we have gone 
through in its entirety. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  That 
concludes our examination of Mr Gama. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  Counsel for Mr Gama, 
is there an arrangement that has been reached subject to 
my approval or what is the position in terms of clarifying 
anything, re-examination? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Mr Chair, there certainly will be a need 
for Mr Gama to place additional evidence before the 
Commission.  There is no formal agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV OLDWAGE:   But we wish to take advantage of your 
offer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   That we reduce to writing in a form an 
affidavit that which in the ordinary course ...[intervenes]  
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 315 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   ...constitutes re-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   I have taken those instructions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   We will be doing so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   So we are simply making use of that 
invitation by you for us to submit such an affidavit in view 
of re-examination. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that is fine.  Mr Myburgh, you 
have ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, and I suppose you setting out a 
timeline would be important ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that will put in action, ja.  Do you 
want to give an idea of what you have in mind in terms of 
timeframe, because it is better if we have a timeframe. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   [No audible reply]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Seven days? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Mr Chair, would – bearing in mind that 
we would like to consult the transcripts of the proceedings 
and the evidence of other witnesses that have been 
referred to during my client’s questioning, might I suggest 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 316 of 317 
 
the 4 t h of June? 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is about how long?  How long from 
now?  Today is what? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is three weeks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is three weeks.  I think that is too 
long but I would be prepared to give you more than seven 
days, as I was indicating.  I am prepared to give you up to 
on or before 25 May.  Is that fine? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   To comply with that?  Regrettable, I am 
away and I am in other matters and I am also away from 
10 
Johannesburg.  So the 25 t h, which is – it gives us six 
working days, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   If I might then ask? 
CHAIRPERSON:   But ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWAGE:   But I am not testing your patience. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   But I also have a busy schedule. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but of course ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWAGE:   Or that we do it by the 28 t h. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   28 t h? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   It gives us to extra days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that is alright then.  The 
deadline is 28 then. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
12 MAY 2021 – DAY 393 
 
Page 317 of 317 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you Mr Gama for 
your cooperation.  Thank you for – to your legal team.  
Thank you Mr Myburgh and your team.  Thank you to the 
investigators.  Thank you to the technicians and the staff.  
Thank you to everybody for all your cooperation to enable 
us to work until this time.  We will adjourn now.   
 
For the benefit of the public.  Tomorrow I will be 
hearing the evidence of Mosebenzi Zwane in relation to 
Eskom, former Minister of Mineral Resources.   
 
We adjourn. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 13 MAY 2021 
