 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 336 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 126 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 3 of 126 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 02 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Freund whom I cannot 
see and good morning everybody. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Good morning Chair I can see you 
clearly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no now I can see you.  Are we ready? 
ADV FREUND SC:  We are indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:  May I proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who is your next witness? 
10 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chair before I proceed with the next 
witness I just thought I would indicate to you that I am 
hoping today time permitting to deal with three witnesses.  
 
The first will be Ms Zukiswa Rantho, the second will 
be Mr James Selfe and the third will be Dr Makhosi Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You raised yesterday an issue about 
the formal admission of the exhibit which is Mr Godi’s 
evidence.  If it suits you we could deal with that now or we 
could defer that to a later occasion. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us deal with it now. 
ADV FREUND SC:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that we do not forget. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair Mr Godi’s evidence was Exhibit 
ZZ2 in Bundle 1 at pages 101 to 214.   
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 4 of 126 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and the affidavit actually starts at … 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you will recall… 
CHAIRPERSON:  At – the affidavit actually starts at page 
103 is that correct? 
ADV FREUND SC:  I am just checking but I believe it is 
correct.  So yes that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you will recall that he confirmed 
his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  And we referred extensively to – to this 
documentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I submit that it would be 
appropriate 
to 
admit 
this 
as 
an 
Exhibit 
before 
the 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Nelson Themba Godi 
which starts at page 103 of Bundle 1 together with its 
annexures is admitted as an exhibit and will be marked as 
Annexure – as Exhibit ZZ2, is that correct? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  That is correct and thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair there is a related issue and that 
is the question of whether we should at this stage seek to 
admit the exhibit which is Mr Makwetu’s evidence. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 5 of 126 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  That is a little bit more complicated and 
my suggestion is we leave that to a later occasion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Because I would need to take you 
through some confirmatory affidavits and the like. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is fine.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Then Chair I just also wanted to 
indicate to you that although I had said to you in address 
in my opening address yesterday that Mr Vincent Smith has 
10 
indicated that he did not wish to testify further.  There had 
been further discussions Mr Smith has indicated that there 
was a misunderstanding and that he is perfectly willing to 
testify and the intention is if at all possible to fit him in and 
to hear his evidence in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Judge against that background the – 
the next witness that I propose to call is Ms Daphne 
Rantho. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes before we get there did we admit Ms 
20 
Mazzone’s affidavit?  I do not think we did. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I believe we did but if there is any 
controversy about that maybe there would be no harm in 
doing it twice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As a …ja I – let us check.  Ms Mazzone’s 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 6 of 126 
 
evidence is ZZ5 in Bundle 2.  The affidavit – the exhibit 
starts at Bundle 2 page 1 and the affidavit starts at page 5 
and the exhibit runs all the way through to page 519.  You 
will recall that she confirmed her affidavit and my request 
to the extent that this has already been done but it be 
formerly admitted as an Exhibit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no we did not admit it because I did 
not mark it and when we admit them I mark them.  The 
affidavit of Natasha Wendy Anita Mazzone which starts at 
page 5 of Bundle 2 is hereby admitted together with its 
10 
annexures as Exhibit ZZ5.  Okay.  We have got that out of 
the way.  Yes now your next witness. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were going to say something about – 
about the next witness. 
ADV FREUND SC:  My next witness … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were going to say something. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair but (speaking over one another). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I am sorry. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I am having some – here sorry. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I was simply … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You go. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I was just going to say that the next 
witness if Ms Daphne Zukiswa Rantho. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 7 of 126 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is Ms Rantho there so we can – the 
Registrar can administer the oath or affirmation. 
ADV FREUND SC:  She – she is visible on screen to me 
Chair.  I am not sure if she is visible to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not at this stage.  I can only see you at 
this stage.  She was visible earlier before you – you came 
on screen.  Maybe there is some – maybe she cannot hear 
us.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Maybe Ms Rantho is on mute I do not 
know. 
10 
MS RANTHO:  Oh.  I have unmuted Advocate and the 
Chairperson as I…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
MS RANTHO:  I think I am loud and clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes now we can hear.  Good morning Ms 
Rantho. 
MS RANTHO:  Good morning Chair.  Can you hear me 
well? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes I do I hear you very well Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh or is there – is there delay when I 
20 
speak before you hear you?  Is there quite some delay? 
MS RANTHO:  I do not have delay in hearing you.  You 
might have delays in hearing me but I do not have any 
delays in hearing you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay no I can hear you there are no 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 8 of 126 
 
delays at all.  Thank you very much.  Thank you for making 
yourself 
available 
to 
give 
evidence 
and 
assist 
the 
commission we really appreciate that. 
MS RANTHO:  Thank you very much Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Registrar will now administer the 
prescribed oath or affirmation before you give evidence. 
Registrar. She needs to come back on the screen.  Is there 
somebody who is supposed to make sure she comes back 
on the screen when she is supposed to come back on the 
screen or how does this work?  Is there somebody who 
10 
must unmute her or something? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair I am not the technical person I do 
not know but I believe that it is probably set that when she 
speaks she appears and when she is silent she goes off 
screen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Ms Rantho can you hear me? 
MS RANTHO:  I do hear you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay you are back.  Alright.  The 
Registrar will administer the prescribe oath or affirmation 
to you now. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS RANTHO:  My name is Daphne Zukiswa Rantho. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS RANTHO:  I do not have any objections. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 9 of 126 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MS RANTHO:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Ms Rantho.  Mr Freund you 
may proceed. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Rantho is it 
correct that you have deposed to an affidavit which you 
have submitted to the commission? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes it is correct Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And that affidavit have you got a hard 
copy thereof with you that was sent to you by the 
commission? 
 MS RANTHO:  Yes I have got the hard copy Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And am I correct that your affidavit is 
Exhibit ZZ6 that starts at page 521 of Bundle 2? 
20 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chair I agree it is ZZ6. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And your affidavit itself starts at page 
524 is that correct and it runs through until page… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  To page 3 – to page 559? 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 10 of 126 
 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And is that your signature at page 559 
to your affidavit? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes it is my signature Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And have you had an opportunity to 
check this affidavit and can you confirm that its contents 
are correct? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes I did have enough time to check the 
affidavit and the contents is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Chair I move that Exhibit 
10 
ZZ6 including its annexures of course be admitted as – as 
an exhibit before the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Daphne Zukiswa Rantho 
together with its annexures the affidavit starts at page 524 
of Bundle 2 is admitted as Exhibit ZZ6. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Rantho will you 
please turn to paragraph 4.2 of your affidavit?    
MS RANTHO:  Yes I am on it Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I do not need you to go into all the 
details in your affidavit about your political career but 
20 
perhaps you could just briefly summarise your – your 
political background and the extent to which you have been 
involved in the activities of the African National Congress. 
MS RANTHO:  Thank you Chairperson I have been a 
member of the African National Congress from 1986 but I 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 11 of 126 
 
have been involved more from 1992 – from 1990 to be in 
the Executive Committees of the – of the organisation and 
I have been active since then for – in the Eastern Cape.  I 
have 
been 
a 
leader 
in 
the 
Women’s 
League 
as 
a 
Chairperson.  I have been a leader in the South African 
Communist Party as a secretary of the Ncumisa Kondlo 
Conglomerate here in Aliwal North and I have been a 
member of the ANC Joe Gqabi region in – from 2 – from 
2012 to 2013 and in 2013 I was elected to be in the PEC of 
the Provincial Executive Committee of the Eastern Cape. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you and that will precede it. 
MS RANTHO:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  That will precede it.  Well from 2009 I 
see in your paragraph 5.1 that you were appointed as an 
ANC delegate from the Eastern Province to the National 
Counsel of Provinces, is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And it goes without saying I suppose 
that for that to happen your appointment needed and have 
this report of the Regional Executive the Provincial – both 
20 
the Provincial Executive Committee and the Regional 
Executive Committees that you have just referred to. 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And is it correct that you served for the 
duration of the Fourth Parliament which is the Parliament 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 12 of 126 
 
from May 20 – 2009 to April 2015 in the – in the NCOP? 
MS RANTHO:  It is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I want to spend a little time 
dealing with your experience during the Fourth Parliament.  
That is a period in which you were not a member of 
Parliament in the sense of being in the National Assembly 
you were a delegate to the NCOP.  But do I understand 
correctly that you nonetheless were a member of and 
participated in the affairs of the Parliamentary Caucus of 
the ANC in that period? 
10 
MS RANTHO:  Yes I did Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I want to take you to your 
paragraph 5.5.  You say there: 
“The prevailing ethos within the caucus was 
that 
allegations 
of 
improper 
influence, 
corruption 
or 
the 
like 
did 
not 
merit 
discussion within the caucus unless or until 
they were either established by a court of 
law 
or 
had 
been 
proved 
by 
concrete 
evidence.  Such allegations were to my 
20 
knowledge 
therefore 
discussed 
by 
backbench members of Parliament of the 
ruling party only privately informally if they 
were discussed by them at all.” 
 
Do you stand by that? 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 13 of 126 
 
MS RANTHO:  I stand by that Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now would you then turn to paragraph 
5.6 and I want to examine the context against which you 
have just given what you have just said a moment ago.  
Because there was a lot of material that was in the public 
domain and very serious allegations that had been made 
and particularly reported in the press in that period – in the 
period of the Fourth Parliament.  Do you agree with that in 
general? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes I agree Chair. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I want to look at just a few 
examples of that.  Can we go to paragraph 5.6.1 please? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You will see there that there is a 
reference to an annexure ZR1 to your affidavit and that 
affidavit – that annexure we will find at page 561 of Bundle 
2.  So if you go to – if you watch the numbers on the top 
left; the black numbers you will see PO2561 that is the 
page reference to that first article.  Do you have that – 
561? 
20 
MS RANTHO:  561? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes. 
MS RANTHO:  It is – if you look at paragraph 5.6.1 it is on 
the – on page of PO02527. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You are absolutely correct but it is a 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 14 of 126 
 
coincidence. 
MS RANTHO:  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But if you look at the end of that 
paragraph you see you refer there to an annexure which is 
called Annexure ZR1.  Do you see that reference? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes I do Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now it is Annexure ZR1 that I want to 
show you and Annexure ZR1 is at page 561 of Bundle 2.  
And I would like to check whether you are able to find page 
561 of Bundle 2? 
10 
MS RANTHO:  in Bundle number 2? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes in Bundle number 2.  These are the 
annexures to your affidavit. 
MS RANTHO:  I have got 561 in front of me Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you and is that an article – a 
newspaper article which is printed off from the Sunday 
Times an article dated the 27 February 2011? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And its heading – its headline is 
Ministers “Shiver” when summonsed to family home and it 
20 
says in the first paragraph: 
“A revolt is brewing within the ANC and its 
alliance partners against the influence of 
the Gupta family over President Zuma and 
his government.” 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 15 of 126 
 
And it says in the third paragraph.   
“Members of top ANC leadership structures 
the National Working Committee and the top 
6 party officials recently raised concerns 
about senior appointments that were made 
in the government and the parastatals with 
the party’s deployment committee being 
side-lined.” 
And the article continues. 
“The Sunday Times understands that the 
10 
Gupta’s role in influencing the appointment 
of CEO’s and Chairmen in key state owned 
enterprises was recently raised at a NWC 
meeting and that be formally discussed at 
its [?] gathering in a week’s time.” 
And on it goes.  It is referring to what is alleged to be an 
undue and improper influence by the Gupta brothers.  So 
that was one of the things that was widely reported on and 
the sort of thing that – that members of Parliament would 
have been aware of those reports, is that correct? 
20 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  And similarly if I take you 
to paragraph 5.6.2 of your affidavit that is back at page 
527. 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chair. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 16 of 126 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  There is reference to another article 
there.  I am not going to take you to the actual article ZR2 
is actually at page 563 to 565 no need to go there.  What 
you say in paragraph 5.6.2 is – or what the report that you 
quote says that it is becoming common for the Gupta’s to 
issue directives.  So that was another report that would 
have become common knowledge as to what was being 
alleged.  Am I correct? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes it is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you refer to other similar reports in 
10 
your affidavit.  If I can take you to paragraph 5.6.4? 
MS RANTHO:  Hm. 
ADV FREUND SC:  There is a set of reports and again I am 
not going to take you to the details or to the actual 
references but you refer in this sub-paragraph to reports 
that Mr Mbalula had told an MEC meeting attended by 
President Zuma that he had learned about his forthcoming 
appointment as a Minister from the Gupta’s two weeks 
before this had been publicly announced.  That sort of 
report would also have come to the attention of members of 
20 
Parliament at about that time.  Do you agree? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Now in paragraph 5.8 of 
your affidavit you say this: 
“I do not recall that these issues were debated within the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 17 of 126 
 
caucus nor do I recall any transparent discussion of these 
issues by the party’s leadership with its MP’s” 
And then you continue.  I am reading at page – oh sorry I 
cannot read the page from here.  It must be 528. 
MS RANTHO:  Page 528. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes.  And I have continue in paragraph 
5.9. 
MS RANTHO:  5.9. 
ADV FREUND SC:   
“To the best of my recollection there were no attempts by 
10 
ANC MP’s to investigate these claims in Parliament 
including the claims of undue influence in the appointment 
of CEO’s and Chairperson of state owned entities.  Claims 
which if true implied that these entities may have been 
rendered vulnerable to capture or corruption.” 
You stand by that? 
MS RANTHO:  I stand by that Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  You then refer in your 
affidavit and I am not going to take you through all the 
details you refer to issues pertaining to the New Age, the 
20 
State 
Security 
Agency, 
to 
press 
reports 
of 
alleged 
attempted bribe of the then Chairperson and acting CEO of 
SAA and you say to the best of your knowledge in the 
period of the Fourth Parliament none of these issues were 
the subject of discussion or investigation within the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 18 of 126 
 
structures of Parliament and within the organs – within the 
ANC caucus as far as you know? 
MS RANTHO:  As far as I know Chair there was none of 
these allegations that were discussed in the ANC caucus. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Now I want to move on to 
the next part Parliament – the Fifth Parliament.  You deal 
with this in paragraph 6 of your affidavit and this is your 
term in the National Assembly. You say though I presume it 
is correct that in May 2014 you were elected as a Member 
of Parliament for the ANC and the National Assembly and 
10 
that you served in that capacity from May 2014 until May 
2019, is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you were then deployed to the 
Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises and you were 
appointed to serve as the ANC Whip in that particular 
committee, is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So perhaps we should just explain that 
– that the committee itself would have as a majority of 
20 
members; ANC members is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes. ANC members would be in the majority 
in the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And because of that the consequence 
was that they were able to determine who would be 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 19 of 126 
 
appointed as the Chair and they did appoint the Chair of 
that committee? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes the – the Deployment comes from the 
Deployment Committee who says who is going to be the 
Chair of the committee.  Then in a committee meeting to 
elect a chairperson a – then a chairperson is elected by 
the whole committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes but you say that although the – the 
formal mechanism for the election of the Chair comes from 
the members of the ruling party who are on the committee.  
10 
The actual decision you say if I heard you correctly comes 
from the Deployment Committee, is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes, yes Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Just – just be a little bit particular 
which 
Deployment 
Committee; 
whose 
Deployment 
Committee? 
MS RANTHO:  The Deployment Committee in the National 
Executive 
Committee 
they 
are 
deploying 
the 
– 
the 
chairperson  in a committee.  Then in a committee meeting 
that is where the formal work is being done. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  And you were then appointed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry – I am sorry Mr 
Freund.  I am not sure that her answer gave the kind of 
clarification that I think you were looking for.  The 
Deployment Committee that you are talking about Ms 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 20 of 126 
 
Rantho is it the Deployment Committee of a political party 
or of a government structure? 
MS RANTHO:  Thank you Chair.  Chairperson before you – 
you go to a process of a government structure which is the 
– is the committee in Parliament you – you are then told or 
deployed by the National Executive Committee and – to a 
certain position in Parliament.  Then when the formal 
process comes to Parliament all parties that are in that 
committee would want to elect their – the chairperson of 
their choice.  But because the ANC is in the majority then 
10 
obviously the ANC members will elect their chairperson and 
then the numbers will outnumber the other political parties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS RANTHO:  And some of other political parties will then 
accept the chairperson that is elected by the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  My question is simply whether a 
Deployment 
Committee 
to 
which 
you 
referred 
is 
a 
Deployment Committee of a particular political party? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes it is a Deployment Committee of a 
particular party. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the ANC in this case? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair you broke up there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Is it the Deployment Committee of 
the ANC that you are talking about in this context? 
MS RANTHO:  It is the Deployment Committee of the ANC 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 21 of 126 
 
that I am talking about in this context Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chair.  And you were 
then appointed as the ANC Whip in that committee from the 
time that you joined that committee is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And we heard evidence yesterday that 
Portfolio Committees in fact we heard evidence about your 
very own Portfolio Committee that – Portfolio Committee on 
Public Enterprises.  The ANC has what is known as a help 
10 
me is it a working group you call it? 
MS RANTHO:  The National Working Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  No, no, no. 
MS RANTHO:  They receive the work. 
ADV FREUND SC:  No not the Working Group the – the 
group for the – the caucus in – with the – the ANC caucus 
within the Portfolio Committee.  What is the term that you 
call it? 
MS RANTHO:  The Study Group.  The Study Group yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  That was the – I meant it slipped my 
20 
mind. 
MS RANTHO:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So you have a Study Group which 
comprises in effect the members of the Portfolio Committee 
who are ANC MP’s, is that correct? 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 22 of 126 
 
MS RANTHO:  Yes Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And that Study Group would as I 
understand it before every Portfolio Committee meet as it 
were in private just ANC persons, is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes that is correct Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And would that Study Group meeting 
involve just the ANC MP’s from the committee or would it 
also involve for example the relevant Minister, the relevant 
Director General or other senior ANC appointees? 
MS RANTHO:  It – in the Study Group Chairperson will be 
10 
the ANC members of the Committee.  If the Minister is 
available the Minister would be part of the Study Group. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right. 
MS RANTHO:  And if the Executive of the – of the 
Department is also available we then call one – one 
representative from the maybe the DG of the – of the 
department. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Into the meeting. 
MS RANTHO:  That is what is happening in the Study 
Group.  Yes Chair. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes.  The meetings of the Study 
Groups.  
MS RANTHO:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now – would that – that would apply 
even 
where 
the 
proposed 
meeting 
by 
the 
Portfolio 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 23 of 126 
 
Committee is to be examining and holding to account for 
example 
the 
Minister 
would 
attend 
the Study 
Group 
meeting that prepares for the Portfolio Committee meeting.  
Is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, that is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And when you referred to, for example, 
inviting a DG or some other official, the same would apply 
there.  Is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   In other words, the majority party on 
10 
the Portfolio Committee, in preparation for an oversight 
meeting, caucuses with those who are to be the subject of 
the oversight.  Is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And does the Study Group then take a 
view as to what approach should be adopted in relation to 
issues that are then going to be discussed in the Portfolio 
Committee? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chairperson.  The Study Group does 
that and also the Study Group look at the policies of the 
20 
government if they are applied within the department, in 
everything that the department is doing in the Portfolio 
Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And when you were appointed as the 
Whip, the ANC Whip of the committee, what is your duty as 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 24 of 126 
 
Whip? 
MS RANTHO:   As a Whip of the committee – I am not a 
Whip of a committee.  I am as appointed as a Whip of the 
ANC.  I therefore look at the members of the – in the 
attendance of the members of the ANC in the Study Group 
and also in the committee meetings. 
 
I also make sure that the Study Group of the ANC 
did read the content of what the department has given to the 
– has sent to the committee at large.  That is what the Whip 
is doing of the ANC in the Study Group. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if the Study Group, having 
considered a particular issues, reaches a decision as to 
what approach should be adopted in respect of that issue.  
Any part of the function of the Whip, the ANC Whip to 
ensure that the members of the ANC caucus within the 
committee act in accordance with what has been studies – 
with what has been decided in the Study Group. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, it is.  It is as part of my duties to see to 
it that what has been discussed in the Study Group the 
members of the ANC stands by the Study Group’s decision. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Now going back to your 
affidavit at paragraph 6.3.   
MS RANTHO:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You refer there to the fact that when 
you joined this committee, the PCPD, Minister Lynne Brown 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 25 of 126 
 
was the Minister of Public Enterprises and there is Letsatsi 
Duba was the Chairperson of the committee.  Is that 
correct? 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then what happened in – on the 
31 s t of March 2017, as you referred to in paragraph 6.4, 
Ms Letsatsi Duba was appointed as Deputy Minister of 
Public Service and Administration and thereafter the State 
Security Minister and once she had been appointed or 
promoted to Deputy Minister, you were promoted to the 
10 
position of acting Chairperson of the PCPD.  Is that 
correct? 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you were serving in that capacity 
as the acting Chair at the time of the PCPD’s now well-
known inquiry into Eskom that commenced in June 2017.  
Is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And although a different chair of the 
committee was in due course appointed, you told the 
20 
Commission in paragraph 6.6 you had been appointed as 
you had been elected as the chair of that particular inquiry 
and you can continue to chair that inquiry right through to 
the conclusion of its work.  Is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chair. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 26 of 126 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in paragraph 7 of your affidavit 
you referred to the powers of portfolio committees.  Now I 
am not going to take you through that.  That we can see 
from the provisions of the rules themselves.   
 
You make the point in paragraph 7.7 that the PCPD 
have 11 members, 6 members of the ANC, 2 from the 
Democratic Alliance, 1 from the Inkatha Freedom Party, 1 
from the United Democratic Front and 1 from the Economic 
Freedom Fighters.  Is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, that is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I want to take you now to 
paragraph 7.12 where you referred to the powers of the 
chairperson of the committee.  And you say there in the 
second sentence: 
“In principle, all members of the committee 
should 
be 
able 
to 
speak 
freely 
and 
to 
participate in any decision making process. 
Chairperson 
can, 
however, 
exercise 
a 
considerable influence over the conduct of 
meetings of committees.” 
20 
 
You stand by that? 
MS RANTHO:   What I mean about that Chair.  Because the 
chairperson is driving the committee, the chairperson can 
ask the – or request the committee members, all of them 
including the opposition parties, to drive them to the decision 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 27 of 126 
 
that I think would be best for the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You drew attention in paragraph 7.13 
to the problem that the committees are busy, they have an 
annual cycle, they have an annual set of agendas which 
makes it quite hard to fit in, as it were, spontaneously 
issues arising at a particular time.  Is that correct?  Is that 
a fair summary of your ...[intervenes]  
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Okay.  And then you say in paragraph 
7.14 that: 
10 
“From 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
5 t h 
Parliament, the PCPE exercise oversights over 
the Department of Public Enterprises including 
then, Eskom, Denel, Transnet, South African 
Airways, 
South 
African 
Express 
Airways, 
Safcol, Alexkor.” 
 
And you make the point that during the 5 t h 
Parliament, SAA was moved to the oversight of Treasury 
and therefore to the other side of a different committee.  I 
think we actually had evidence to that effect yesterday. 
20 
 
Then you make a point in paragraph 7.16 that one 
of 
the 
practical 
problems 
experienced 
by 
portfolio 
committees.  You say: 
“Frequently the overseeing departments or 
entities only furnished the document or report 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 28 of 126 
 
to 
be 
considered 
at 
the 
meeting 
of 
the 
committee very shortly before or sometimes 
even at the meeting concerned.” 
 
Could you just elaborate on that and explain to the 
Chair to what extent that is a real problem? 
MS RANTHO:   It is a real problem Chairperson because all 
departments know that they should furnish their committee 
within certain dates before the committee sits with the 
information that they are going to present in the committee.  
But most of the time, the department, the entities will come 
10 
with the presentation or we get the presentation a day before 
the committee sits. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now ...[intervenes]  
MS RANTHO:   It as very rare for us to get presentation 7 
days before the committee sits. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Ms Rantho, may I just refer you to 
paragraph 7.17? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund.  Ms Rantho, why 
was the 7-day period not enforced, namely that departments 
20 
must furnish their documents not later than 7 days before the 
meeting?  Why was that not enforced? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson, that was enforced but they 
never – they do not really adhere to what the committee 
members would say.  That is why most of the time when the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 29 of 126 
 
departments or the entities come to a committee meeting and 
the committee sees the document how big it is and it needs 
thorough inspection or thorough reading. 
 
The committee has the right to refer that department 
back to where it comes from and the committee has enough 
time to read the documents so that they are able to know 
what is happening.  That is what is happening, usually, in 
Parliament.   
 
The committee would refer that document back – 
would refer, in fact, the people who are coming to present 
10 
back to where they are coming from and they would look at 
the document.   
 
But that also was rare because of the procedure and 
the procedure that we need to follow in Parliament so that 
we meet the deadlines. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If you could just explain what...  Sorry, 
Chair you proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So you are saying that the way to 
enforce 
this 
requirement 
was 
for 
the 
committee 
to 
20 
reschedule the meeting with the result that the government 
or the department officials or the Minister would have to go 
back and come back on another day when the committee 
would have had enough time to study the document.  Is that 
what you are saying? 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 30 of 126 
 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, that is what I am saying Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are also making another point, are 
you not?  That it was rare that other committees or the 
committee you are talking about used that step? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chairperson because of the procedure 
of Parliament, we had to adhere to that line of everything 
that needs to be done.  If the committee has to go through 
the presentation and take it through to Parliament in the 
sitting of Parliament at a certain time, we would then be up 
for a time, maybe for 20-minutes to read the document or we 
10 
just go through with the document as it is presented by the 
person who came with the presentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With the result that quite often committee 
members or most of the committee members would not be 
as well-prepared to deal with the issues as they would 
have been if they had had the 7-days’ notice. 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I want to take you 
now to paragraph 7.17 of your affidavit.  And I think it is 
20 
very important that we, the Commission and the Chair 
should understand how these meetings actually work in 
reality.   
 
I think many lawyers would work on the assumption 
that there is going to be an oversight meeting and that 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 31 of 126 
 
there is going to be questions.   
 
One would assume that each person would ask a 
question, get an answer, asks another questions, get an 
answer.  And then the next person will ask a question, get 
an answer and so forth. 
 
But that is not how that happens, is it?  Would you 
explain how it actually works in reality? 
MS RANTHO:   In reality Chairperson, after the presentation 
the committee members will be given a chance to ask 
questions but we usually take a round of five questions or 
10 
four questions.  Then the presenter will then respond.   
 
If there is any other person that the presenter has 
come with, he or she will give a chance to the person that to 
react on what she has said or what he has said.   
 
We take a round of four questions or five questions 
depending on the time that we have because usually the 
meeting start at half-past nine and by quarter to two every 
meeting must be done so that we go to the sitting of 
Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you say in this paragraph: 
20 
“Members are usually afforded an opportunity 
to take turns to each ask questions which they 
wish to pose. 
After 
they 
have 
all 
posed 
their 
various 
questions, the presenter is usually afforded an 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 32 of 126 
 
opportunity to answer all the questions. 
Sometimes adequate time is not afforded to 
enable all questions to be answered but the 
presenter is also sometimes afforded leeway 
to determine which questions to really address 
and which to skirt over. 
When questions are directly addressed, there 
are sometimes not an adequate opportunity for 
probing follow-up questions.” 
 
So I just want to, in the light of your previous 
10 
answer, to know whether you still stand by what you say 
here in paragraph 7.17? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chairperson I stand by – I thought I am 
explaining the whole paragraphs, how it works. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  And would it be fair to then 
say from this that persons who are asked a set of 
questions are effectively able to avoid answering difficult 
questions because they just choose which bits to deal 
thoroughly and there is really very often not adequate 
opportunity to follow up properly. 
20 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, there is usually no follow-up questions 
because of the time and the presenter takes his or her time 
to answer the questions to his or her satisfaction.  And I am 
saying, these presenters will take the questions that they 
think would be – they are able to respond to.   
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 33 of 126 
 
 
And those difficult questions, if they do not respond 
to them and we insisted them to respond to, they will 
respond or they will say they will come with a response later 
or they will send the response.  It is only depended on the 
time.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  And given your experience of 
situations 
like 
that 
where 
persons 
being 
questioned 
undertook to come back later or to respond in writing and 
then failed to do so.   
MS RANTHO:   Yes, we did experience a failure from their 
10 
responses of not coming forward.  And also sometimes, they 
will have – they will make time respond back but by then 
when they respond back by writing, we have already left that 
portion of presentation.  We are focussing on another entity.  
As you have seen in my paragraph 17, 7.14 that we had a lot 
of entities that we were looking at and all those entities were 
really in serious problems. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you make the point in your 
paragraph 7.18 that: 
“The net result is having difficult question are 
20 
raised.  Ordinary committee meetings do not 
always 
elicit 
satisfactory 
and 
complete 
answers.” 
 
And you say: 
“The position is different when a committee 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 34 of 126 
 
decides as the PCPE eventually did to conduct 
a public hearing under Rule 167D.” 
 
Is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But...  So the different format of the 
meeting - a formal public hearing.  There you believe that 
you get a better opportunity to properly explore difficult 
issues. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I want to turn to your paragraph 
10 
8.  And I want to deal fairly briefly with your views on the 
effectiveness of the oversight by the Portfolio Committee 
on Public Enterprises in the period between May 2014 and 
June 2017. 
 
May 2014 
is 
when 
you 
came 
into 
the 
committee.  June 2017 is when we know which your 
committee took a decision to have an inquiry into Eskom 
and so forth.   
 
In the interim, if you could just deal generally with 
your own impressions as a member of that committee as to 
the effectiveness and the adequacy of the oversight by that 
20 
committee 
in 
respect 
of 
Public 
Enterprises 
and 
in 
particularly allegations of alleged improper influence or 
improper performance or corruption or the like within those 
Public Enterprises.   
 
Can you give us an overview as to your own 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 35 of 126 
 
opinion? 
MS RANTHO:   The – well, they started the 5t h Parliament 
and I started as a member of the National Assembly.  In all 
our portfolio committees, if I am answering correct, we were 
waiting for the presentations from the departments and the 
entities.   
 
If there were any challenges that emerged from the 
presentation 
during 
the 
questioning 
and 
during 
the 
presentation of the department or the entity, then we will 
recommend or we will ask the presenter and the department 
10 
to come back and present again so that we look at what they 
have presented that is before us and make sure that what 
they are coming with is something that is – which we did.. 
 
We really Chairperson did not know if it was a legal 
representation like legit or not but we were doing, we were 
given a presentation and we would ask questions on that 
presentation that is before us.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now ...[intervenes]  
MS RANTHO:   That is why each and every committee as per 
this paragraph or we are on oversight by then.  Each and 
20 
every committee would have a legacy report.  The legacy 
report sometimes depends on what the presenters have 
given us in the five years. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  And in the interest of time, I 
am not going to try and take you paragraph by paragraph 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 36 of 126 
 
through this period but if I can draw your attention to 
paragraph 8.4.  You referred to a schedule which had been 
drawn up and which you referred to in your affidavit about 
a series of engagement.  And you say: 
“It will be evident from schedule, whilst there 
were quite a few oversights engagements and 
whilst 
in 
some 
of 
these 
engagements 
legitimate oversight concerns were expressed, 
the issue of state capture was not really 
expressed and little effective oversight took 
10 
place in respect of allegations of fraud or 
corruption or other comparable misconduct.” 
 
Do you stand by that? 
MS RANTHO:   I stand by that Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Okay.  And then in paragraph 8.6 you 
refer to the press report because I am trying to get a 
picture of what was known or what was being alleged in the 
public domain.   
 
And you refer in paragraph 8.6 to a press report 
about Transnet and the R 15 billion tender and allegations 
20 
being 
made 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
Gupta 
family 
and 
Mr Duduzane Zuma and Mr Iqbal Sharma and so forth.  You 
refer in paragraph 8.9 to a report in July 2015 and 
AmaBhungane about commission payment to Neotel.   
 
And we have already heard evidence about those 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 37 of 126 
 
two reports.  So I am not going to take you to the actual 
details of those reports.  But again that background, you 
say the following in paragraph 8.10.  You are referring to 
the Neotel report.  You say: 
“I actually have no recollection of this press 
report.  It raises issues that seem to me to be 
quite complex. 
To the best of my recollection, there was no 
attempt 
by 
the 
PCPE 
to 
probe 
these 
allegations. 
10 
With the benefit of hindsight, I think it would 
have been advisable. 
This is the sort of report which I think research 
was advising the PCPE should be required to 
monitor and advice the committee on. 
I do not recall receiving any such advice.  
I also do not think that any research was 
mandated by the PCPE to look for such 
information and to advice the committee on 
issues that should be probed by it.” 
20 
 
You stand by that? 
MS RANTHO:   I stand by that Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thanks.  And then in your paragraph 
8.12 having referred to another article in 8.11 which is an 
article in March 2016 alleging, according to the headline, 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 38 of 126 
 
the entire Eskom Board was appointed by the Gupta’s.  You 
say in paragraph 8.12 the following: 
“I believe that when taken together with all the 
other information which was coming to light by 
this time, an article like this ought to have 
prompted the PCPE to enquire vigorously into 
the 
possibility 
of 
undue 
influence 
by 
the 
Gupta’s over Eskom and the boards of other 
entities like Transnet and Denel.” 
 
You stand by that? 
10 
MS RANTHO:   I stand by that Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So let us try and get our bearings now 
as to the period of time that we are in.  We are now in 
March of 2016.  And it is really at that time that you are 
saying by then we should have been doing that we were 
not doing.   
 
And in your paragraph 8.13 you draw attention to a 
series of publicly reported allegations.  You refer to 
Mcebisi Jonas’ claim that the Gupta’s had offered him 
R 100 million bribe in October 2015 if he had taken the 
20 
post of Finance Minister to do their bidding.   
 
You refer to an allegation that the person then 
appointed instead of him as the new Finance Minister in 
early December 2015, Mr Des van Rooyen was appointed 
to his new post on his appointed by Gupta link aids.   
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 39 of 126 
 
 
You refer to Vytjie Mentor ’s allegation that she has 
been offered Barbara Hogan’s job as Minister of Public 
Enterprises by the Gupta’s if you had cooperated with them 
in assisting Jet Airways to replace SAA on the Mumbai 
route.   
 
You referred to Barbara Hogan’s allegation that 
there were definitely sinister forces operating behind her 
back when she was Minister of Public Enterprises until 
October 2010 and that she too had faced pressure 
regarding Jet Airways.   
10 
 
And 
against 
that 
background, 
you 
say 
the 
following: 
“The PCPE did not enquire effectively into the 
above 
allegations 
nor 
into 
allegations 
of 
improper 
or 
undue 
influence 
over 
the 
procurement decisions of Transnet or Eskom 
until after June the following year.” 
 
You stand by that as well, I take it? 
MS RANTHO:   I stand by that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Then what you do ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take a short adjournment.  It is not 
the tea-break.  It would be about five minutes and then we 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 40 of 126 
 
will resume.  We adjourn. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us proceed, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Rantho, I would 
like to refer you to paragraph 8.18 of your affidavit. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Because then you deal with the 
question of what explains the failures, as you have already 
10 
said you see them, to exercise a certain degree of 
oversight and I would like 
you perhaps to tell the 
Commission in your own words in your view what explains 
why things did not go as you might with hindsight have 
wished they did go? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson, as I said before that in 
parliament there is a procedure that we will follow, so when 
things are coming up you have already set up a programme 
as a committee, you have sent the programme to all 
entities and to all departments.  You then follow that 
20 
programme.  It will have something that will push us to do 
what has just come up like the allegations that keep on 
coming but, Chair, because of – because I said before, 
because of the procedures that we needed to follow, we did 
not really – I would say as much as the allegation were 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 41 of 126 
 
open to everybody to know, we did not really take a stand, 
as a committee, to say we are going to follow those 
allegations because we had a procedure that we needed to 
follow. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is really …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am not sure – I am sorry, Mr Freund, 
just repeat that answer, Ms Rantho, I am not sure that I 
follow it. 
MS RANTHO:   I am saying, Chairperson, I agree that the 
committee did not do its best to follow up on the 
10 
allegations that were on the public domain because we had 
a programme that we have set up that we will follow in the 
– towards the procedures of parliament as per parliament 
proceedings.  So allegations that really come up, we did 
not follow them.  We heard about them, some would refer 
to them, we will talk about that but formally we did not do 
it, we did not really follow them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, my concern is the reason you give 
why you did not follow them up.  As I understand it, you 
are saying it is because of the tight programme that you 
20 
had and you seem to suggest that there was not enough 
time or enough flexibility in your programme to be able to 
follow them up.  Do I understand your evidence correctly? 
MS RANTHO:   You understand me correctly, Chairperson, 
the programme of parliament is rigid and it has an annual 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 42 of 126 
 
cycle that we need to follow.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I want you to consider whether it 
was really the programme that was – that created a 
problem or whether there was simply no will on the part of 
the majority of the committee members to follow up the 
[inaudible – no sound from Chairperson’s mic for 50 
seconds] 
MS RANTHO:   I do see the Chair but I cannot hear what 
you are saying.   
ADV FREUND SC:   We can hardly hear you. 
10 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, it is better now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I could not hear both of you but now I 
can hear both of you.  Okay, alright.  Let us go back.  So 
my question, Ms Rantho, was this.  Was the problem or at 
least maybe was the reason or at least one of the reasons 
not that there was no will on the part of the majority of the 
committee members to follow up on these allegations? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson, that is why when I was 
responding to the question, in the first instance I said I 
agree that the committee did not do diligence in its work 
20 
because the committee did not make any follow-up in any 
allegations that we have.  I do not think it is because we 
are in majority as the ANC in the committee.  It is just that 
we did not have that – really that oomph to do the real 
oversight in these allegations because if we had done that 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 43 of 126 
 
at the beginning of the fifth parliament we would have 
enough time to probe every entity in Public Enterprises but 
we did not follow any allegations that were in the public 
domain. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where members of the committee, who 
were from opposition parties trying to do proper oversight 
in the committee but because they were in the minority 
they did not succeed or was the position that everybody in 
the committee just did not have the appetite, to say the 
least, to follow up on these allegations? 
10 
MS RANTHO:   To be honest with you, Chairperson, in our 
committee of Public Enterprises, we understood each 
other, we were working together.  That is why we took a 
unanimous 
decision 
as 
this 
committee 
when 
these 
allegations were really coming up now and there was 
evidence in front of the committee that we took a 
unanimous decision to say let us then probe on these 
allegations especially because the allegations on Eskom 
were too much, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, you see, yesterday one of the 
20 
witnesses that I heard was Ms Mazzone of the Democratic 
Alliance. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who I think has very high respect for 
you in the light of I believe the work that you did when you 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 44 of 126 
 
chaired the committee but if I recall correctly, her evidence 
was that the committee was not keen on following up on 
these allegations for quite some time but there was a 
turning point, I think that may have been in 2017, there 
was a turning point when there seemed to be a change of 
attitude on the members of the committee particularly I 
think the majority party members to taking up these 
allegations and agreeing to do – conduct an enquiry but for 
quite some time before that, her evidence was that she 
made proposals to the committee to say let us call – let us 
10 
summon the Guptas to the committee, let them come and 
answer questions under oath.  She tried a number of things 
but the committee seemed not to be interested.  What do 
you say to that? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson, in my recollection on the 
committee work, even if there was – there were allegations 
that the opposition would come within the committee 
meeting, they will just present or just say that there are 
such allegations, in front of the minister, in front of the DG, 
in front of the whole executive maybe of the entity or the 
20 
department.  But I am saying, as a committee, we have 
never took that decision.  Even if they would come up as 
opposition to say there is corruption, there is this that has 
happened, that we would not follow that route as a 
committee. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 45 of 126 
 
MS RANTHO:   Was it not because these allegations were 
against ANC ministers or deputy ministers or directors 
general who may have been ANC comrades and CEOs?  
Was it not that, that the majority …[intervenes] 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   …that the ANC members might not have 
wanted to embarrass their own ministers by questioning 
them as if they are opposition party members? 
MS RANTHO:   No, Chairperson, we did not have that in 
the committee and also, Chairperson, there is a procedure 
10 
in the committee that needs – in parliament that needs to 
be followed when you come up with allegations and you 
have all the evidence in front of you.  To just speak about 
the allegations in the committee, that was not enough 
because they would say there is an allegation that in 
Eskom there is this fraudulent things that are happening 
but there will be no evidence.  We started to look at the 
evidence that we have in front of us.  That unfortunately 
came - or fortunately, came up towards the end of 2016 in 
the Public Protector ’s report and also at the beginning of 
20 
2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, as a committee, if you are told 
about some allegations, for example, of corruption in an 
SOE, is the position that the committee had powers to 
make enquiries from the relevant CEO or the board to say 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 46 of 126 
 
what is happening about a, b, c, d, here are these 
allegations that we see in the media, in the newspapers, or 
whatever, here are allegations that have been made.  Yes, 
there might not be evidence now but the committee is there 
to try and see if there is evidence by asking questions to 
the entity, to the relevant minister, to the DG, to the CEO, 
to the Chairman of the board.  Is that not part of his duty? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, that is part of the oversight, 
Chairperson.  As I am saying, Chairperson, the committee 
depends on the information that is in front of them, of the 
10 
committee.   
If that information does not come forth to the 
committee, there is nothing that the committee will do.  If 
there is an opposition party that is bringing evidence in 
front of the committee, opposition parties they know which 
route to follow so that we are able to look at those 
allegations of that information that they have in their 
hands.   
It 
is 
not 
because 
we 
are 
in 
majority 
in 
the 
committee, if something has to be investigated or question 
20 
has to be asked, those questions would be asked, then it 
will depend on the response of the presenter of that 
moment.  
 
So, Chair, it is really an unfortunate situation that 
we did really did not follow all those allegations that were 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 47 of 126 
 
on public domain. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I might come back to this but, Mr 
Freund, just continue in the meantime. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you and I had referred you 
to paragraph 8.18 of your affidavit. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I think you very fully dealt with 
what you have said in paragraph 8.18.1.  Perhaps you 
could deal with 8.18.2 and then we will come after that to 
8.18.3. 
10 
MS RANTHO:   Chair, you see, 2016, as much as those 
allegations were there on public domain, every political 
party in 2016 were concerned about the local government 
that were happening in 2016 so we did not have really 
enough time to engage in the year of 2016.  Most of the 
time we were out of parliament doing political work as 
different parties that are in parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what do you say about 8.18.3? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, I agree with what I said in 8.18.3, 
Chairperson.  You know, a member of parliament is in 
20 
parliament because of a political party so a pressure from 
political parties would make – would also, even the 
leadership of political parties, would make us not to probe 
a certain issue that is politically sensitive.  It does not 
happen only in the ruling party, it also happens in every 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 48 of 126 
 
other political party. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So just perhaps for the record I should 
read what you said there or maybe would you like to read it 
into the record, what you said in paragraph [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chair, I said – I said members of 
parliament who refused to toe the line can end up being 
removed from parliament by their party.  That is why I am 
saying it cuts across, it does not only happen in one 
political party.  Do I read further, Chair? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You also say this in the first sentence.   
“Political 
and 
leadership 
pressures 
can 
inhibit 
portfolio committee members from probing certain 
politically sensitive issues.” 
Now …[intervenes] 
MS RANTHO:   I agree. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you say that can happen? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, it can. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Where it did happen? 
20 
MS RANTHO:   I can happen, it can happen into any party 
but I am not going to say it did happen because we were 
really not – we did not have a person that is prohibiting us 
from doing our job and we had a leadership in a person 
like Jackson Mthembu, the former chief whip, may his 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 49 of 126 
 
should rest in peace, that would say you push for what is 
wrong, that what is happening and you do what is right, 
you correct what is wrong, you do what is right.  You tell a 
person if a person is wrong, you tell that person that you 
are wrong, politically and administratively. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, we know …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that – I am sorry, Mr Freund, was 
that from a certain time when you were in this committee, 
Mr Rantho, that that was the attitude or was that the 
attitude through the time that you were a member of this 
10 
committee? 
MS RANTHO:   It was the attitude that we had throughout 
the term of – the fifth term of parliament from the 
beginning.  We were told by the chief whips or chief whip 
that we need to do what is right.  If there any allegations 
against a certain person who is in our committee or who is 
leading our committee, we need to probe that person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, continue, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Rantho, we had 
evidence yesterday from Ms Mazzone and let me clear that 
20 
Ms Mazzone accepts that from May or June of 2017 you 
were at the forefront of an attempt to exercise proper 
oversight within your committee but she testified also 
about an earlier period and she focused in particular on 
the period from March 2016 until around about May 2017.  
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 50 of 126 
 
One of the things she testified about what was a formal 
request that she addressed to the Chair of the portfolio 
committee on Public Enterprises referring to the various 
allegations particularly revolving around alleged Gupta 
family influence requesting that the Gupta family and 
various other named people should be summoned to come 
and appear before your committee and she said that not 
only the Chairperson declined to do that but there was no 
support from members of the PCPE for such an inquiry in 
March or April of 2016.  Do you recall that and can you 
10 
confirm that that is correct? 
MS RANTHO:    That is correct, Chairperson, but she wrote 
a letter to the Chairperson of the portfolio committee, then 
the Chairperson consulted the legal team of parliament and 
the legal team suggest to the Chairperson – I remember 
few letters from Ms Mazzone, coming from Ms Mazzone to 
the Chairperson.  The Chairperson would say to the 
committee there is a letter that is coming from Ms Mazzone 
and Ms Mazzone, according to the legal advice that I have 
received, we cannot pursue this.  By then the committee 
20 
itself, me as a whip of the committee or the whip of the 
ANC in the committee, would not know what the content of 
the letter is until the Chairperson brings the letter in the 
portfolio committee and share the letter with us and say 
the legal team, if the legal team say we cannot probe what 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 51 of 126 
 
is on the table, we therefore put it aside. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So are you saying to the Chair that 
that first request was not supported by the committee 
because the committee accepted the legal advice that the 
chair had received that this could not be done? 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Were you aware at the time that Ms 
Mazzone vigorously disputed the correctness of that legal 
advice? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, I am aware, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what was your view that you must 
simply accept whatever the Chair ’s legal advice had been? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, we were of the view that if a legal 
person says we cannot pursue an issue because of certain 
reasons, then we do not pursue it, we agree that we cannot 
pursue it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now Ms Mazzone also 
testified yesterday that the DA subsequently in September 
of …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Freund, you are moving 
20 
away from this question that were dealing with just now, 
hey?   
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I am. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, let me ask this question.  
Ms Rantho, the allegations that Ms Mazzone asked the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 52 of 126 
 
committee or the chair that they should be inquired related 
to the Gupta family, is it not?  Do you know that or did you 
know that at the time? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson, as I have said before – 
Chairperson as I have said before, the letter will be 
between Ms Mazzone, the Chairperson and the legal team 
of 
parliament 
so 
when 
she 
comes 
to 
us, 
as 
our 
Chairperson, she will say to us there is a letter coming 
from Ms Mazzone which has these allegations in it and the 
legal team of parliament says we cannot probe these 
10 
allegations as a committee, it is not in our mandate as a 
committee to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, in other words …[intervenes] 
MS RANTHO:   Those allegations that she put in front of 
the committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, she told the committee 
what the allegations were that Ms Mazzone wanted to be 
investigated. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chairperson, but not all the letters, 
some of the letters she will tell and some of the letters she 
20 
will say the letters from Ms Mazzone have been put aside 
because the legal team – and we would not know what is 
inside the letter, especially me as the whip of the ANC in 
the committee, I would not know what is in the letter, the 
content of the letter, and that letter would be put aside 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 53 of 126 
 
because it was sent to the committee not to the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But do you – did she ever say to 
you the committee, that is the Chairperson, that the 
allegations – did she ever say at any stage that the 
allegations that Ms Mazzone wanted to be investigated 
were allegations relating to alleged corruption and State 
Capture 
by 
the 
Gupta 
family. 
 
Did 
she 
– 
did 
the 
Chairperson 
inform 
the 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
MS RANTHO:   No, Chair, she will not say… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry, continue. 
MS RANTHO:   You faded away again, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, let me repeat. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, you faded away again, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay alright, I will repeat the 
question, did she ever tell the committee, that is the 
Chairperson of your committee, did she ever tell the 
committee 
that 
Ms 
Mazzone 
wanted 
allegations 
of 
corruption and state capture by the Gupta family to be 
investigated by the committee? 
20 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson, in essence the name Gupta 
family came up during the inquiry, it never came up in the 
committee meeting.  We only knew about the Gupta family 
and the fraudulent allegations against the Gupta family in 
the inquiry. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 54 of 126 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you therefore saying as far as 
you know and as far as the committee knew up to the time 
that the committee made – considered the proposal that it 
considered about an enquiry and agreed to hold an inquiry, 
until that stage it was not aware of any request by Ms 
Mazzone that allegations of corruption and state capture 
by the Gupta be investigated by the committee.  What they 
might have been told by the Chairperson at the time was 
that there was a certain request for certain matters to be 
investigated, requests from Ms Mazzone, but the legal 
10 
advisers of parliament had said that the committee could 
not do that. 
MS RANTHO:   I agree with you, Chair, that is what 
happened.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But I want to make sure that you are not  
misunderstood, you are not saying that the Chairperson of 
the committee at the time never told you what allegations 
Ms Mazzone wanted to be investigated each time she may 
have made the request but you are saying sometimes the 
Chairperson would tell the committee what the allegations 
20 
were, sometimes she would not say, is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS RANTHO:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Freund? 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 55 of 126 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Rantho, Ms 
Mazzone also testified yesterday in relation to a speech 
that she gave on the floor of the house in April of 2016.  
You will not have this in front of you but I am going to read 
to you and Chair, this is bundle 2 at page 263.  It is from 
Hansard in respect of the 26 April 2016 and Ms Mazzone is 
quoted as saying the following: 
“There is growing evidence to suggest that the 
number of state owned entities that had been 
captured by the Guptas with the family allegedly 
10 
influencing not only ministerial appointments but 
also appointments within SOEs themselves.  In the 
light of the mounting allegations of influence and 
interference by this family I have requested the 
Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises urgently 
summons the Guptas according to the rules of 
parliament so that a process of inquiry can begin 
into the capture of state owned entities by the 
Guptas.” 
Were you aware, therefore, that that was what she was 
20 
calling for and why she was calling for it? 
MS RANTHO:   I was not aware, Chair, that what she was 
calling for – why was she calling for it, Chairperson, 
because I had no – nothing that I knew about the Guptas. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take the tea break, Mr Freund, 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 56 of 126 
 
and then we will continue.  We will resume at half past 
eleven.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I had to attend to some 
Commission matters and other matters, so we are resuming 
later than I had indicated.   Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes thank you, may I proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I am sorry that we have taken 
longer, I had to attend to some urgent matters that could 
10 
not wait, thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Not at all.   Ms Rantho you will recall 
that before the tea adjournment you explained that you had 
accepted the legal advice that you had been told about; 
that the Portfolio Committee itself could not without the 
support of a resolution of the House, embark upon an 
inquiry, for example into the allegations involving the 
Gupta’s, am I correct in the way I just put it to you? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, that is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And herein before the break, I referred 
20 
you to a statement made in the House by Ms Mazzone on 
the 25 t h of April, which referred to not only the allegations, 
but her request to the Portfolio Committee that there 
should have been an investigation and according to her 
affidavit, and this is the evidence she gave yesterday.  She 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 57 of 126 
 
says that her speech on that in which you have referred, 
she says: 
“To growing evidence that a number of SOE’s are 
being captured by the Gupta’s.” 
And I stress this is in April 2016.  She says: 
“Having referred to all of that the ANC MP’s in the 
National Assembly ignored everything I said and 
therefore there was no decision in the National 
Assembly on this occasion in favour of an inquiry, 
without support from the National Assembly or the 
10 
PCPE for the inquiry that I proposed, such an 
inquiry could not get off the ground.” 
I presume you would accept that? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, I will accept that can I, can you give 
me a chance to explain on the statement? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, of course. 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson, a statement that is done in 
Parliament or yes, a statement that is done in Parliament, 
everybody in Parliament is allowed to do a statement.  The 
statement you are doing does not mean that the statement 
20 
will be taken to be discussed further.  There is something 
that is called motions in Parliament.   
So there are motions that are being picked by a 
certain group of people.  I cannot remember what those - 
what that committee is that can be discussed even in the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 58 of 126 
 
sitting of Parliament.  There are motions that are set aside 
that cannot be discussed, because they were not agreed by 
the majority of people in Parliament.  So statements are 
being done by everybody who is a member of Parliament.  
It depends if that statement will go through to get the 
necessary attention it needs; it is not really depending on 
the committee itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying Ms Rantho that the 
reason why the National Assembly did not support her call 
for an inquiry when she made that statement is because 
10 
she did not use the right procedure? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson when you present a statement 
in Parliament, there are other people also who are 
presenting other statements in Parliament.  It depends on 
the selection of those statements, which one has been 
prioritised by Parliament to get the necessary attention it 
needs.   
So it will be Parliament, the whole of Parliament 
would sit and consider a statement and then agree that this 
statement has passed, therefore the committee would look 
20 
at those allegations or what has been presented in the 
statement.  So if that did not happen, that would not go 
through and go and be given the attention that she wanted 
the committee should give to her statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not want to misunderstand 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 59 of 126 
 
your evidence but as things stand I seem to understand it 
as you defending the failure to act both by your committee 
at certain stages before May 17, I think and the failure of 
the National Assembly to do 
something about these 
allegations that Ms Mazzone spoke about in the National 
Assembly.  
And these were allegations, of course, serious 
corruption and allegations of State Capture on the part of 
the Gupta’s and I am concerned because we are talking 
about 2016 and the evidence that has been given here 
10 
yesterday by Mr Godi and Ms Mazzone reveals, for 
example, that by 2016 from about 2011 and onwards, I 
think, including your own affidavits there were lots of 
allegations in the media about what the Gupta’s were 
allegedly doing that was wrong.  
And of course, by 2016, you had had, we in 
Southern Africa had had the Waterkloof Landing which 
must have opened everybody's eyes.  That was 2013 and 
in 2015, I think in March, Mr Jonas, Mcebisi Jonas had 
come out in the public to say what had happened when he 
20 
met with one of the Gupta brothers and Mr Duduzane Zuma 
and Mr Fana Hlongwane on the 23 r d of October, oh no I 
think it was about early, maybe March 2016, when he came 
out publicly but about the meeting that he had had in 
October 2015, with one of the Gupta brothers.  
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 60 of 126 
 
So they in the public domain any members of 
Parliament who were aware about what was in the public 
domain ought to have been quite concerned about what the 
Gupta’s may have been up to if these allegations were true 
and therefore, if there was somebody saying, let us have 
an investigation or let us have an inquiry into what these 
people are alleged to be doing.  I would have expected that 
members of Parliament would take such cause seriously.  I 
may be misunderstanding you but I seem to get the 
impression that you are defending the failure to act on the 
10 
part of the National Assembly on that occasion when Ms 
Mazzone said, let us have an inquiry about these serious 
allegations involving corruption or alleged corruption and 
let us take action by the Gupta’s.  Do I misunderstand you? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson I am not defending anybody, or 
any institution.  I am saying statements that are being 
made in Parliament are many and they are being elected by 
a certain group of people, which I do not know who they 
are to be followed up. 
If a statement has been made in Parliament in a 
20 
sitting of Parliament, there is a certain group of people 
that deals with that.  I am not defending anybody.  I am 
saying if those people did not see it befitting at that time 
for a follow up that needs to be done it is dependent on 
them, Chairperson not on us as a committee, especially the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 61 of 126 
 
statement has been done publicly to everybody who is a 
member of Parliament with the presiding officers being 
there. 
This can be a failure of the National Assembly may  
be overlooking what was happening then but at the end of 
the day, the committee itself took a decision on its own to 
do the probing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was about close to a year later, but 
that was close to a year later. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chairperson it was a year yes, 
10 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I am concerned about how much of 
taxpayer ’s money that I have been told has been looted, 
allegedly looted by the Gupta’s and their associates would 
have been saved had your committee and had the National 
Assembly acted a year earlier than your committee did, had 
acted when Ms Mazzone stood up and said, here are these 
serious allegations, there is growing evidence that the 
Gupta’s are involved in corruption that they have.   
They are influencing the appointments of Ministers 
20 
and whatever, and that they are involved in State Capture 
and the National Assembly just did not do anything about 
that from what she has said and I think you are confirming 
that also you do not know that they did anything. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes Chairperson I am confirming that I do 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 62 of 126 
 
not know why did the National Assembly not take all the 
allegations 
that 
were 
set 
in 
front 
of 
them 
to 
be 
investigated, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But also…[intervene] 
MS RANTHO:  But I am not defending them in not 
investigating the cases.  I am saying I do not know why did 
they not take all the cases seriously, and give maybe the 
Chair of Chairs give committees that have - that are 
relevant to such allegations and infractions to investigate 
those allegations, Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you.  Miss Rantho in 
fairness to you, I want to put in proper context what I put 
shortly before the break because I put to you shortly 
before the break a certain statement made by Ms Mazzone 
on the 26 t h of April 2016 and I want to make clear to you 
that that was in answer to the budget speech of the 
Minister on the department.  
And she took the opportunity in her answer to refer 
to the previous unwillingness of the Public Enterprises 
20 
Portfolio Committee to pursue the inquiry that she had 
requested.  She criticised that and then the point that I had 
made to you as well, nobody responded from the ANC 
positively to that criticism.  
But I understand that there is some force in the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 63 of 126 
 
point You have just made about the context in which the 
statement is made. But having said that, I want to refer you 
to something else that she testified about.  She testified 
that because the stance, taken by the Portfolio Committee 
ostensibly on legal advice was the Portfolio Committee 
without the approval of the House cannot embark upon 
such an inquiry.  She says in her view, that is legally wrong 
but that was the view that was taken, there is nothing she 
could do about it.  
So she says because of the DA brought this matter 
10 
back to the House on a subsequent occasion, not the 
occasion I have just been referring to but on a subsequent 
occasion on the on the 8 t h of September 2016 she refers to 
in her affidavit, which I do not think is in front of you, in 
her affidavit paragraph 14.6, it is page 29 of Bundle 2 and 
she says: 
“That a full motion was properly put before the 
house on that occasion asking the House not to 
authorise the PCPE to do an investigation but 
asking the House to approve an Adhoc Committee – 
20 
a fact that we know also happened with the SABC 
shortly thereafter, an Adhoc Committee in terms of 
the specific rule to investigate allegations of State 
Capture by certain individuals and their alleged 
undue influence over the government.” 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 64 of 126 
 
And the motion proposed how that would be set up and how 
it would work.  And then she testified yesterday that that 
motion had wide support from opposition parties but she 
says that all ANC members present voted against that 
motion.  Now, do you recall voting, do you recall that 
motion and do you recall voting against that motion? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson I might not be in a position to 
recall the motions but there are motions, there are a lot of 
motions that were rejected by the ANC in the Assembly and 
that means the motion has been rejected by the majority of 
10 
people who were in the National Assembly then, therefore 
the motion could not go through. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I understand that.  What interests 
me is, what would induce members of the ANC to vote 
against such a motion.  I assume from the earlier evidence 
that the question of party instructions, party decisions, 
party discipline, I am assuming that that would be the 
explanation.  
I am asking you whether that is correct and if it is 
not correct, what explains why the ANC members present 
20 
would have voted against such a motion? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, we in the National Assembly, we 
influence each other, all parties influence each other to 
say we vote against this motion, and we vote in favour of 
this motion.  It might have gone through the same 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 65 of 126 
 
procedure to say we are not going to vote with – we are 
not going to vote in favour of this motion.   
Because when we go to the National Assembly, we 
already know the motions, some of the motions that have 
been put in front of the National Assembly, and we already 
know which motions are we going to vote against and 
which motions are we going to vote in favour whether the 
motions are coming from the opposition parties or not.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And would that be a matter determined 
by instructions from the Chief Whip or from Luthuli House 
10 
or who makes that kind of decision and how is that 
decision made? 
MS RANTHO:   The office of the Chief Whip is the one that 
is giving us instructions on what to do on the motions.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, thank you.  Now let us move to 
further developments.  We know that subsequent to that 
September vote that we have just been referring to 
September 2016.  
We have the Public Protector ’s report in November 
of 2016, if I have got my facts correct and your affidavit 
20 
deals with a number of events that took place in the first 
half of 2017 and that culminates for present purposes in a 
decision that was taken inside your committee to proceed 
with an investigation.  Really the sort of investigation that 
had been requested by Ms Mazzone back in March of the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 66 of 126 
 
previous year.  Am I correct? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, you deal with that in your 
affidavit in paragraph 9.99, 9.10 the following and all of it 
and you refer in particular to the uproar that arose in 
respect to what Mr Brian Molefe, his pension payment, his 
resignation, his retraction of his resignation, his coming to 
Parliament, his removal from his - his withdrawal from 
Parliament.  And that all happened shortly as I understand 
it before the committee that you were now the acting Chair 
10 
of have decided you need to have an inquiry.  Is that a fair 
summary? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, that is a fair summary Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And Ms Mazzone testified yesterday 
that when she arrived at that meeting, it was a meeting 
held at the Tuinhuys Hotel. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:   This is the meeting of the 23 r d 
of…[intervene] 
MS RANTHO:   The 23 r d of May. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   When she arrived at this meeting, she 
immediately had a sense from fellow members of the 
portfolio that the atmosphere had changed, that there was 
now a spirit of cooperation and a spirit that jointly the 
committee 
should 
investigate 
what 
needed 
to 
be 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 67 of 126 
 
investigated.  Do you think it was a reasonable perception 
on her part? 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, it is a reasonable perception, 
Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So that seems to me to imply that 
sometime before that meeting, members of your committee 
must have - members of your working group must have 
caucused the study groups.  So that is the second time I 
have made that mistake.  Members of your study group 
must have caucused and taken a decision that really we 
10 
need to more seriously think about inquiring into these 
allegations. Is that a fair comment? 
MS RANTHO:   That is a fair comment Chairperson, 
because we saw that there is clear evidence that is coming 
from the media that says that there is this R33million that 
must be paid out to Brian Molefe which says Brian Molefe 
worked for 18 months but he will he will be paid R33million 
out of - R30million out of those working months of himself.  
So I think that was the decision that the study group took 
because they could see the evidence was clear. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that evidence to which you are 
referring related in particular, to Bundle F in payments that 
he had received. 
MS RANTHO:   Yes, it was relating to the R30million that 
Brian Molefe had to receive. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 68 of 126 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now your affidavit explains that this 
was what he received that the Minister had been invited 
but certain representatives of Eskom had been invited, I 
am not sure if Mr Molefe was there as well but the 
committee asked some difficult questions and your affidavit 
says it was not satisfied with the answers.  Is that a fair 
summary? 
MS RANTHO:   That is a fair summary, Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And arising from that, what was the 
decision of the committee, what should be done? 
10 
MS RANTHO:   The committee unanimously take a decision 
that we must go through an inquiry as a committee so that 
we get more resources, we access more resources from 
Parliament to get more researches and get more people 
that constantly advise us that will take us through the 
inquiry.  
Because as we were a committee then we had only 
one researcher and one content advisor and one secretary, 
so that would mean we will have many people that would 
be able to get their hands on the information that we want.  
20 
So that was the main reason that we said there must be an 
inquiry on the issue.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, now I would like to refer 
you…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second Mr Freund, Ms Rantho, in 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 69 of 126 
 
paragraph 9 of your affidavit 9.14.1 to 9.14.3.  You suggest 
three factors that you say in your view contributed to the 
decision of the PCPE to commence an inquiry.  May I ask 
you about a factor that you did not include and I want to 
find out whether you do not think it was also a factor 
namely, that 2017 was a year when there would be an 
elective conference of the ANC.   
It was going to be in December and there was a 
possibility that the then President of the ANC and of the 
country, Mr Zuma might not, would no longer be President 
10 
of the party and that there could be a different President 
and we know that there were a number of people who were 
campaigning, one of whom was the current President. 
Is the position that there was to be a possibility of 
Mr Zuma no longer being President of the ANC soon, could 
that 
not 
also 
have 
influenced 
people 
to 
feel 
more 
comfortable pursuing these allegations by way of an 
inquiry? 
MS RANTHO:   Chairperson, I agree with you.  The year 
2017 was a year of the elective conference of the ANC but 
20 
that did not influence us as a committee because we were 
not working as an ANC group.  We were working together 
with opposition parties and we were working together 
towards a common goal.  
So I do not think that has much to do with the with 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 70 of 126 
 
the elective conference but it has a much to do with what 
we wanted to show the world that we are in a serious 
motion of dealing with corruption and if we cannot do it 
with the evidence that we have in front of us, then that 
means we will never have to prove any investigation to 
anyone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I am not sure that your evidence is 
correct but we will reflect on it.  I think there is a 
perception that when there is going to be a change in 
leadership goes to the danger of leadership, you know. 
10 
One sees certain different attitudes through – on 
certain issues within members of both the ruling party and 
in Parliament, each time there might be a change of 
leadership but let us leave that I hear what you say, Mr 
Freund continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair, Ms Rantho the Chair 
has already referred to the fact that you gave three 
reasons in paragraph 9.14.  The second you have already 
touched on, the question of resources and my impression, 
please confirm or put me right.  My impression is that the – 
20 
the model followed by the SABC inquiry had some impact in 
demonstrating to – to MP’s that it was possible to your better 
responsibilities and better assistance in pursuing inquiries, 
is that one of the factors that you say was relevant? 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chairperson. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 71 of 126 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Another factor you identify is the 
judgment of the Constitutional Court on the Nkandla matter 
which came down in March of 2016 in which the court had 
been very critical of the failure by the National Assembly to 
exercise its oversight responsibilities.  Was that a factor that 
was of influence? 
MS RANTHO:  That is part – that is one of the factors that 
have influenced us to do the – the inquiry because it was 
really evident by the judgment that we are failing to – to 
investigate matters of serious concern. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  And another factor that you identify in 
your affidavit and I am now at 9.14.3 of your affidavit is the 
public outcry on the publication from about the beginning of 
June 2017 of the so called Gupta Leaks.  Was that a factor 
that also weighed with your committee? 
MS RANTHO:  Correct Chair.  It is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now while you talking about that is not 
that you were influenced by that I understand that but what 
interests me is why you were not influenced by all the earlier 
reports of alleged corruption and state capture.  Why did 
20 
they not also move you at an earlier stage to inquire at any 
earlier stage? 
MS RANTHO:  As I have said before Chairperson it is – we 
went into this inquiry because we had evidence in front of 
us.  Most of the allegations that came up with the opposition 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 72 of 126 
 
parties they were just allegations that were coming up out of 
the – of the media without giving the – the real evidence of 
what has really happened; who has done what?  It was just 
an – a media statement or an allegation coming with the 
opposition that says in Eskom there is corruption; at 
Transnet there is corruption that is happening.  A lot of 
looting that is happening but we do not know how and who is 
doing that. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright now let us move on.  You made 
these submissions within the committee.  We have already 
10 
heard evidence that although the initial point of focus was Mr 
Molefe it broadened to include Eskom in 00:02:50 and that 
also there was an intention to broaden it in to include 
Transnet and Denel as well.  You agree with that? 
MS RANTHO:  I agree with that Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So you now have a position within the 
Portfolio Committee and obviously therefore also within the 
Study Group for that Portfolio Committee in support of what 
one might call a proper investigation.  A Portfolio Committee 
Inquiry into quite a lot of serious allegations. 
20 
MS RANTHO:  I agree Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now what you say in your affidavit in 
paragraph 7 – 9.17 is that although that was true on the 
other hand there were some within the caucus who took a 
different view within the ANC Parliamentary caucus could 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 73 of 126 
 
you maybe explain what happened there and what the nature 
of the pressure was and what was going on? 
MS RANTHO:  The nature of the pressure was that it was 
already been announced that there will be a commission of 
inquiry.  So the other members of the ANC did not see it 
befitting that there would be an inquiry that will take place in 
the committee – in the Portfolio Committee and also 
repeated the same inquiry with the commission that is in 
place. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now… 
10 
MS RANTHO:  But we were able to respond in saying we are 
not – we are not a court of law.  We are doing our oversight 
and the rules of Parliament allows us to do that. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes I understand that view.  But again I 
think we need to break down into different periods because 
as I – as I am sure you know although the state of capture 
report in November of 2016 had recommended to then 
President 
that 
a 
commission 
of 
inquiry 
should 
be 
established.  By the time in June 2017 then you took your 
decision to start your inquiry no such commission of inquiry 
20 
had been appointed.  It appointed in January of 2018 do you 
agree? 
MS RANTHO:  I agree with you Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So that is why I want to distinguish 
between the position inside the caucus before that time – 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 74 of 126 
 
before 2018 or January 2018 and after.  Because after 
January 2018 there is room for argument that there is 
arguable duplication of process.  But before that time a great 
deal of controversy about whether there was going to be an 
inquiry and if so when and who would lead it and so for a 
long time that inquiry did not get going; that is at present 
Zondo Commission of Inquiry and you would have been 
aware of that at the time I presume?  You agree? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes we would have been aware of it at that 
time I agree. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you say in your affidavit that there 
was a push stub of the inquiry from a substantial number of 
members of the ANC Parliamentary caucus who argued that 
the inquiry would cause 00:06:29 and would taint the 
integrity of the ANC.  Of particular concern to some members 
of the caucus was the risk to the reputation of the party.  
These views were openly communicated to me in clear and 
emphatic terms.  Do you stand by that? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes I stand by that Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Could you perhaps elaborate on that a 
20 
little? 
MS RANTHO:  Chairperson the – the issue of the inquiry was 
taken to the caucus of the ANC and in that caucus it was 
discussed and therefore there were members that felt that it 
is not necessary to have an inquiry in the Portfolio 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 75 of 126 
 
Committee because if this inquiry continues they – members 
of the ANC might be implicated in the inquiry and that will 
mean the ANC will be divided.  Not divided maybe into two it 
will be divided altogether.  And there will be people who 
would have to go maybe to be investigated further from the 
inquiry.  But we stood our – as a committee that we are 
going to go through with the inquiry.  We will then see when 
the Zondo Commission is established what do we – what do 
we do then?  Because we had a – an – something that says 
the Zondo Commission might be – might start working when 
10 
we are in this – in the Sixth term of Parliament and yet we 
would stop doing our work waiting for the Zondo Commission 
to start and it would fail the people of South Africa by doing 
that. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right so I understand that there were 
differences of opinion within the caucus and then you deal in 
paragraph 9.18 with the 00:08:41 of the Chief Whip – the 
then Chief Whip Mr Jackson Mthembu.  Could you just 
elaborate on the role that he played in this particular 
controversy? 
20 
MS RANTHO:  The Chief – the then Chief Whip Honourable 
Mthembu has assured us that we must continue even if there 
are people within the caucus that do not want the inquiry to 
continue but the majority of people within the MEC and 
within the ANC are supporting us to – to go through with the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 76 of 126 
 
inquiry.  He said that in the – in the caucus he said that to us 
as the ANC members in the inquiry he said to us – he said to 
us as a committee we must continue doing the work that is in 
front of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Freund.  Do I understand you correctly 
Ms Rantho that what you are saying in paragraph 9.17 of 
your affidavit – you do not have to go there really.  What you 
are saying is that within the ANC Parliamentary caucus there 
10 
were two groups which had different views about whether the 
committee should conduct an inquiry. 
 
The one group and I think you were in that group was 
in support of conducting an inquiry.  And the other group was 
against it.  Is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it – is my understanding also correct 
that one of the reasons advanced by the group that was 
against the holding of an inquiry by your committee was that 
in effect the inquiry could bring up evidence that could 
20 
implicate some ANC members and that might affect the 
integrity of the ANC and therefore for that reason among 
other reasons as far as that group was concerned the inquiry 
should not be held.  Am I correct? 
MS RANTHO:  That – that is correct Chairperson. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 77 of 126 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So in other words there were some 
members of Parliament. 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.  So in other words there 
were some members of Parliament or ANC who effectively 
wanted to protect – who thought they would be protecting the 
ANC if revelations that could show wrongdoing on the part of 
some members of the ANC was not brought up in the open. 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Freund you may continue. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes thank you.  Ms Rantho you then 
described in paragraph 10 of your affidavit briefly how the 
commission went about its work and some of the difficulties 
you faced.  I think that that speaks for itself.  It is well-
known.  But what I would like you to please just comment on 
is the degree of personal pressure and the degree of threat 
and risk that you perceived that you were taking and that 
other members of your committee perceived that they were 
taking. 
MS RANTHO:  It was a great so – it was a great risk that we 
20 
have taken Chairperson especially because we were divided 
within the caucus.  But we pursued the – the – to have the 
inquiry regardless of anything that happens.  I personally 
were pressurised but I had a great support even with 
ordinary South Africans who would call and compliment the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 78 of 126 
 
work and then support me in saying we are here you can – 
you can depend on us that we are here for you as South 
Africans we love what you are doing.  So it was – there was 
a lot of pressure.  There is a pressure from people who 
expects me to do what am I supposed to do in Parliament?  
There is a great pressure from people who do not want us to 
go through with the inquiry.  But my – I would say my 
conscience spoke to me to say this is what must happen so 
that the people of South Africa gets the right information and 
also can be satisfied in what we are doing as a committee of 
10 
Parliament in this Republic. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you refer in your affidavit to both 
suspicious events and who would intimidate the events.  For 
example that your son was confronted by an unidentified 
man who said to him your mother is making our lives difficult 
before speeding off.  Your husband being followed and I 
think other incidents.  Maybe if you could just briefly 
describe the sorts of – the sort of atmosphere and the sort of 
pressure and the sort of intimidation that you and your family 
came under? 
20 
MS RANTHO:  Chairperson we were living in fear but when I 
informed 
the 
National 
Assembly 
Speaker 
about 
the 
intimidations there was a follow up by the Security Personnel 
to come and – and look at the risk of being – me being 
intimidated if I would not be able to – those people would not 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 79 of 126 
 
be able to – maybe to do something worse to me or to my 
family.  We – we were not given a real – we were not 
assigned to a real security or to a security personnel that 
will always be next to me or next to my house.  But there 
were people who were looking from afar what was happening 
in my house and we – with my family.  We accepted the 
situation and I was encouraged within the family that I 
cannot stop doing what I am doing let me go forward.  If 
there is a need of me to get – to get hurt I will get hurt but I 
will be healed in the running – in the future because I would 
10 
have done the correct thing. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And did it come to your attention that 
Advocate Vanaro had faced a difficulty? 
MS RANTHO:  It did come to my attention because Mr 
Vanaro came to me in one evening and I – and said we must 
identify a certain spot where we will not be seen because 
there is something that has happened in her – in his office 
and she was – he wanted to share that with me and see how 
do we take this forward because I think he himself was in 
deep fear of what would happen to him. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now there are certain I think criminal 
proceedings pending in relation to that so I am not going to – 
I am not going to deal with that issue in any more detail.  
What I would like to deal with is this.  The – Ms Mazzone 
said 00:17:24 that the comment was made to her by ANC 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 80 of 126 
 
members of your committee during the course of 00:17:43 
and that this was kamikaze mission that – that the ANC MP’s 
who were pursuing this inquiry took this to be a significant 
threat to their own political futures.  Do you agree with that 
view? 
MS RANTHO:  The ANC members of Parliament that were in 
the committee? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes those who were – those who were 
pursuing the… 
MS RANTHO:  Or ANC members general? 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  No the ANC members in the Portfolio 
Committee inquiry whether they felt that this was – this was 
putting at risk their own political futures. 
MS RANTHO:  I never came across that but maybe that what 
people – that is what she discussed with those ANC 
members. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Let us deal with your own 
situation.  Before you came to Parliament you told the Chair 
this morning you enjoyed – you were a member of and 
enjoyed the support of your Provincial Executive Committee.  
20 
Now you were first nominated to the NCOP and thereafter 
elected on the party list to the National Assembly.  What 
happened to you afterwards; after this inquiry? 
MS RANTHO:  After the inquiry – the inquiry we gave the 
report on I think 2018 and after that there were supposed to 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 81 of 126 
 
be elections in 2029 there were elections in 2029. 
ADV FREUND SC:  2019. 
MS RANTHO:  I was not re-elected to Parliament as a 
member of Parliament by my own branch – by my own region 
and I think when the list came to the Provinces – to the 
Province the – my name was not there in the lists. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Can I just check Ms Rantho. 
MS RANTHO:  The last people that would send the – sorry 
you are cutting.  I did not hear what you saying. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Can I just check?  You said 2029 but I 
10 
think you meant 2019 elections is that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  2019 yes.  2019. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I think what you… 
MS RANTHO:  In 2019 I could not return to Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you were not supported on the – on 
the ANC list of candidates is that what you are saying?  You 
were not – you were not put onto that list. 
MS RANTHO:  Yes that is what I am saying Chair.  No I was 
not put on that list Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now the report that your committee 
20 
produced as a matter of public record it would be well-known 
to this commission but I just want to draw attention to one 
feature of that of your findings.  This is referred to in 
paragraph 12.5 of your affidavit.  Your report found that it 
was patently clear that there was undue influence by private 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 82 of 126 
 
individuals and companies over the appointment of Eskom 
board members as well as some procurement decisions.  Is 
that correct? 
MS RANTHO:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And that of course is really the sort of 
allegation that had been raised in the press for years and 
about which opposition members had been pushing for some 
years for a Parliamentary Inquiry, do you agree with that? 
MS RANTHO:  Yes I agree Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Then one final issue maybe two that I 
10 
would like to raise with you.  Firstly is the question of votes 
of no confidence.  You deal with that issue in paragraph 13 
of your affidavit and you say this: 
“I believe that members of the ANC sent on 
its behalf to represent it in Parliament I am 
duty bound to adhere to decisions of the 
party and instructions like these.” 
And what you are referring to there is instructions from the 
party as to how to vote in relation to a vote of no confidence.  
That is your view is it not? 
20 
MS RANTHO:  That is my view Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you I have no further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Ms Rantho for 
coming to give evidence. We really appreciate it and if we 
need you to come back and clarify some issues we will ask 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 83 of 126 
 
you to come back but thank you very much for coming to 
assist the commission or availing yourself to assist the 
commission.  Thank you very much you are now excused. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did she hear me? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes I believe so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.   
MS RANTHO:  I heard you Chairperson thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright okay.  Okay I thought maybe 
you did not hear me.  Okay thank you very much. 
10 
MS RANTHO:  No I did – I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Alright thank you.  Ms – Mr 
Freund your next witness. 
ADV FREUND SC:  My next witness is Mr James Selfe.  I 
see that his name appears on the screen so he appears to 
be immediately available.  I do not know Chair whether you 
would like to take a five minute break before we proceed?  
Perhaps I might request a very short comfort break. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But otherwise we are ready to proceed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no let us take a short comfort break 
five minutes or so and then we can resume after that.  We 
adjourn. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  All rise. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 84 of 126 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And thank you for 
the extended adjournment.  Papers were misplaced but I 
now have them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The next witness is Mr James Selfe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Selfe, can you hear me? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, I can hear you Judge. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Good afternoon to you.  Is it 
afternoon?  Ja, good afternoon to you. 
MR SELFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you for availing yourself to assist 
the Commission and give evidence.  Thank you for coming to 
assist. 
MR SELFE:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Please administer the oath or affirmation.  
You must tell me if you cannot hear me clearly Mr Selfe or if 
there is a delay before you hear what I say? 
20 
MR SELFE:   I can hear you reasonable clearly Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  The registrar will now 
administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR SELFE:   I am James Selfe. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 85 of 126 
 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR SELFE:   No, I do not. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR SELFE:   I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear then that the 
evidence you are about to give, will be the truth, the whole 
truth and nothing else but the truth?  If so, please raise up 
your right hand and say, so help me God. 
10 
MR SELFE:   So help me God. 
JAMES SELFE:   (d.s.s.) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Freund, you may proceed. 
EXAMINATION BY ADVOCATE FREUND SC:   Thank you, 
Chair.  Mr Selfe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   May before you proceed.  I am sorry 
Mr Freund.  Maybe before you proceed, let me announce 
what we have discussed outside of the hearing because 
otherwise you may be wondering why we are starting with a 
new minutes a few minutes before one o’clock.   
20 
 
We are not going to be able to sit until the normal 
time this afternoon because of some commitment.  And we 
are not going to have a session tomorrow because I need to 
be somewhere else.   
 
The arrangement that has been made is that 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 86 of 126 
 
because I intended adjournment at three, we should rather 
use the lunch hour of one to two to continue with evidence 
and then at two that is then we will adjourn for lunch but 
then we will not resume in the afternoon.   
 
And tomorrow we will not sit but on Thursday we will 
continue with the hearings.  Okay.  Okay Mr Freund, you may 
now proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, for the 
record the evidence of Mr Selfe is to be found in Bundle 2 
at page 720 and following, Exhibit ZZ-7.  Mr Selfe, you 
10 
have a copy of your affidavit and annexure? 
MR SELFE:   I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And is it correct that the affidavit 
starts at page 722 starting on the – using the numbering on 
the top left of the pages.   
MR SELFE:   Yes, it is. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that it runs through until the 
signature page at page 748.  And that is your signature at 
page 748? 
MR SELFE:   It is, yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And have you had an opportunity to 
read and consider your affidavit and are you satisfied that 
it is true and correct? 
MR SELFE:   I am. 
[Speaker’s voice soft – unclear] 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 87 of 126 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I am sorry Mr Freund.  Mr Selfe, I am 
going to ask you to speak up a bit.  Your voice is quite soft.  
So if you can try and speak up.  Okay Mr Freund, you may 
proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  In the light of that 
formal evidence, may I request that we admit as an exhibit, 
Exhibit ZZ-7, Bundle 2, page 720 and following. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr James Selfe which 
starts at page 722 is admitted together with its annexures as 
10 
an exhibit and it will be marked Exhibit ZZ-7. 
AFFIDAVIT 
AND 
ANNEXURES 
OF 
JAMES 
SELFE 
IS 
ADMITTED AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT ZZ-7 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Selfe, would you 
please to turn paragraph 4 of your affidavit? 
MR SELFE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   I would just like to place on record 
very briefly.  Some of the key features of your experience 
and history.  You say there you have been a politician for a 
period in excess of 41-years and acted in the Democratic 
20 
Alliance since its foundation.  Is that correct? 
MR SELFE:   It is so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You were elected to the Senate in May 
of 1994 and you became a member of Parliament in the 
National Assemble in 1999.  Is that correct? 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 88 of 126 
 
MR SELFE:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you remained a member of 
Parliament and the National Assemble since then.  So you 
are still a member of Parliament? 
MR SELFE:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And is it correct that after the 2004 
General Election you were appointed to the Correctional 
Services Portfolio and that amongst other portfolios that on 
which you have served, you have served on that portfolio 
and its successive portfolio now known as the Portfolio 
10 
Committee on Justice and Correctional Services ever 
since? 
MR SELFE:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that you are a former Federal 
Council Chairperson of the DA? 
MR SELFE:   That is so, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   In paragraph 5 of your affidavit, we 
deal with what we call with the PMG reports.  Now the PMG 
is the Parliamentary Monitoring Group.  It is an NGO as I 
understand it.  It has observers who attend most, if not all, 
20 
of Portfolio Committee meetings and maintain records.  Are 
you familiar with their records? 
MR SELFE:   I am familiar with their records.  I think they 
cover all Parliamentary committees.  They record them, both 
orally – well, both through a recording device and in writing 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 89 of 126 
 
and I find them to be reasonably accurate. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  And when you say 
reasonably accurate you are referring in your affidavit to 
summaries? 
MR SELFE:   Correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And are you aware as you refer to in 
your affidavit that ...[indistinct] [00:08:17] [Speaker not 
clear – transmission distorted] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Freund.  Sorry Mr Freund.  You 
could not be – we could not hear you clearly.  Maybe you 
10 
have to start that question afresh. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Of course.  Mr Selfe, can you confirm 
that the Parliamentary Monitoring Group, amongst other 
contributions that were made to this Commission, has 
prepared a report entitled BOSASA Report by PMG and 
have you had an opportunity to read that report? 
MR SELFE:   I have seen it and read it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in fact, it is correct, is it not, that 
in part of your affidavit you referred to it and you give us 
references, certain material appearing in that PMG report. 
20 
MR SELFE:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that report, speaking very 
generally, is derived from or it compromises a series of 
extracts from PMG records of meetings of relevance.  In 
this instance meetings of relevance to the question over 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 90 of 126 
 
Parliamentary oversight in relation to contracts between 
the Department of Correctional Services and the BOSASA 
Group of Companies.  Is that correct? 
MR SELFE:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I understand that the Portfolio 
Committees do maintain to some extent their own minutes 
but 
could 
you 
please 
compare 
the 
foremost 
and 
completeness of those minutes by comparison to the 
summaries in records that are produced by the PMG? 
MR SELFE:   Certainly.  The minutes tend to be fairly bland, 
10 
an outline merely the business of this transacted at the 
committee meeting.  The PMG reports are more full.  They 
quote what individual members had to say in some instances 
and they give more of an account of the committee meeting 
and what gives a flavour of what was discussed at the 
committee meeting. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you.  Now I want to turn to 
paragraph 6 of your affidavit.  This is really the bulk of 
your affidavit.  And the focus in some detail in paragraph 6 
is on contracts between the Department of Correctional 
20 
Services ...[indistinct] [Speaker not clear – transmission 
distorted] 
and 
BOSASA 
and 
affiliated 
and 
related 
companies.  Broadly speaking, you would agree that is 
what you attempted to do? 
MR SELFE:   That is so. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 91 of 126 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you refer in your affidavit to 
incidents about which evidence has already been given to 
this Commission.  Contracts awarded to BOSASA and 
certain of its subsidiaries from August 2004 onwards.  And 
in particular a set of four contracts that were awarded in 
the period 2004 to 2006.  Is that correct? 
MR SELFE:   That is so, yes.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say in paragraph 6.2 of your 
affidavit and referring to the very first of those contracts 
that: 
10 
“It was immediately mired in controversy and 
that sources who you have identified told you 
that it was common knowledge that Angelo 
Agrizzi and Patrick Gillman had contributed to 
the framing of the requirements for the tender.  
Members have been framed in such a way that 
BOSASA would be advantaged.” 
 
Is that correct? 
MR SELFE:   Well, that is what the insiders told me at the 
time, yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you refer in paragraph 6.3, 
6.4, 6.5 to the further contracts awarded to BOSASA and 
its associated companies in that period.  And then at 
paragraph 6.8 you move on to deal with an allegation 
reported in the press. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 92 of 126 
 
MR SELFE:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The allegation reported in the press 
and you give a reference, and the Commission can refer to 
them in due course if need be, was that Mr Linden  the 
then National Commissioner for Correctional Services had 
registered a company that not only shared an address with 
BOSASA and its two subsidiaries, Phezulu and Sondolo, 
but that company was a shareholder in at least some of 
those companies. 
 
In other words, there was a suggestion of a 
10 
personal 
financial 
interest 
by 
the 
then 
National 
Commissioner in these BOSASA contracts. 
MR SELFE:   Yes, that is correct.  And obviously, that was 
very suspicious at the time and we raised the matter often. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, that is really what I wanted to 
come to.  In paragraph 6.9 you refer to a number of calls 
for an investigation or an inquiry that you made at the 
time.  Did you make such calls and if so, was any heed 
given to your calls for those inquiries? 
MR SELFE:   I had many calls over many years that these 
20 
events should be investigated either by the committee or by 
some appropriate inquiry but normally fell on death ears.  
And there was very little acceptance of that suggestion from 
the majority party. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  And we will deal with that 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 93 of 126 
 
issue in some more detail as we go along.  You deal in 
paragraph 6.11 with a renewal or a re-award of the very 
first contract and a further and an administrative extension 
of that contract.   
 
And you then refer, and this is a matter of public 
record 
which 
has 
been 
fully 
ventilated 
before 
the 
Commission, the appointment of a new commissioner, 
Mr Bernie Petersen.   
 
And you refer to certain engagements between 
your Portfolio Committee and Mr Petersen.  Is that correct? 
10 
MR SELFE:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now although you say the calls that 
you made for investigations or inquiries generally went 
unheeded.  It is correct, is it not, that in November 2007, 
as referred to in paragraph 6.13 of your affidavit, the then 
President 
Thabo 
Mbeki, 
commissioned 
a 
Special 
Investigating Unit to investigate alleged serious tender 
irregularities in relation to the DCS? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, that is so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And arising from that, you refer in 
20 
paragraph 6.14 to a meeting that your committee had with 
Mr 
Petersen 
in 
which 
you 
say 
he 
stated 
that 
the 
department then led by him acknowledged that there was a 
problem with the outsourcing of services and he referred to 
these ongoing SIU investigations.  Is that correct? 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 94 of 126 
 
MR SELFE:   Yes, Mr Petersen was a breath of fresh air.  He 
understood that there was a problem in the department in he 
was at pains to get to the bottom of it but he was 
stonewalled anywhere he went. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Then in paragraph 6.15 you refer to a 
discussion of what you call the Catering Contract which is 
really the first in principle BOSASA contract.  As a meeting 
of your committee on the 19 t h of August 2008, and you say 
that the chairperson asked for a briefing on certain issues.  
The chairperson then was Mr Dennis Bloem.  Is that 
10 
correct? 
MR SELFE:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say elsewhere in your 
affidavit, you developed a good working relationship with 
Mr Bloem.  You regarded as a good chair of the committee. 
MR SELFE:   I did indeed.  He was a colleague of mine in 
the Senate and we went a long way in politics together.  We 
had a personal relationship.  So he was able to do things on 
the committee that maybe another chairperson will not. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you referred in paragraph 
20 
6.15 is a certain request from the committee to the 
department to provide information that it could not provide 
with the outset.  And you say as far as you can recollect it 
never did so.  You never got that information.  Now firstly, 
is that correct that there was such an incident? 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 95 of 126 
 
MR SELFE:   That is correct, ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Was that unusual in your experience 
or did you experience that type of problem with any degree 
of irregularity? 
MR SELFE:   No, it was a fairly regular occurrence that you 
would ask the department for a written report on a matter 
that they were unable to provide satisfactory before the 
committee.  They would then promise to provide a written 
report and it was seldom not produced at all.  And sometimes 
it was followed up and even then it was not produced. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   So when you say it was very seldom 
not produced at all.  Do you mean very seldom produced or 
was it never produced? 
MR SELFE:   Very seldom produced. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Very seldom produced.  Now you refer 
in paragraph 6.16 to Commissioner Petersen reporting to 
your committee on the 21 s t of October 2008 that a 
preliminary report from the SIU, the Special Investigating 
Unit, 
had 
been 
available 
to 
the 
department 
in 
the 
preceding months, September 2008.   
20 
 
And you say in paragraph 6.17 that on the basis of 
this report, Commissioner Petersen had suspended one of 
the person against whom these accusations had been 
made, Mr Patrick Gillingham.  Is that correct? 
MR SELFE:   That is correct.  That is what he told the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 96 of 126 
 
committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Could you perhaps elaborate on - by 
that time – so we are now in October 2008.  To what extent 
you had formed an impression based on the little that you 
knew of the SIU report and what Commissioner Petersen 
had told you as to whether there were issues of apparent 
serious concern. 
MR SELFE:   Well, there was certainly issues of serious 
concern.  They had to started to appear in the media.  There 
were some insiders in the department who were talking about 
10 
this.  And the sum total was that we regarded the affairs of 
the department and its relationship with BOSASA in a very 
serious light. 
 
And 
this 
was 
substantiated 
then 
when 
Commissioner 
Petersen 
came 
to 
the 
committee 
and 
substantiated by the fact that he had used the interim 
report as a basis to suspend Mr Gillingham. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Now Mr Bloem has already 
testified to this Commission and he has already testified 
about some difficulty in relationship he had with the then 
20 
Minister Balfour.   
 
And you refer in paragraph 6.18 to a meeting on 
the 21 s t of October 2008 and you say that: 
“The meeting was marked by the receipt of a 
letter from Balfour to Bloem to the effect that it 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 97 of 126 
 
would 
be 
inappropriate 
for 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee to discuss the “instability” in the 
DCS, 
arguing 
that 
this 
is 
beyond 
the 
competence of the committee.” 
 
Well, firstly.  Can you confirm that that is what 
happened, that there was such a letter? 
MR SELFE:   There was such a letter. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Secondly.  Was that a unique, as far 
as you know, problem as the between the chair of the 
committee 
and 
the 
then 
Minister? 
 
How 
would 
you 
10 
characterise the relationship there and particularly the 
attitude of the Minister to the oversight that the committee 
was attempting to effect? 
MR SELFE:   It was a most extraordinary event because in 
all my experience in Parliament I have never come across a 
Minister telling the committee what they could and could not 
do.  But the instability referred to the relationship between 
Petersen and the Minister.   
 
Those allegations of a clash between those two 
personalities have also found its way into the media and the 
20 
committee wanted to know what was going on.   
 
And the Minister wrote and saying it was none of his 
business, none of the committee’s business to discuss what 
was going on in the department.   
 
But the committee in the view of the fact that they 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 98 of 126 
 
had received this letter from Mr Balfour then decided not to 
pursue any inquiry in the committee itself. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you referred to the press reports 
who had dealt with the difficulty of the relationship 
between Commissioner Petersen and Minister Balfour.  Did 
that surprise you?  Were you aware of any bearing on the 
issues of the BOSASA contracts? 
MR SELFE:   Well, it was very clear and stated by 
Mr Petersen that Mr Petersen was uncomfortable with the 
administrative extension of the BOSASA contract beyond 
10 
2007 and wanted the whole process re-advertised and put 
out for tender.  Mr Balfour, apparently, did not want that to 
take place.  He wanted the contract to be extended for 
another year.  And it has caused quite a degree of 
unpleasantness between the two individuals.   
ADV FREUND SC:   What you then go on to deal with in 
paragraph 
6.20 
is 
that 
it 
was 
in 
fact 
extended.  
Commissioner Petersen was moved elsewhere and the 
contract was extended without going to tender.  Is that 
correct? 
20 
MR SELFE:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   He was very ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   One second Mr Freund, please.  Mr Selfe, 
the position that you have stated I think as having been 
conveyed by Mr Petersen that Minister Balfour wanted the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 99 of 126 
 
contract to be extended without going out on tender.   
 
Is that just something that you were told as a 
committee by Mr Petersen or is that something that you 
happen to know to have been the position of Mr Balfour?  
Maybe the committee called him to a meeting and that is 
what he said?   
 
I just want to find out whether you have personal 
knowledge of that particular because Mr Petersen is late.  So 
he cannot tell us if that was Mr Balfour’s position.   
MR SELFE:   Yes, Chair I personally cannot recollect how 
10 
that knowledge came to me but I – all I can tell you is that it 
was fairly common knowledge.  It might have been conveyed 
to me by Mr Bloem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  Okay it would be important to 
find out if there is somebody who has got personal 
knowledge of Mr Balfour having taken that stand.  But okay.  
Thank you.  Proceed Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  You refer in 
paragraph 
6.21 
of 
your 
affidavit 
what 
you 
call 
an 
extraordinary exchange that took place between the DCS 
20 
and the Mail & Guardian in January 2009.  Perhaps you 
could just explain without going into too much detail the 
gist of this extraordinary exchange? 
MR SELFE:   Well, there were allegations principle in the 
Mail & Guardian that the Department of Correctional 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 100 of 126 
 
Services and BOSASA were colluding in the question of the 
Catering Contract and their affiliated companies were also 
benefiting, Phezulu and Sondolo, and as a result of that 
the Corporate Communications branch of the DCS placed 
several advertisements in Sunday newspapers early in 
January of 2009 and said that this was all nonsense.   
 
And 
as 
a 
result, 
the 
Mail 
& 
Guardian 
then 
published, as I recollect the front page, an article with the 
headline:  Here is the proof, Minister.   
 
And which it laid down exactly why they had made 
10 
the allegations that they made about malfeasance at the 
department.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And on your reading of those 
allegations, did they look sufficiently plausible to warrant 
an investigation? 
MR SELFE:   Undoubtedly, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, what I omitted to do when 
Mr Selfe first referred to the BOSASA report was to give 
you a reference to where that is to be found in the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is ZZ-8.1.  It is in Bundle 4.  
And you will see that in the heads to the paragraph that we 
are dealing with at the moment about the exchange in the 
Mail & Guardian.  You will see there at Footnote 16 a 
reference.  You will just see it is stated very cryptically 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 101 of 126 
 
PMG page 18. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now there will be evidence in due 
course from the author of the BOSASA report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m 
ADV FREUND SC:   That will be formally introduced by way 
of evidence.  But where you see a reference to PMG like 
that, it is in this affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV FREUND SC:   It a reference to the BOSASA report 
10 
prepared by the PMG at page 18 where you will actually 
find that particular article. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now moving on from that Mr Selfe.  
You say, and as Mr Bloem made apparent in his own 
evidence - I am referring you now to paragraph 6.22 of 
your affidavit - that he became increasingly disillusioned 
with the ANC.  Could you just talk to the issue you raise in 
paragraph 6.22? 
MR SELFE:   Well, what used to happen is that Mr Bloem 
20 
used to telephone me from time to time to tell me about the 
difficulties he had with his own organisation and to pass on 
certain information and to encourage me to ask certain 
questions and to pursue certain issues in the committee 
which he had knowledge of presumable from discussion at 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 102 of 126 
 
his Study Group but which I knew nothing about.   
 
And what he told me as well was that he was 
regularly summoned to the Deputy Chief Whip at the time 
were Mr Gilliomee and Mr Nel to reprimand him for acting 
like and opposition MP.  That he really was fulfilling his task 
of being an impartial chairperson of an oversight committee.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now at the end of the 4 t h Parliament, it 
takes 
place, 
as 
I 
understand, 
at 
the 
end 
of 
each 
parliament.  Portfolio committees prepare formal reports 
which are known colloquially handover reports or legacy 
10 
report, is that correct? 
MR SELFE:   That is correct, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And at the end of this fourth parliament 
which is the parliament during which Mr Bloem was the 
Chair and you were also a member of the committee, a 
legacy report was prepared on the work of the preceding 
parliament and on, as it were, suggestions as to the work 
of the incoming committee, would that be correct? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, a legacy report is really to try and 
highlight the issues that were unable to be resolved during 
20 
the 
previous 
five 
years 
and 
to 
encourage 
the 
new 
committee to take on those issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now in relation to the allegations of 
corruption and the like pertaining to the BOSASA group of 
companies and the Department of Correctional Services, 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 103 of 126 
 
what was in short and in summary the position adopted in 
this legacy report of 2009? 
MR SELFE:   Well, as I quote there, the committee 
remained disturbed with the manner in which the matter 
was handled and the incoming committee should treat it as 
a priority.  That was its summary and it was unable during 
the previous five years to make sufficient headway in 
getting to the bottom of this issue and it encouraged the 
new committee to do so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you make the observation in this 
10 
paragraph that that report dealt with many issues but that 
the contracts to BOSASA, Phezulu and Sondolo IT featured 
predominantly in that particular legacy is that correct? 
MR SELFE:   They did, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you also refer in paragraph 6.24 
to other oversight institutions that were also expressing 
concern.  You refer to the auditor general and you refer to 
SCOPA and you refer to a report in the Mail and Guardian 
about the auditor general’s report into its investigation into 
BOSASA, Phezulu and Sondolo contracts, is that correct? 
20 
MR SELFE:   That is so, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the newspapers, that were the 
Mail and Guardian, published leaks and the like from the 
auditor general’s report and on a reading of that, what 
impression did it create in your mind as to whether these 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 104 of 126 
 
were 
allegations 
that 
required 
careful 
and 
proper 
investigation? 
MR SELFE:   Well, they were certainly very serious 
allegations because they talked to collusion, they talked to 
tender 
rigging, 
they 
talked 
to 
a 
massive 
probably 
overstatement of the costs and these are matters which I 
believe the portfolio committee should at the very least 
have taken notice of, followed up and investigated. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you refer in paragraph 6.245 
of your affidavit to the issue that we have already touched 
10 
on but here you put a time period to it, you say: 
“Between 2004 and 2009 in particular I regularly 
called on the minister and whose department to be 
investigated, this largely fell on deaf ears although 
the SIU inquiry was instituted.  Whenever I did this 
in the PCCS meeting the matter was studiously 
ignored.” 
And you give a reference to a press report on the issue.  
Could you just perhaps elaborate on that briefly? 
MR SELFE:   Yes.  Well, it was quite clear that parliament 
20 
through its institutions was unable or unwilling to deal with 
the matter with sufficient seriousness and I felt that a 
proper inquiry, perhaps a Judicial Commission of Inquiry or 
some other Commission of Inquiry would be a more 
appropriate way of dealing with it notwithstanding the fact 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 105 of 126 
 
that the SIU was busy with an investigation. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You then move on from paragraph 6.26 
onwards 
to 
deal 
with 
the 
next 
parliament, 
the 
fifth 
parliament and during that period, I think it is a matter of 
public record that Mr Vincent Smith replaced Mr Dennis 
Bloem as the Chairperson of that committee, is that 
correct? 
MR SELFE:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And at an early meeting in that fifth 
parliament you deal with in paragraph 6.27, you refer to an 
10 
incident where you raised the re-awarding of the contract 
to BOSASA whilst it was still under investigation and you 
refer to the response you got.  Perhaps you could just take 
us through that. 
MR SELFE:   Well, the catering contract ran from 2004 to 
2007.  Then it was extended by a year.  So around about 
the middle of 2008 it was due for either re-advertising or 
renewal or whatever.  Now the department already had the 
preliminary report of the SIU and we had a pretty good 
idea that the preliminary report of the SIU was fairly 
20 
damning and yet notwithstanding that fact, the contract 
was renewed again and Mr Motseke who was at that stage 
the CDC Corrections said that his hands were effectively 
tied in the award of contracts because these were matters 
that were dealt with by bid evaluation committees and not 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 106 of 126 
 
by line civil servants. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Can you just for the record elaborate? 
CDC, what is that?  Chief Deputy…” 
MR SELFE:   Commissioner. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  And so if I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I did not hear that.  I am 
sorry, Mr Freund, I did not hear the answer from Mr Selfe.  
What does CDC stand for? 
ADV FREUND SC:   CDC stands for Chief Deputy 
Commissioner. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 
 
Immediately 
beneath 
National 
Commissioner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now if I read in a little bit more detail 
the extract that we quote from the BOSASA report on this, 
he says that: 
“External factors were not under consideration and 
in context.” 
Do I read correctly that he is suggesting that these 
20 
allegations of corruption in the earlier contracts awarded to 
BOSASA and its subsidiaries were external factors that 
ought not to be taken into account at all in deciding if they 
should benefit from a further contract. 
MR SELFE:   Well, what he was saying was the he himself, 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 107 of 126 
 
as a line official of the Department of Correctional Services 
could not influence the award of the contract and neither 
could anybody else because they were in the hands of the 
bid 
evaluation 
committee 
and 
the 
bid 
adjudication 
committees in a sense operating independently and that 
those committees were precluded from taking that sort of 
evidence of collusion into account when they awarded the 
contract because it was not within the specifications. 
ADV FREUND SC:   When you say within the specifications 
you mean within the tender specifications as to the criteria 
10 
to be considered? 
MR SELFE:   Correct, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So in paragraph 628 you make a 
comment arising from that.  Perhaps you could talk to what 
you say there. 
MR SELFE:   Well, you see, when they got the preliminary 
report of the SIU it was considered good enough to use to 
suspend Mr Patrick Gillingham from his position but it was 
not good enough to stop the award of the contract in 2008.  
I find that extraordinary because if it would stand up to 
20 
some sort of scrutiny in terms of the suspension of an 
official it should have been good enough to stop the aware 
of the contract. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Perhaps you should just elaborate in a 
little more detail, what was the nub of the accusation 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 108 of 126 
 
against Mr Gillingham insofar as BOSASA was concerned? 
MR SELFE:   Well, it was alleged that he and Mr Agrizzi 
had colluded together, that they had together drawn up the 
tender specifications for the original catering contract and 
subsequent contracts are awarded to Sondolo and Phezulu 
and that in return for that, Mr Gillingham was alleged to 
have received a number of cars, to have had his house 
paid off, to have kitchen renovations done, to have 
received a certain degree of money and to have an 
overseas trip paid for his daughter. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the source of those payments was 
alleged, if I understand you correctly, to have emanated 
from – let me not ask a leading question, from whom?  Who 
was the payor? 
MR SELFE:    It was alleged that they had come from the 
top levels of BOSASA. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you have referred already to the 
fact that there was an SIU investigation and you refer in 
paragraph 6.29 to a briefing received by your committee 
from Mr Willie Hofmeyer, the then head of the SIU to your 
20 
committee.  Did you receive such a report? 
MR SELFE:   We did receive the report it was in a form of 
a series of overhead slides which were talked to by Mr 
Hofmeyer but we did not receive the SIU report itself. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now when we look at what you refer in 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 109 of 126 
 
your footnote and we look at the BOSASA report one gets 
the impression that Mr Hofmeyer was at least initially 
astute not to name names but that you named names.  So 
could you please just tell us what happened at that 
meeting and what you said and why you said it? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, well Mr Hofmeyer pleaded with the 
committee not to name any names allegedly because he 
was concerned that BOSASA might sue him for whatever 
he was going to say.  I did not regard that as being 
plausible at all, firstly Mr Hofmeyer was testifying in 
10 
parliament and everything that is said in particular is 
covered by privilege. 
 
And 
secondly, 
because 
everybody 
outside, 
the 
general public, were fully aware by that stage of the 
allegations against BOSASA, Phezulu and Sondolo and it 
made no sense to not name names and so I named them. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And was there any doubt in your mind 
or in the mind of anyone present at that meeting that the 
entity or entities that he had referred to anonymously were 
correctly identified by you as being BOSASA entities? 
20 
MR SELFE:   I was certainly not contradicted in any way by 
any member of the committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And just very briefly and very broadly 
because we do have the written documentation, it is all 
apparent in the BOSASA report, what Mr Hofmeyer did was 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 110 of 126 
 
after dealing with certain other issues to identify what he 
called example number 4 or case number 4 or something 
like that and what was the gist of the findings that in 
relation to those unnamed entities he said that the SIU had 
made? 
MR SELFE:   Well, in relation to that one which I 
understood to refer to BOSASA referred again to – and I 
have alluded to before – that there was collusion about the 
construction of the tenders, that there were payments were 
made to at least one official, if not more, the department, 
10 
and 
that 
there 
were 
matters 
that 
required 
further 
investigation including by the police. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Did you or any other members of the 
portfolio express any views at that meeting about the 
import of what was revealed in the SIU report?  Well, 
everybody professed themselves to be very shocked by it 
and we were given the assurance that this SIU report 
would be handed over to the National Prosecuting Authority 
and 
that 
people 
implicated 
in 
the 
report 
would 
be 
prosecuted in due course by the NPA.  Unfortunately, that 
20 
was in 2009, we are now in 2021 and very, very little had 
happened. 
MR SELFE:   Now you refer in paragraph 6.32 that what I 
think you have just been alluding to, that the committee 
was told that that had been referred to the NPA, I think 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 111 of 126 
 
there most members regarded the matter as having been 
disposed of.  Now I can understand that point of view, at 
least for about 2009, (indistinct – recording distorted) but 
what about in the years that followed?  What was the 
degree of interest, if any, was brought up by your 
committee into – as regards these serious allegations and 
what was becoming of them and what their implications 
were for further contracts then? 
MR SELFE:   Well, one would have assumed at the time 
that the NPA was doing its work, would have assumed that 
10 
the department would have taken note of those very 
serious allegations but what happened is that in due 
course 
the 
contract 
was 
renewed 
and 
renewed 
and 
extended and extended until very recently without any 
apparent consequence for anybody in either DCS or the 
BOSASA group of companies. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If I can take you back a little to 6.35 of 
your affidavit as at 24 March 2010, you refer to the 
Minister of Correctional Services informing the National 
Assembly that a disciplinary inquiry had commenced with 
20 
(indistinct – recording distorted) the official that you 
quoted in the report and you say that was Mr Gillingham, is 
that correct? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, the minister came to parliament and 
admitted 
that 
there 
was 
an 
official 
that 
was 
facing 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 112 of 126 
 
disciplinary steps.  We understood privately that that 
person was Mr Gillingham. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say in the next paragraph that 
your information is that when the disciplinary panel was 
due to hand down its finding Mr Gillingham resigned from 
the department. 
MR SELFE:   That is correct, I understood at the time in 
order to preserve his pension. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So maybe if you would like to talk to 
the point you make in your paragraph 6.37. 
10 
MR SELFE:   Well, what I experienced over this period 
between 2009 and the years that followed was that there 
was absolutely no appetite that I could discern in either the 
department or the NPA or any other law enforcement 
agency to deal with the very serious allegations that had 
been made against that department, its officials and 
critically BOSASA and its affiliates. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you refer in paragraph 6.41 to 
further attempts you made for action to be taken in relation 
to this.  What success did you have in drawing attention to 
20 
and getting action taken to deal with this problem? 
MR SELFE:   Absolutely nothing at all.  In fact I did not 
enjoy the same relationship with the new Chairperson, it 
was very difficult to get a reaction from the committee but I 
regularly asked for an inquiry in 2011 and 2012 but there 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 113 of 126 
 
was no appetite for an inquiry.  I just found it extraordinary 
that having had this inquiry there was no action that was 
taken at all and that in itself required an explanation. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the Chairperson of the committee 
to whom you are referring now is presumably Mr Vincent 
Smith? 
MR SELFE:   That is so, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The Commission received an affidavit 
from Mr Smith and I am currently anticipating that he will in 
due course come to testify but one of the things that I note 
10 
in his affidavit, that I want to put to you for comment, is 
that he says that during the period that he chaired that 
committee, there were no further contracts awarded to 
BOSASA and by implication they are talking about the 
BOSASA group.  Would you maybe talk to paragraph 6.43 
and to that issue generally, please? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, I do not believe that what Mr Smith is 
saying is true because the contract HK14 of 2008 expired 
at the end of January 2012 and Mr Moyane came to the 
committee and said that there was no capacity in the 
20 
department at the time to in source catering and on the 
grounds of that it was necessary to extend the contract still 
further.  The reason why they did was all the equipment, 
the catering equipment in the prisons that were serviced by 
those contracts belonged to BOSASA who would have 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 114 of 126 
 
removed them had the contract not gone back to BOSASA. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So that means, if I understand 
correctly, you are referring to the extension from the 31 
July 2012 through to January 2013 as we read on the last 
line of page 737.  Am I understand it correctly? 
MR SELFE:   It was first extended from January to July and 
then from July to January and then it was extended again 
until 2013.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you say – on the 20 March 
2013 you say this. 
10 
“The PCCS, the Portfolio Committee on Correctional 
Services acquiesced in a further extension of the 
contract with BOSASA to 31 May 2013” 
And perhaps you can take it from there, what was the 
position then? 
MR SELFE:   There was a great debate inside the 
committee at that stage about in sourcing and outsourcing.  
In sourcing was a way of implying prison labour, amongst 
other things, of training people, of training people in 
catering and that sort of thing and Mr Smith at that time 
20 
said that he was only going to allow the catering contract 
to be extended until May of 2013 on the basis that creative 
steps were taken by the department to move to in sourcing. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now if we then skip down to paragraph 
6.45 – well, let me ask you this, maybe at 6.46, were there 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 115 of 126 
 
further extensions of BOSASA contracts during this period? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, I have already indicated it was only 
relatively recently that that contract was terminated and in 
fact 
in 
sourcing 
took 
place 
there 
and 
then 
without 
consequence for the department. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Incidentally, Chair, I made a reference 
to what is stated by Mr Smith in his affidavit, you might like 
to make a note that that is in bundle 1, page 70, paragraph 
20. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually, Mr Freund, yesterday I had 
10 
meant to ask you to arrange for somebody in your team in 
relation to the affidavits.  I do not know whether it was Mr 
Godi’s one or also Ms Mazzone’s one where there were 
lots of references, I thought there were annexures referred 
to in the text but there is no indication of where to find the 
annexure that, if possible, somebody in your team could 
take my bundle and make notes next to each annexure 
referred in the paragraphs to say where I must find it or 
what page, that would be convenient. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair you have broken up but I did 
20 
hear the initial part of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I can give you the assurance that 
we will take the necessary steps to have your affidavits 
reflect the reference numbers. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 116 of 126 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Made reference numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You make a point in paragraph 6.45, 
particularly the last sentence of that.  Perhaps, Mr Selfe, if 
you would just explain what your view if there. 
MR SELFE:   Yes.  Well, as you know there was a 
preliminary report given to the department and then there 
was a briefing by Mr Hofmeyer to the committee in 2009 
and notwithstanding that, the catering contract was re-
10 
awarded in 2008 to BOSASA, a company who was already 
deeply implicated in wrongdoing and then it was extended 
and re-awarded again and again without any consequence 
to anyone at all in BOSASA or in the department.  I found 
that extraordinary. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in paragraph 6.46 you go further 
in relation to that point as to what features in the legacy 
report at the expiry of the next parliament.  If you could 
maybe explain in some detail what your stance is what 
happened. 
20 
MR SELFE:   Yes.  Well, as you know in 2009 Mr Bloem 
had drawn up a legacy report which had drawn the 
committee’s attention to the issues surrounding BOSASA, 
Sondolo and Phezulu and at least initially while Mr 
Hofmeyer and others were giving evidence before the 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 117 of 126 
 
committee the matter was on the top of the agenda or at 
least as top of the agenda as you can get but it gradually 
faded into insignificance and when the legacy report was 
drawn up in 2014 the issue did not feature at all, not at all. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what is your view about that? 
MR SELFE:   Well, I think that the legacy report is chiefly 
the responsibility of the Chairperson of the committee and 
it really ought to have featured much more largely more 
particularly because, as I have emphasised, no action had 
been taken and the contracts had continued to be awarded. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now the portfolio committee in the 
next parliament changed its name, I think you have 
referred to that already, and you continued to be a member 
of that committee as renamed, is that correct? 
MR SELFE:   That is correct, I am now an alternate 
member because it is Justice and Correctional Services. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And perhaps if you could just 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, Mr Freund.  Mr Selfe, can I 
take you one step back to the legacy report?  Would the 
20 
Chairperson of the committee after preparing the report not 
give copies to members of the committee and ask them 
whether he had or she had fairly represented the matters – 
the important matters that had been discussed and had 
needed to be – that the next committee needed to be told 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 118 of 126 
 
about.  Would he or she not do that and would there not be 
an opportunity for members of the committee to say hang 
on, Chairperson, your report has left out a very important 
issue that should have been included? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, that is my expectation.  I cannot 
recollect having ever received that draft report and the 
report was then tabled in parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Thank you, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The new committee, 
as I… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund seems to have – Mr Freund 
you disappeared or not disappeared you appeared frozen 
on the screen and we could not hear you so you might 
have to say that again. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, can I just check that I have 
reappeared? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have reappeared yes, well you had 
not disappeared, you just appeared frozen. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I can inform you, Chair, sitting in Cape 
Town as I am frozen, not that I am.  It has been an 
20 
extremely warm day here today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The scope of the mandate of the new 
committee, if you could just explain whether it is correct 
that it expanded and if so, in what respect that this could 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 119 of 126 
 
expand. 
MR SELFE:   Well, the two portfolio committees became 
one.  So the portfolio committee on Justice deals with 
Department of the Justice and all its ancillary ...[indistinct 
– word cut off] and the NPA, the Office of the Chief 
Justice, etcetera, etcetera, and it also deals with the 
Department of Correctional Services.  In point of fact the 
Department of Correctional Services has a bigger budget 
and really ought to be dealt with more seriously by that 
committee but inevitably there are justice matters that 
10 
demand attention and as a consequence the Department of 
Correctional Services does not get the proper oversight 
that it requires. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now on that committee you refer in 
paragraph 6.4 to a question asked by your colleague, 
Glynnis Breytenbach, about the delays in the BOSASA 
prosecutor, can you maybe just take the Chair through 
that. 
MR SELFE:   Yes, well it appeared from early on that Ms 
de Kock, at the NPA, did not regard the SIU report as being 
20 
capable of standing up in court and as a result the matter 
was then reinvestigated.  I understood at the time that it 
was referred to the police’s Serious Economic Offences 
Division, and then various other administrative problems 
that needed to be sorted out and eventually there was a 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 120 of 126 
 
new report that served before the NPA that was capable of 
being prosecuted, that’s what I understand. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I think it is a matter of public 
record that after Mr Agrizzi had already testified before 
this Commission certain charges were then – certain 
persons were then charged with offences, that really have 
their origin going way back to what was alleged in the SIU 
report. 
MR SELFE:   That is correct yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I just want to deal with some 
10 
more general matters 
with you, because 
you are a 
seasoned and experienced member of Parliament and you 
are alert to the fact that an issue of interest to the 
Commission is the role played by Portfolio Committee and 
the role that can reasonably be expected of Portfolio 
Committees and whether there are things that can be done 
perhaps with a view to improving oversight in the future. 
 
Let’s firstly focus on your own assessment of the 
effectiveness of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional 
Services in the period that you served on it.   What is your 
20 
own judgment of your own committee? 
MR SELFE:   Well Portfolio Committee on Correctional 
Services shares the same drawbacks as any other portfolio 
committee in the sense that it has a very full agenda, it 
needs to exercise oversight not only over the department 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 121 of 126 
 
but over parole boards, over a variety of other institutions 
and critically it should go and see for itself what goes on in 
prisons, and if the Committee is conscientious and visits a 
prison it takes a full day so what tends to happen and this 
is alluded to by other witnesses, is that there is a quarterly 
programme that is developed with the agreement ordinarily 
of all parties, but which that programme does not take into 
account any unusual or unexpected developments that 
might occur, nor does it have the flexibility to be able to 
say we are not going to deal with item X or whatever was 
10 
on the agenda, item Y, which is now in the current 
circumstances more relevant is now going to be the focus 
of our attention, and really so what tends to happen is an 
overly bureaucratic approach to oversight instead of being 
able to be nimble and get onto the issues that require 
attention. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So if that is the problem with the 
current system, is there any possible way of addressing 
that problem in your view?  
MR SELFE:   Well a lot as I said depends on the discretion 
20 
of the Chairperson, when you have a chairperson that is 
generally geared towards oversight that chairperson can 
generally rearrange the agenda at short notice but there 
are other chairpersons who won’t entertain that sort of 
request and really what one needs is a mechanism that is 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 122 of 126 
 
above the Chairpersons of the committees so as to be able 
to appeal to that authority to say this is an urgent matter, it 
needs 
the 
attention 
of 
Parliament, 
it 
needs 
to 
be 
investigated, let’s now do it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Can I just take you back a step, before 
we proceed further and analyse the causes of problems I 
just want to go back to a question that I asked and I think 
you only partially answered.   If you have regard to 
paragraph 7.2 and 7.3 of your affidavit, and the issue you 
address there is your judgment call on the effectiveness of 
10 
your own committee on the issues we are currently talking 
about.    
 
These are the issues of the allegations involving 
Bosasa and the Department of Correctional Services, 
maybe if we can just talk to that again briefly. 
MR SELFE:   Well I would argue as I say that many of my 
colleagues did not fulfil the oath of office that they took, 
they did not uphold the law, there were some very, very 
serious allegations that should have been investigated.  
When I raised the issue in the committee and said let’s 
20 
have an inquiry, let’s get to the bottom of this they shifted 
and looked the other way and became deaf and generally 
did not do what they said they should be doing and that 
was particularly irritating after the revelations on the ISU 
which cried out for an investigation. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 123 of 126 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, and then from paragraph 7.3.1.1 
you start address some specific issues, and I just want to 
give you a brief opportunity to talk to them in term.  So an 
issue you raised is the problem of lack of independence of 
MP’s generally and particularly in the ANC.   What is the 
point you are trying to make there? 
MR SELFE:   Well the point that I am trying to make is that 
the electoral system is a closed list system and a closed 
list system however it is done, and I have some experience 
in how it is done in the DA, but however it is done 
10 
ultimately it is party office bearers who have a very, very 
great say in who gets onto the lists and in what order they 
get onto the lists and if that is the situation that your 
advancement in Parliament or your continued employment 
as a Member of Parliament is dependent on the party it 
does then send a rather chill wind down your spine if you 
start wanting to become independent of the party and the 
party line. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.   If I can just pause there 
Mr Selfe, Chair I note that we are now passing two o’clock.   
20 
You will note that we are pretty close towards the end but I 
would anticipate another ten minutes or so.   I don’t know 
if you would like to take the adjournment now or whether 
we should endeavour to complete this witness’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The temptation is to go on but I suspect 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 124 of 126 
 
that one might do injustice to some of the issues, for 
example the view that Mr Selfe has just expressed I would 
like to explore that more with him, so I am inclined to say 
since if he has to come back to finish it won’t involve 
travelling, maybe it shouldn’t be a problem if we adjourn 
now and the on Thursday morning we start with him and 
finish before the next witness? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am not personally against that at all 
but I know that Mr Selfe has told me in the past he has got 
certain scheduling problems on Thursday, is there any 
10 
possibility Mr Selfe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Because we ...[intervenes]  
MR SELFE:   I am committed ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You are committed on Thursday, the 
whole day or there could be sometime early in the morning, 
I am thinking Mr Freund was saying ten minutes, if we take 
more than ten minutes, it certainly should not be more than 
30, and maybe early morning. 
MR SELFE:   Well I have Chairperson a meeting that starts 
at seven o’clock on Thursday followed by one that starts at 
20 
eight o’clock, it is actually quite difficult. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, and then for the rest of the day you 
are committed? 
MR SELFE:   That is so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Selfe would you be ...[indistinct]  
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 125 of 126 
 
MR SELFE:   Sorry? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I was asking Chair, sorry to have 
interrupted you, whether you would be available on Friday?  
MR SELFE:   Yes I could be available on Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, maybe let’s do that, let’s look 
at Friday then, we can just slot you in for a really short 
time, but I just want us to explore some of the issues on 
which you obviously have views, you have been in 
Parliament for quite some time, you know how Parliament 
works and so on.    
10 
 
So if that would be fine I think we would talk on 
Thursday Mr Freund to say what time Mr Selfe should make 
himself available on Friday, depending on his situation as 
well. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes Chair, that would be certainly in 
order with me.  Chair can I just enquire what time you 
would like to start on Thursday morning? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us start at ten o’clock on Thursday 
but I will be prepared to sit until quite late and into the 
evening to try and cover as much as possible, but I do 
20 
know that there is a witness who was going to come who is 
not well enough to come, so if you indicate that there is no 
need to sit until late in the evening on Thursday because 
there’s enough time on Friday, I will be flexible. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Indeed. 
02 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 336 
 
Page 126 of 126 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Otherwise both on Thursday and on 
Friday I will be wishing us to do as much as we can. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Good. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay we are going to adjourn then 
the proceedings for today and as I said earlier on just for 
the public there will be no hearing tomorrow, but on 
Thursday we will continue. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 4 FEBRUARY 2021 
10 
