 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
15 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 284 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 224 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
15 OCTOBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 3 of 224 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 15 OCTOBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
  
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Myburgh, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see that somebody has decided I should 
have no bundles here – I should have no file here.  Good 
morning Mr Todd thank you for coming to the commission 
and to assist it. 
MR TODD:  Thank you Chairman. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson as you know Mr Todd is 
10 
our next witness.  He will give evidence in relation to Mr 
Gama’s reinstatement.  His affidavits are contained as 
Exhibit BB17 in Bundle 3 and he will also give evidence by 
cross-referring to documents contained in Bundles 1 and 2 
similar to what Mr Mapoma did. 
 
Exhibit BB17 you will see contains four affidavits 
17.1 through to 17.4.  17.3 and 17.4 deal with GNS which 
we are not going to deal with now.  I will after the witness’ 
has taken the oath ask him to confirm that 17.1 and 17.2 
are his affidavits and then I would ask you to admit them 
20 
formerly as exhibits. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes please administer the oath or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR TODD:  Christopher Francis Neale Todd. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 4 of 224 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR TODD:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR TODD:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help 
me God. 
10 
MR TODD:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If I hear that noise coming from there you 
will be kicked out.  If I hear that noise again you will be 
kicked out.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Todd you 
have in front of you Bundle 3 could I ask you to turn to 
Exhibit BB17 and to page 47. 
MR TODD:  I have it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You confirm that that is an affidavit of 
yours? 
20 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And may I ask you then to turn to the 
end of that affidavit which you find at page 64. 
MR TODD:  Yes 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is that your signature and do you 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 5 of 224 
 
confirm that you deposed to this affidavit under oath on the 
14 July 2020? 
MR TODD:  I confirm that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd you would know that 
attached to your affidavit is a series of annexures running 
from Annexure A to 8.  Annexure A you find at page 65. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And the end of Annexure 8 you find at 
page 155 you confirm that? 
MR TODD:  Yes I confirm that. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  A to H. 
MR TODD:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  End of H is at 155. 
MR TODD:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then if I could take you please to 
page 156 do you confirm that is a further affidavit of 
yours? 
MR TODD:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could you then please go to the end 
of that affidavit which you find at page 167 confirm that 
20 
you deposed to this affidavit under oath on the 29 
September 2020? 
MR TODD:  Yes I did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  This affidavit also has a series of 
annexures from page F confirm that those annexures 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 6 of 224 
 
commence at page 168 as A and Annexure F ends at page 
485. 
MR TODD:  That is correct.  You will appreciate I have not 
been through the bundle this morning. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja. 
MR TODD:  But I confirm that – those are the annexures to 
my affidavit yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It ends at 485 immediately before 
your next affidavit. 
MR TODD:  Correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Chairperson we would then ask 
that you admit Mr Todd’s affidavit of the 14 July 2020 as 
Exhibit BB17.1 and his affidavit of the 29 September. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay – okay let us deal with one at a 
time.  The one you have just asked me to admit is it the 
one starting at page 47? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is correct yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  As Exhibit? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  17 – BB17.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Christopher Francis Neale Todd’s 
20 
affidavit starting at page 47 is admitted and will be marked 
as Exhibit BB17.1.  Okay then we can go to the next one. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The next affidavit deposed to on 29 
September 2020 Mr Chairperson you will find at page 156. 
CHAIRPERSON:  156.  And that one I – you want me to 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 7 of 224 
 
admit it as Exhibit? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  BB17.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  BB17.2.  The affidavit of Mr Christopher 
Francis Neale Todd starting at page 156 is admitted and 
will be marked as Exhibit BB17.2. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Todd let 
us then start with your first affidavit at page 47.  From 
which firm of attorneys are you and what position do you 
hold there? 
MR TODD:  I hold the position of Director sometimes 
10 
referred to as a partner of the firm Bowman Gilfilan. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you deposed to this affidavit you 
deal with this at paragraph 3.  What is the purpose or was 
the purpose of deposing to this affidavit? 
MR TODD:  It was in response to a request by the 
commission to assist with information that I had personal 
knowledge of concerning the matters dealt with in the 
letter. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We then follow the chronology of 
events in relation to your involvement and the involvement 
20 
of Bowman Gilfilan.  When was Bowman Gilfillan first 
instructed in the matter relating to Mr Gama? 
MR TODD:  So that was in May 2009.  We were not the 
first firm to have given advise in relation to the matter and 
– but some prior advice had been obtained by members of 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 8 of 224 
 
the board from another firm which had recommended that 
disciplinary proceedings be proceeded with against Mr 
Gama.   
And when the board members then passed that 
matter onto the then acting Chief Executive who was Mr 
Wells the acting Group Chief Executive he decided that he 
would proceed with the benefit of legal advice himself and 
he – we were then instructed not specifically by Mr Wells 
he in turn engaged another executive Mr Maharaj he was 
the person ultimately responsible for Human Resources 
10 
within the group.   
And we were then engaged in May 2009 to advise 
initially on the question whether or not we agreed that 
there was a proper basis for the – for Transnet to take 
disciplinary steps against Mr Gama. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now you were at all times the 
attorney that was then responsible for giving advice and 
rendering legal assistance to Transnet in this matter? 
MR TODD:  Yes I was.  I – sometimes you refer to that as a 
lead partner or lead attorneys.  There were other attorneys 
20 
involved at different times and Counsel was briefed but I 
remained the person responsible for advising Transnet. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And throughout the time that you 
dealt with this matter Mr Todd who represented Mr Gama? 
MR TODD:  An attorney by the name of Themba Langa and 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 9 of 224 
 
his firm was Themba Langa Attorneys. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At paragraph 7 of your affidavit you 
deal with the fact that after Transnet had instituted 
disciplinary proceedings against Mr Gama and on the 10 
September 2009 he approached the high court? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What – what did that litigation 
involve? 
MR TODD:  Once disciplinary proceedings were formally 
instituted and there were some – there were some prior 
10 
steps.  In fact what Mr Wells initially did was engaged with 
Mr Gama on a relatively informal basis and then also set 
out in a detailed written letter what the issues were and 
invited him to respond.  And the purpose of that before 
disciplinary proceeding proceeded formally was in fact to 
establish whether Mr Gama was of a mind to agree that 
there had been serious problems and that he would commit 
to working to resolve them.   
Maybe he said he had agreed that he had been 
negligent or that – a contract had been entered into 
20 
irregularly and that he would work to resolve it.  In fact 
unfortunately Mr Gama took the view that merely having 
those allegations raised with him was indicative of an 
ulterior purpose being pursued by Transnet and its group 
executives.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 10 of 224 
 
And so that – that attempt to engage on the 
disciplinary matters in a more informal manner did not 
succeed and a decision was then taken to – to formally 
institute disciplinary proceedings against Mr Gama.  And 
the high court proceedings were effectively a consequence 
of Mr Gama’s belief at the time that there was no merit in 
any concerns about his conduct and that the fact of 
bringing disciplinary complaints against him was indicative 
of a conspiracy against him being – and the language 
became quite florid.   
10 
There was a cabal within Transnet that was intent 
on undermining his aspirations to become the Group Chief 
Executive. 
 That 
was 
in 
essence 
the 
thrust 
of 
his 
application to the high court and he asked to effectively – 
he also sought to challenge the authority of Mr Maharaj 
who had formally issued the disciplinary charge sheet or 
instituted proceedings.   
But the primary thrust of his complaint in the high 
court was that there no underlying merit in concerns about 
his conduct and that it was part of a – there was ulterior 
20 
purpose. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Myburgh can I take one step 
back? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course we know that you know 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 11 of 224 
 
disciplinary matters and unfair dismissal matters because 
you will deal with that at some stage.  They fall within the 
field of labour law.  How long have you been an attorney? 
MR TODD:  Around 25 years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About 25 years. 
MR TODD:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And labour law do you specialise in 
labour law? 
MR TODD:  Yes Chairperson throughout that period I 
practiced this. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You practiced labour law? 
MR TODD:  A specialist – I mean one evolves and some of 
the work I do would not be characterised as solely labour 
law.  Many board conflicts involve company law and other 
areas of law but essentially I have been a specialist and a 
recognised specialist within our firm for 25 years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I happen to know that you have 
acted as a Judge in the labour court as well I think a 
number of times.  Is that correct? 
MR TODD:  That – that is correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So the field of labour law, unfair 
dismissals, disciplinary hearings is something that falls 
within your speciality as a labour law specialist? 
MR TODD:  That is so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Thank you. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 12 of 224 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Perhaps to add to that 
have you published articles in books in labour law Mr 
Todd? 
MR TODD:  Yes I have Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well I thought that you know you 
might not have wanted all of these things to come out 
about you but it is important for – for your evidence to 
everyone to know that Transnet had the benefit a specialist 
in labour law – had the benefit of the services of a 
specialist in labour law.  Ja okay. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd just dealing with the high 
court litigation.  Who were the respondents in that 
litigation? 
MR TODD:  Well it was a little unusual for me – I do not – 
it may have been a first.  No it actually was not the first it 
does happen occasionally that a person dissatisfied with 
action being taken by the company seeks to identify and 
join individual board members to the litigation.   
It is – ja – it does happen but it is unusual because 
there – the board effectively make decisions on behalf of 
20 
the company.  They represent the company. When they 
take decisions they do not do so in their personal capacity. 
But Mr Gama because of his belief in a conspiracy 
obviously thought and his lawyers perhaps advised him 
that it was appropriate to join all of the individual directors 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 13 of 224 
 
to the litigation as well and they in turn chose – in fact 
they were not initiating proceedings against Mr Gama the 
individual.   
They had – they are the controlling mind of the 
company but the proceedings were being managed by the 
executive.  Nevertheless board members were joined and 
they sought separate legal advice in those proceedings 
and sought to be represented separately which in fact 
occurred. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So who did Bowman… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What – I am sorry.  What was the basis 
advanced 
in 
Mr 
Gama’s 
application 
for 
sighting 
the 
individual directors?  If you are able to remember. 
MR TODD:  Ja Chairperson I do not remember what he said 
and I have not recently read those papers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR TODD:  But I have always believed since then that that 
is a misjoinder an inappropriate.  There was no – there 
were no grounds to identify conduct by individual directors.  
But in essence it was part of the atmosphere of the 
20 
complaint at the time was that Mr Gama believed that he 
was the victim of a conspiracy and Chairperson there – 
some litigants use that mischievously to seek to divide a 
board and to seek to open up differences in a board by and 
seeking to get board members to come out on affidavit 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 14 of 224 
 
saying where they stand in relation to the matter.   
But properly speaking although it had served at the 
board because a board sub-committee had had to decide 
how to deal with on the one hand a – a complaint that had 
originally come through.   
I think the Public Service Commission via the then 
Minister concerning locomotives and a second complaint 
had been a whistleblowing complaint that had come 
through to the then Chief Executive who was leaving.  A 
board sub-committee had had to decide what to do; had 
10 
sought legal advice and they had then delegated that as 
they should have to the person then acting as the Group 
Executive.   
It was really a company matter not a board – not a 
matter for individual board members to be singled out.  So 
I cannot – I do not recall exactly why Mr Gama did it but in 
the circumstances where I have seen it done I am afraid to 
say that it usually represents either a deliberate stratagem 
to undermine the unity of the board or perhaps it is – it to 
be – to look at it more fairly perhaps a genuine belief that 
20 
actually board members would not agree with or tolerate 
some sort of abuse that is happening and the person who 
is bringing the case is somehow seeking to elevate it to the 
attention of board members.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 15 of 224 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd who did Bowman Gilfilan 
represent in that high court application? 
MR TODD:  We represented the company Transnet. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And who represented the directors? 
MR TODD:  The firm at that time was known as Eversheds.  
They were a – I do not recall if they are still exist in the 
same shape or form but it was a firm – ja I think it had 
previously been Routledge Modise and it was at that time 
called Eversheds. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what was the result of this 
10 
litigation? 
MR TODD:  The high court did not agree with Mr Gama’s 
contentions and dismissed the application and it dismissed 
it with costs that becomes a relevant consideration later 
on.  In litigation of this kind there is always an opportunity 
for the high court to perhaps it has not historically done so 
but in some circumstances it might say I am going to order 
limited costs or find that I should be careful or order only 
partial costs or something of that nature but in this case 
the court was satisfied that Mr – that the case should be 
20 
dismissed with costs on both sides including the costs of 
senior counsel on both sides.  That was a reflection of the 
court’s approach to the litigation and in fact Mr Gama did 
apply for Leave to Appeal but that was refused. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I… 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 16 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did – was the position that Transnet 
opposed that application and filed papers to oppose it as 
well as the individual directors of the – of Transnet they 
also filed papers and all opposed or maybe some abided or 
some agreed with Mr Gama or what is your recollection? 
MR TODD:  My recollection is that if the tactic was to open 
a division it succeeded to a very limited extent.  Two 
directors did descent as it were or separate themselves 
out.  Not in that they supported the litigation but they were 
– they dissociated themselves from the – from the general 
10 
position that the board had adopted in the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From opposing? 
MR TODD:  And Mr Chairperson I think it is bare saying it – 
when we come to the change in the board composition later 
– when the board composition was changed approximately 
– in any event shortly after Mr Gama was dismissed those 
two directors happened to be two of the three who were 
retained on the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR TODD:  But the relevance that one can decide. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR TODD:  But it – there were two directors but they did 
not 
– 
they 
did 
not 
join 
or 
agree 
with 
Mr 
Gama’s 
contentions.  They simply dis – they did not join in the 
general 
body 
of 
directors 
who 
were 
represented 
by 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 17 of 224 
 
Evershed.   
And 
my 
recollection 
is 
that 
the 
directors 
so 
represented did deliver confirmatory affidavits but the main 
answering affidavit for directors if my recollections serves 
me correctly was Mr Phaswana or who had been the – she 
was the Chair of the board at that time and Professor 
Everingham who I think was either the Deputy Chair but 
who had also been involved.   
And the main reason for them delivering affidavits 
on the merits was that Mr Gama’s contention was that he 
10 
was imminently to be appointed as the Group Chief 
Executive.  There was an on-going process at the time to 
appoint a Group Chief Executive.   
My recollection and I did consult with Mr Phaswana 
and others at the time so I had some personal knowledge 
not of the recruitment process but in the affidavits they 
made it very clear that they had not considered Mr Gama 
suitable.  That the selection committee had not considered 
Mr Gama suitable for appointment to the Group Chief 
Executive.   
20 
I think they – their affidavit said at this stage they 
did not rule out the possibility that he might at some point 
in the future but they certainly did not consider him 
suitable at that time.  And they had recommended a 
different candidate to be appointed.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 18 of 224 
 
And so it was important for the conspiracy theory 
for them to say this is not a case where Mr Gama is about 
to be appointed or soon to be appointed as Group Chief 
Executive and somehow this – these disciplinary matters 
have been used to run interference.  And he said – so – 
they delivered affidavits which effectively disabused that 
idea. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what you have just said in terms of 
what the position of the board was and what Mr Phaswana 
said 
in 
his 
affidavit 
about 
the 
conspiracy 
theory 
is 
10 
consistent with the evidence given by Ms Barbara Hogan 
before this commission. 
MR TODD:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Either early last year or late 2018 I 
cannot remember.  I think early last year.  But also the 
commission tried to get Mr Phaswana last year and we 
established that or at least I was informed that he now 
lives somewhere else not in South Africa but visits South 
Africa from time to time.   
We obtained an affidavit from him with regard to the 
20 
issue of Mr Gama and the disciplinary hearing and his 
affidavit and the commission is in possession of his 
affidavit and it is exactly to that effect.  So I thought I 
would mention to you that what you say is consistent with 
an affidavit that the commission has obtained from Mr 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 19 of 224 
 
Phaswana.  
MR TODD:  Thank you Chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Todd 
perhaps I could take you to the judgment.  Could you 
please turn to Bundle 2 and to page 142 now we are using 
the black numbers.   
MR TODD:  Yes have it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So you would have seen that we 
downloaded 
this 
judgment 
off 
Saflii. 
 
Gama 
versus 
Transnet Limited handed down on the 7 October 2009. 
10 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  May I take you please to page 161 
the 
Chairperson 
asked 
you 
about 
the 
question 
of 
[00:24:58].  You say that you were of the view that it was 
irregular. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh I know that I think your voice 
is soft by nature. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I beg your pardon.  I am looking 
down and not [talking over one another]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I keep on asking you to raise it. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd could we please go to page 
161.  The Judge deals with Spilg J deals with misjoinder at 
paragraphs 116 and 117.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 20 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  Yes I see he in fact found there was misjoinder 
and he also answered my question my recollection about 
two of the directors and he said they did not oppose the 
application.  He records that the 10 t h and 1th respondents 
did not oppose the application.  But the other members had 
done so.  Yes I see that.  I remember that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you will see then at paragraph 
119 under his conclusion.  He say: 
“I also find there has been an impermissible 
joinder of the 5 t h to 13 t h respondents since 
10 
the 10 t h and 11 t h respondents have not 
opposed the application it is unnecessary to 
deal with any costs issue in relation to 
them.” 
And then at paragraph 121 the court deals with costs: 
“The application is dismissed with costs 
including 
the 
costs 
of 
the 
1 s t 
to 
3 r d 
respondents and the 4 t h to 13 t h respondents 
excluding the 10 t h and 11 t h.  Such costs to 
include the costs of two counsel.” 
20 
And then perhaps I could just ask you to confirm at page 
163 there we see that Mr Gama was represented by Langa 
Attorneys.  The 1 s t to 3 r d respondents by Bowman Gilfilan 
Attorneys and the balance by Eversheds as you have said. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  But there was one other slightly unusual 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 21 of 224 
 
thing but again it – it seems to me that it was a tactical 
matter or maybe it was because he believed it appropriate 
is that in fact Mr Wells and Mr Maharaj were also joined – 
they 
are 
my 
recollection 
is 
they 
were 
response 
– 
respondent 1 was Transnet 2 and 3 wherein fact the acting 
Chief Executive and the Executive seeking to carry out the 
discipline.  And that also being joined in their personal 
capacities in the manner which I thought was unusual. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If we then go back to your first 
affidavit and we are going to of course come to the detail 
10 
of the disciplinary hearing.  Perhaps I can direct your 
attention to paragraph 8 of your first affidavit at page 48 of 
Bundle 3.  You say that: 
“After 
the 
high 
court 
proceedings 
disciplinary proceedings then took place.” 
Who was the chairperson of those proceedings? 
MR TODD:  Yes senior counsel at the Johannesburg Bar 
Advocate Mark Antrobus and I should just mention there 
there was some wrangling later about whether and in fact 
quite strangely to me Mr Gama later contented it had been 
20 
unfair that we did not run this as an arbitration only as a 
disciplinary hearing.   
I have never understood how that could be unfair to 
a person who effectively is given a second bite at the 
cherry being able to challenge the fairness of the outcome.  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 22 of 224 
 
But anyway the point was when we were attempting to 
conduct an arbitration process Advocate Antrobus had 
been one of the arbitrators proposed by Langa Attorneys 
on behalf of Mr Gama. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And we might come to that in a little 
bit more detail in time but during the course of the 
disciplinary proceedings you say at paragraph 8 that both 
parties were represented by senior counsel, is that so? 
MR TODD:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You then go on to provide a 
10 
thumbnail sketch of what was found and as I say we will 
come to the detail in a moment but what was the 
conclusion then of these disciplinary proceedings? 
MR TODD:  Mr Gama was found guilty of misconduct in 
respect of three – let us call it the three main charges.  I 
do not actually recall but I recall the chairperson – we did 
not strongly persist with a fourth charge on the grounds it 
was abandoned but it really was ancillary to the other – to 
the main three charges and then there was a sanction after 
the hearing.   
20 
In other words after the chairperson in a rather lengthy 200 
page finding found that Mr Gama was guilty on those three 
– of those three charges.  There was then a sanction 
process what was the appropriate sanction?  In that part of 
the hearing Mr Gama chose not to give evidence in 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 23 of 224 
 
mitigation of sanction, and he elected to deliver written 
representation in relation to sanction which he did and those 
were considered by the chairperson. 
 
And then he wrote a finding on sanction and his finding 
on sanction was that the appropriate sanction in respect of 
each of the three charges taken individually was dismissal 
and 
he 
then 
made 
that 
logical 
point, 
that 
taken 
accumulatively, even more so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is important of... it is important to 
make sure those who are listening know exactly what the 
10 
charges were or what the conduct was that he was found 
guilty of that was said to unacceptable conduct. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if we can cover that.  So.  Particularly, 
because later on it becomes important. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say why was the conduct with which he 
was... misconduct with which he was found guilty, so serious 
as to justify dismissal.  So that is important if we can deal 
with that. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Would you like us to deal with it now 
Chairperson?  I tend to come to it in a moment when 
introducing Mr Todd’s report where he then deals with it, you 
know, in much detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay if it is not going to be too far away 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 24 of 224 
 
from now, that would be fine.  It is just that, I am thinking 
people who are listening, they say:  Well, we hear the 
sanction was dismissal but we do not know what he was 
guilty of, you know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  Well, perhaps I can take Mr Todd 
to his report so that he can highlight that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then he can come back to the 
report in more detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine.  That is fine. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, if we could then fast 
forward?  If I could you take you please to page 65 of 
Bundle 3.  We are going to come to this report that you 
provided to Transnet and Deneys Reitz on the 2n d of 
February, it being Annexure A to your affidavit.   
 
You know that in this report you deal with the findings of 
guilty made by Mr Antrobus.  And perhaps I can take you to 
page 74 where you summarised those key findings. 
 
And then to answer the Chairperson’s questions, it will 
be apparent from that what precisely the charges were. 
20 
MR TODD:   Yes.  Maybe, Chairperson I can just before 
referring to at your findings, just describe what the issues 
were. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR TODD:   Ja.  The first in time complaint that had arisen 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 25 of 224 
 
and had arisen Chairperson, initially being referred as a 
complaint to the Public Services Commission or a body 
outside of Transnet and being routed through the then 
Minister Alex Irwin.   
 
He was the then Minister of Public Enterprises and he 
referred 
it 
to 
the 
Transnet 
Board 
to 
investigate 
it.  
Concerned a contract for the... effectively to refurbish 
locomotives and it became known as the Fifty-Like-New 
contract. 
 
Meaning it was a contract for the acquisition of 50 
10 
locomotives, train locomotives.  And rather than buying a 
brand new locomotives, they were going to be refurbishing 
and therefore slightly, I think, more cost-effectively, it was 
hoped.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So the idea being, they are not new but 
they are like new. 
MR TODD:   Like new. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]   
MR TODD:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
20 
MR TODD:   And the issue that had arisen there was that the 
source of the locomotives was the original manufacturers 
abroad but the refurbishment would require significant 
assemble work in South Africa.   
 
And the proposal that had originally been taken to the 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 26 of 224 
 
board was, that there would be an entity in South Africa 
outside of Transnet that would become involved in the 
assembly of these locomotives.   
 
And there was a whole discussion at the board at the 
time which said:  We do not want to create a new middleman, 
for want of a better word, or a new entity that we cannot hold 
accountable.  We want to contract directly with the original 
manufacturer so that that is clear and nobody can say:  Oh, 
it is somebody else’s fault.   
 
And the second important thing was, they said:  We can 
10 
do this assemble work ourselves.  But what was then called 
Transnet Rail Engineering.   
 
Transnet has its own engineer division in workshops in 
various places.  And it was very important to the board that 
actually it utilise its own and build and extended its own 
productive capacity.   
 
And so there was... when that contract was approved 
and it was roundabout R 800 million contract.  When it was 
approved by the board, a particular condition after this point 
was discussed and there was strong... Mr Gama’s... the 
20 
Transnet, the team...  
 
The Freight Rail Team were proposing a structure which 
the board pushed back against it and said:  We do not want 
that.  We want this manufacture work to be done within 
Transnet Road Engineering.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 27 of 224 
 
 
And what then happened was that Mr Gama effectively 
concluded a contract and it was implemented on the other 
basis that that this entity, STS which was then a joint 
venture with an overseas manufacturer, set up its own 
manufacturing operation at old Iscor premises and exactly 
what the board did not want to happen then happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR TODD:   And it happened... that involved corruption.  I 
say that quite simply because the project manger within... 
under Mr Gama, he was responsible for execution.   
10 
 
Yet it turned out had a personal interest or he and his 
wife had a personal interest in this entity which was being 
set up to manufacture in competition or in parallel to 
Transnet... oh, to assemble in parallel to Transnet’s own 
operations.   
 
And so that was clearly... and he was dismissed for that 
reason.  But the accountability for Mr Gama came because 
the point was:  We discussed this, Mr Gama.   
 
And we specifically said it must not happen like that and 
yet it happens like that.  You concluded a contract on that 
20 
basis which undermined the company’s interest.   
 
And Transnet, in fact, had to go to great lengths to 
dismantle the contractual arrangements.  They then had to 
compensate this third party for the costs it had incurred in 
setting up its own assembly facilities and so on.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 28 of 224 
 
 
So it had very significant consequences and Mr Gama’s 
role was regarded by the board as having failed in his 
responsibility 
to 
conclude 
the 
contracts 
and 
oversee 
execution consistent with the board’s resolution.  So that 
was the locomotive contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Before you go to the other one.  I 
just want to say.  I am grateful that you have decided this 
information because it is quite important in regard to what 
were the facts, what was happening.   
 
So in regard that transaction, because there was a 
10 
charge linked to it, the idea was simply that Mr Gama and 
his team had been told in specific terms by the board that:  
When you do this transaction, you must use a Transnet 
facility and not an outside service provider.  And he went 
against that. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And used an outside entity instead of 
using an internal Transnet facility. 
MR TODD:   Yes, that is correct.  Chair, and Mr Gama said:  
Oh, I... all the documents are a bit... I did not...  
20 
 
The lawyers were responsible for the legal documents 
which 
facilitated 
this 
and 
my 
project 
manager 
was 
responsible for the implementation.   
 
But ultimately the board and the chairperson said those 
are not good explanations to defer a responsibility.  You 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 29 of 224 
 
knew the issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   It had been specifically discussed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   And it was under your direct authority, both to 
sign the contract and to see that under your... that your 
management team execute it accordingly.  And this was a 
complete deviation which was exactly what the boar had said 
must not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  And he was CEO of TFR. 
10 
MR TODD:   CEO of Transnet Freight Rail, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright.  Then the next one? 
MR TODD:   The second charge Chairperson related to 
another procurement transaction.  This time I think there is 
no doubt that it was... it can be characterised as a 
fraudulent... exactly what words you use to describe but it is 
highly irregular. 
 
A procurement contract under which Transnet Freight 
Rail engaged security services from a contractor who at the 
time, an entity at the time was known as General Nyanda 
20 
Security or GNS.   
 
The irregularity was stock.  The manner in which this 
contract was entered into.   
 
Because everybody agreed, including Mr Gama, that this 
kind of contract should only be engaged on an open public 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 30 of 224 
 
tender process because there are many security companies 
out there who can do the work.   
 
And in fact, Mr Gama himself had specifically instructed 
his team after approving an earlier, what is called a 
confinement, to a single service provider and a year earlier 
had said this must not continue.   
 
We need a public tender process.  And the public tender 
process was underway to appoint a security provider.  And 
in... it was initially 11 contractors had put in their bids for 
services.   
10 
 
That had been whittled down to four who were the sort of 
four in the running for service providers who were in the 
running for this contract.   
 
None of those were generally under security.  It was not 
on the scene.  It was not in the public procurement process 
and it was not one of the four, you could refer to a 
shortlisted bidders.   
 
What then happened.  For some reason that no one was 
ever able to give a sensible explanation for.  That process 
was terminated.   
20 
 
The explanation that was given by officials in Transnet 
Freight Rail Security was that one of those four had been 
appointed on a different contract with Transnet in the interim 
and therefore was now disqualified from winning this 
contract.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 31 of 224 
 
 
Nobody 
could 
really 
explain 
why 
winning 
another 
contract 
would 
disqualify 
from 
this 
contract 
but 
most 
obviously, assuming they were disqualified, it did not prevent 
the procurement process from continuing with the other three 
shortlisted bidders.   
 
So nobody ever gave a rational explanation for why that 
process was stopped.  But what is apparent from the 
sequence of events within almost at the same time that it 
was stopped, General Nyanda Security made an unsolicited 
pitch. 
10 
 
And there were various documents on the computers of 
the Transnet officials managing this whole procurement 
process which showed that they were actually helping 
General Nyanda Security to draft their submission to 
Transnet.   
 
And they then made a submission to say, and this was in 
September/October 2007.  And General Nyanda Security 
made a submission.   
 
It was rapidly approved by the officials inside the 
Transnet Freight Rail Security Division on the basis that 
20 
General Nyanda Security will be appointed on consignment 
and that meant, a single source procurement and on the 
grounds that it was urgent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR TODD:   And so this was then... it went through various 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 32 of 224 
 
committees within the Transnet Freight Rail Security to 
officials who were most instrumental where named Ms 
Khanya and Mr Senamela.   
 
And I mention them because they were both dismissed 
for their role in this affair in proceedings that are in the 
papers here.   
 
But Ms Khanya and Senamela and others put this 
through various hoops.  The last leg of which was approval 
by Mr Gama as the Chief Executive of Freight Rail.   
 
This could not proceed without his approval of this 
10 
confinement and he had delegative authority to approve a 
single source confinement of this kind up to an amount of 
R 10 million.  So that was then presented.   
 
That document was then presented for Mr Gama’s 
approval on the 5t h of December that year, 2007.  And Mr 
Gama signed it and approved it.   
 
Right in the beginning, initially, it was thought that well 
what Mr Gama has done wrong and many people that what 
Mr Gama had done wrong is that he had exceeded his 
authority because the annual value of the contract was on a 
20 
proper calculation R 18 million.   
 
And whereas his delegative authority was R 10 million 
and so it was said:  Well, you have exceeded your authority 
by R 8 million.   
 
That was not the real problem here and that is not why 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 33 of 224 
 
Mr Gama was actually dismissed.  He was dismissed 
because the circumstances in which that happened could 
only be characterised and my submission to you Chairperson 
is that the chairperson of that inquiry, Advocate Antrobus 
was extremely generous to Mr Gama by characterising that 
conduct as serious negligence.   
 
But the way it panned out is the following.  First, in Mr 
Gama... in the course of the hearing, specifically put it 
through his counsel to Transnet’s witnesses that he had no 
personal relationship with General Nyanda.  And he did not 
10 
like any inference that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   ...that this could have any... could have resulted 
from any personal relationship that he had with General 
Nyanda. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR TODD:   Transnet then presented to him a serious of 
telephone records which showed a series of telephone calls 
between Mr Gama and General Nyanda in the weeks leading 
up to the conclusion of this confinement.   
20 
 
Mr Gama then were confronted and then said to the 
chairperson of the hearing:  I must apologise to you.  I have 
given incorrect instructions to my counsel.  I do have a 
personal relationship with General Nyanda.   
 
And he said so on... and he said:  The reason I lied 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 34 of 224 
 
about it was that I thought too much was being made of it.  I 
thought that inferences were being drawn that were not 
warranted.  So I downplayed it.   
 
And so he said:  My true relationship with General 
Nyanda is that we are not close friends but I occasionally 
play golf with him and we call each other when there is a 
family event and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR TODD:   The most recent call between then was on the 
1s t of December 2007, four days before Mr Gama signed the 
10 
contract in favour of General Nyanda Security.   
 
So that was the deeply disturbing part of what emerged.  
Not just R 128 million over R 10 million.   
 
The second deeply disturbing part of the contract was 
that it should never... Mr Gama himself and he said in the 
hearing:  This contract of this kind should never have been 
approved on a confinement.  So why was it?   
 
Mr Gama affixed his signature to a document which, as 
the Chairperson pointed out, in 15 places, said this is a 
confinement.  That is what the document was.   
20 
 
Mr Gama said:  Well, I did not realise it was a 
confinement.  And he was asked how that could possibly be?  
And he said there was an official who brought in a document 
to sign together with a pack of what he thought were tender 
documents.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 35 of 224 
 
 
And he said this official, who was now the Mr Khanya, 
Norma Senamela.  His name was Beattie(?).  And Mr Gama 
said that Mr Beattie had explained that it was urgent, 
important.  That is had been through a full tender process.  
And so lied to Mr Gama.  Misrepresented what was 
happening.   
 
And said all that is required is, you sign it.  Because it 
has been a full tender process, as you know it should be.  
And we selected a bidder.   
 
And Mr Gama said took Mr Beattie’s word for it and so 
10 
did not even look at the document.  He just appended his 
signature to the last page without in any way paying 
attention to the document.   
 
Now that was also unsatisfactory and deeply troubling in 
the disciplinary hearing for a number of further reasons.  
One of which with Mr Beattie.   
 
You would not be able to get him to this Commission 
because he immigrated to Australia and he immigrated after 
receiving a large severance package which Mr Gama also 
signed on the 5t h of December 2007. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it was right before that, ja. 
MR TODD:   But we were never able to speak to Mr Beattie 
about that.  But the second thing that was deeply worrying is 
what 
reason 
would 
Mr 
Beattie 
have 
to 
fundamentally 
misrepresent to Mr Gama and construct an entirely false 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 36 of 224 
 
explanation for the document that Mr Gama was being asked 
to sign.   
 
There has never been provided any rational reason why 
Mr Beattie would have sought to mislead Mr Gama in that 
way.   
 
Thirdly, Mr Gama had said previously in during the 
investigation that all he was shown by Mr Beattie was the 
document.   
 
It mentioned three names and this is the contractor you 
are going to appoint.  Now that was completely inconsistent 
10 
with the proposition that he just signed the last page.   
 
But in the disciplinary hearing, after admitting his 
personal relationship with General Nyanda, he then said he 
did not even know who was being appointed when he signed 
that document which was also inconsistent with what he said 
previously.   
 
But with respect Chairperson, he had put himself in a 
corner 
because 
having 
had 
his 
personal 
relationship 
exposed, he now felt it necessary to deny that he even knew 
that this confinement which should not have been granted in 
20 
the first place was in fact being granted to a person with 
whom he had a personal relationship.   
 
The irregularities in the tender processes, just to finish 
off Mr Chairperson, include one further one.  And that is 
...[intervenes]  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 37 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, before you do that.  You said that 
the 
chairperson 
of 
the 
disciplinary 
inquiry 
was 
quite 
generous to him in regard to a certain matter, I think under 
the first charge. 
MR TODD:   Yes, what ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I... reading his judgment, ruling.  I thought 
that he was quite generous in not concluding that Mr Gama 
had actually mislead the disciplinary hearing about his 
personal relationship with General Nyanda. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought he was quite generous to him. 
MR TODD:   Chairperson, it was quite unusual.  All of the 
points I have made are included in the chairperson’s 
reasoning in his 200 pages.   
 
And one would logically have expected into conclude 
that this was just a completely unsatisfactory explanation.  In 
the end, when he whittled all of his reasoning down, he said:  
I will decide this on the basis that I accept Mr Gama’s 
statement that he simply looked at one page.   
 
He did not even know it was General Nyanda Security.  
20 
And so he did not seek to draw adverse inferences from a 
series of difficulties with Mr Gama’s evidence that were 
manifest in the proceedings.   
 
So with respect, it was very generous but he said, if I 
accepting 
that 
version. 
 And 
he 
made 
a 
number 
of 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 38 of 224 
 
statements.  Like, it may well be that this is a false version 
of Mr Gama but he did not go a step further.   
 
But he then makes the point and this was always 
apparent that even on Mr Gama’s own version:  I am the 
Chief Executive of TFR signing a security contract for 
R 18 million.  And you can just put anything in front of me.  
You say anything and put anything in front of me and I will 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And you sign, you do not even know who 
this contract is going to.  I mean... 
10 
MR TODD:   How long it was for.  How much it was.  And that 
was the approach that Mr Gama took because once he said:  
I only saw the last page.  It also followed that he did not 
even know how much it was for.  And that also ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that is quite troubling.  I mean, you 
can sign and give somebody an R 18 million contract without 
even checking who are you giving that contract to.  Is that 
person suitable for that kind of contract?  Have there been 
proper processes followed?   
MR TODD:   I mean, all of this is relevant Chairperson 
20 
because Transnet accepted the disciplinary chair’s finding 
but 
when 
that 
disciplinary 
chairperson 
says 
this 
is 
dismissible misconduct because it is serious and he explains 
why.   
 
Even on his analyses it was serious and warranted 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 39 of 224 
 
misconduct.  You are not dealing with a disciplinary 
chairperson who was going off irrationally or aggressively to 
find against Mr Gama.   
 
In fact, he think he was, if anything, extremely generous 
in his assessment of the evidence.  But Chairperson, I was 
going 
to 
say, 
the 
other 
serious 
problem 
with 
this 
procurement process was that as it transpires, General 
Nyanda Security had no prior track record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course ...[intervenes]  
MR TODD:   It was not registered ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...these kind of service. 
MR TODD:   No, not rendering this kind of service.  Had its 
pitch document was full of language appropriate to American 
companies.  Jury tampering and things like that it claimed to 
be experts in.  It had no prior track record and it was not 
even registered with the Regulatory Authority which is called 
SIRA that private ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Security ...[intervenes]  
MR TODD:   ...regulatory security body. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MR TODD:   Which is a necessary requirement for delivering.  
In fact, it was only registered in June the following year but 
only applied in June the following year.  And it transpired 
that, more importantly, it had no employees.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 40 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   And what it was engaged to do was to supply 
security services through employees.  One sees the invoices 
which show we are supplying so many employees, so many 
employees, so many employees. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR TODD:   And it is said... it is said when pressed on that, 
he said:  Oh, we procure those form other service providers.  
And so what really infuriated the chairperson who presided 
over the hearings of Khanya and Senamela is he said this, 
and he did not use the word fronting. 
10 
 
But he described and was clearly very confronted by the 
fact that this was a crude fronting transaction which in the 
procurement document said this is a black owned security 
company wanting to do business with Transnet but it 
transpired that it had no ability to do it.   
 
And as one sees when Transnet sued for the money, the 
company said:  Well, we were never... it was never us 
contracting.   
 
Actually, it was consortium involving others and so on 
and so forth.  But ultimately, this was a fundamentally flawed 
20 
procurement process and Mr Gama’s version on which, for a 
want of a better word, he was convicted of misconducted, 
was that he paid no attention to any of the detail and simply 
signed the last page when it was shown to him without even 
knowing that it was a contract in favour of General Nyanda.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 41 of 224 
 
 
In my respectful views, those that was very improbable 
but that was true.  But even on that version which Mr Gama 
maintained, he was very seriously negligent in his duties as 
a Chief Executive of Transnet’s largest division.  That is 
ultimately what the chairperson said.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So.  I mean, I am grateful you explain this 
because it is important that when later on your evidence 
deals with the question of his reinstatement and the 
settlement agreement.   
 
It is known exactly what it is that he has... he had been 
10 
found involved in because later on when the board, the new 
board reinstates him, one is bound to look at what... at his 
conduct for which he had been dismissed. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say, what is it on the part of this board 
that made them think it was fine to reinstate somebody who 
has been found guilty of this? 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Attached of misconduct.  And of course, 
much later on the Commission will look at the fact that he 
20 
ends up being appointed as Group CEO of Transnet. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is like a promotion despite all of this.  
And of course, the Commission is looking at it within the 
context that Ms Barbara Hogan gave evidence which said Mr 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 42 of 224 
 
Gama was a candidate for the position of Group CEO 
together with other candidates in 2009/010. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And of course, as you said, he was making 
allegations that he was being robbed from being appointed to 
this position.  A candidate who was recommended by the 
board, Mr Sipho Maseko, against whom I have not had any 
witness saying anything adverse, was made to wait. 
 
Was not appointed and ultimately had to abandon the 
whole thing and move on in his life.  And the position of 
10 
Group CEO for Transnet was left un field for more than a 
year.  Maybe a year and a half.   
 
And then Mr Brian Molefe was... who was appointed.  
But three years or so after Mr Gama had come back, then 
had been reinstated at TFR.  Mr Brian Molefe was seconded 
to Eskom and Mr Gama was appointed to Group CEO.   
 
And Ms Barbara Hogan’s evidence had been that when 
she presented the case to the then President, Mr Zuma to 
say, the board has recommended Mr Mkhize as a candidate.   
 
She said Mr Zuma had said:  No, his only choice for the 
20 
position of Group CEO for Transnet was Mr Gama.  As I said 
yesterday, Mr Zuma has denied that.   
 
So we do not know at this stage exactly what the 
position is but we are exploring all avenues to see what 
happened.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 43 of 224 
 
 
But in the end, Mr Gama does end up being Group CEO 
of Transnet against all of this background.   
 
So the information you have provided as the attorney 
was representing Transnet, has been very helpful.  Thank 
you.  Thank you, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, there was a third charge 
...[intervenes]  
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...that Mr Gama was found guilty of.  
Could you just summarise that for us? 
10 
MR TODD:   In essence, that was a sequel to the litigation 
he brought against the company.  And it primarily went like 
this.  It says if you are being...  
 
If you are approached by executives who were acting in 
accordance with their duties and they raise with initially in a 
very collegial and informal way concerns about your conduct 
and then ultimately charge you with misconduct and you go 
on the attack and you accuse them of all sorts of improper 
motives and you...  
 
And that became very public and very charged and it 
20 
was very directed at the executives and that they were 
involved, effectively, in the dishonest conspiracy against 
them.  When you do that, if you do not have grounds to do it, 
you – between executives.  You cannot conduct yourself in 
a way which say rather than saying I will – I do not believe 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 44 of 224 
 
I should be charged but I will deal with the inquiry as 
quickly and expeditiously as I can and I will show you why 
I believe I am not guilty.  That is what – that is actually the 
state of mind that an executive ought to demonstrate.  
 
Of course, Mr Gama believed, apparently, that he 
was being persecuted.  He clearly believed it wrongly, 
ultimately 
accepted 
that 
actually 
he 
was 
guilty 
of 
misconduct in all of the respects alleged.   
 
So ultimately – but that third charge was really a 
sequel to a kind of litigation be brought against the 
10 
company and its executive in an attempt to avoid having to 
answer these charges.  I may just say, Chairperson, one 
thing …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I just – I wanted to say, you are 
saying Mr Gama believed, maybe he did believe but maybe 
he did not believe there was a conspiracy, maybe it was 
convenient that he should put up this, I do not know, but 
sometimes 
people 
say 
– 
put 
up 
conspiracy 
theories 
knowing that they have no basis.   
Sometimes they put up conspiracy theories because 
20 
they genuinely believe that there is a conspiracy.  So we 
…[intervenes] 
MR TODD:   It is unfortunate, Chairperson, as a – you 
know, you mention my experience, I have - unfortunately, 
lawyers are engaged and end up doing an enormous 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 45 of 224 
 
amount of work at great cost to employers because 
executives do not sit down and say show me what it is you 
are concerned about, I will engage and deal with but 
instead bring all sorts of cases to try and – and litigation of 
this kind unfortunately, from senior executives is – I would 
not say pervasive but it is very common and it is really 
brought by executives who are not agreeing to follow the 
rules and say show me what I am said to have done and I 
will do my best to answer.  I hope I will show you that I 
have done nothing wrong.  You know, instead of adopting 
10 
that sort of approach they adopt an approach which 
attempts to put an obstacle in the way of a company from 
actually dealing with a concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   But that was what happened here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   Chair, just on your point about, if I may, 
Chairperson, about the governance point about putting Mr 
Gama back in his job later.  Although the Chairperson of 
this hearing was, I have suggested, generous in his 
20 
conclusions, he is very clear in the end as when he 
imposes the sanction of dismissal that he is dealing with a 
person who has to be entrusted with Transnet with a very 
high level of diligence, care and integrity in dealing with 
major procurement and, for that reason, he says what I 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 46 of 224 
 
have seen leads me to the conclusion that actually Mr 
Gama cannot be trusted or relied on by Transnet in that 
context.   
I mention that just because I read Minister – 
previous former Minister Hogan’s transcript of her evidence 
on Monday, it is in one of these bundles, and I saw that 
she said when she was attempting to appoint a new board 
of Transnet and when she was attempting to recommend a 
Chief Executive, one of the key things in her mind was, as 
the state, we have an ambitious capital expenditure 
10 
programme that we are going to drive and use to drive 
economic growth and she says we were going to spend R84 
billion in five years using Transnet’s balance sheet to drive 
economic growth through capital expenditure and we 
needed to have the right board members who would be 
ultimately the custodians or give the right oversight and 
over a programme of that important and self-evidently, 
similarly, you need executives who have demonstrated the 
ability to oversee things of that kind.   
And when one sees the Gama charges and the 
20 
reasons 
why 
the 
Chairman 
thought 
dismissal 
was 
appropriate in that context, it is really exactly why the 
Chairperson said, of the hearing, said Transnet cannot be 
expected 
to 
tolerate 
and 
entrust 
these 
kinds 
of 
responsibilities to an executive who has been shown to 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 47 of 224 
 
have conducted himself as Mr Gama did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, Mr Todd, there were then 
findings of guilt in relation and misconduct in relation to 50 
like new locomotives GNS and criticism of the executives.  
The 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
disciplinary 
enquiry, 
did 
he 
recommend dismissal on a cumulative basis or did he 
recommend it in relation to each of the charges in our 
summation? 
MR TODD:   He recommended in each.  He said having 
10 
looked at each charge and what sanction would be 
appropriate, for each he went through it in a lot of detail 
and it was included in the report that you have referred me 
to but he concluded that dismissal was warranted on each 
one individually so that had I found him guilty only of 
charge 1 I would have recommended his dismissal.  Had I 
found him guilty only of the second and only of the third, 
each one, in his view, was destructive of the employment 
relationship and he then made the point that taken 
cumulatively it goes without saying that dismissal – I 
20 
recommend dismissal as the appropriate sanction. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, we will come then to your 
report in time.  Could I take you back please to page 49 of 
bundle 3 and to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  As you give evidence, Mr 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 48 of 224 
 
Todd, 
about 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
disciplinary enquiry concluded that on each charge he 
would have recommended dismissal, my mind thinks about 
in the context of crime, criminal courts, about the passing 
of three life sentences on somebody or who may have been 
found guilty of some serious crime each time, you know, so 
in this case it seems, therefore, based on what you are 
saying and my understanding of the Chairperson’s decision 
that in effect when Mr Gama was dismissed he could be 
taken to have carried three separate three separate 
10 
dismissals each of which could stand on its own.  But, of 
course, a dismissal, a dismissal.  Is my thinking more or 
less in line with what the Chairperson was saying? 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chairperson, I think that is – if you put it 
slightly differently and said when Mr Gama challenged his 
dismissal, the fairness of it, and said he is challenging the 
appropriateness of the sanction, he would need -  a 
bargaining council arbitrator would need to actually find 
that dismissal was not appropriate for any one of the three 
or for all three taken cumulatively.   
20 
 
So, in other words, it was ultimately they – if you 
showed that dismissal for the attack on your fellow 
executives, unwarranted attacks on your fellow executives, 
I would not have dismissed, I would have given you a final 
warning because apologised.  That would not render 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 49 of 224 
 
dismissal and inappropriate sanction nevertheless because 
there are still two charges which individually would carry a 
dismissal sanction and by the same token, even if on 
another one, the bargaining council arbitrator were to say 
for that charge, I also think you could have had a final 
written warning.   
Still got to deal – you first of all would have to 
conclude that for all three and then he would also have to 
conclude that cumulatively even though – because what 
can happen, is if somebody commits a series of conduct 
10 
which each of which warrants – is serious enough to 
warrant a final warning, for example, you might say 
cumulatively there is just too much going on here, I cannot 
give you - you know, say that there so many instances of 
conduct that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Anything else would be a slap on the 
wrist. 
MR TODD:   By itself would fall short of dismissal and then 
I have to take account of the fact that you have – there are 
a series of problems here and I have to consider the 
20 
cumulative effect as well.  So my main point there, not so 
much about the criminal analysis, but would be to say this 
is why, when it comes to the prospects of success in the 
bargaining council arbitration, it seemed to us that Mr 
Gama had an impossible mountain to climb.  Impossible is 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 50 of 224 
 
maybe too strong, a very, very steep mountain to climb. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, there is something that is 
common, as I see it – I have not done a criminal case in 
the courts in many years, but I see it, there is a common 
feature in terms of the example of a criminal case as well 
as disciplinary case.  If you were sentenced to three life 
imprisonments, terms of imprisonment for rape, murder and 
something else, you know, or two rapes, one murder or two 
or three murders, three rapes, or whatever, if you then 
appealed, went to an appeal court seeking and saying I 
10 
accept that I was properly found guilty of these charges, 
my complaint is simply the sentence, you would have to – 
you would have your counsel, who is arguing the case, 
would have to say okay, let us take this charge and say 
well, if it stood alone, the probable sentence might be just 
a fine, you know?  Another one – and show that if you were 
to look at them like that in all probability there would be no 
life imprisonment but having done that, it may be that one 
of these would qualify for life imprisonment.  And if one of 
them qualifies, you end up with life imprisonment. 
20 
MR TODD:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
It 
might 
be 
that 
it 
is 
one 
life 
imprisonment and not three if you have been able to 
persuade the court that the other ones were not justified. 
 
So if you look at a dismissals like this, Mr Gama’s 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 51 of 224 
 
counsel at the arbitration on the basis that ultimately his 
position was I am not challenging the finding that I was 
guilty of, these three acts of misconduct, maybe he was 
going to  also concede that these are serious misconduct 
or maybe he was going to say they were not serious but he 
would then say I am saying that dismissal was too harsh, 
he would have to show effectively that each one of them 
did not deserve to – did not warrant a dismissal. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But even if each one of them were – if 
10 
he was lucky and the arbitrator said no, each one of them 
standing 
on 
its 
own 
did 
not 
warrant 
dismissal, 
the 
arbitrator would still have to ask the question, when taken 
together 
cumulatively, 
was 
the 
dismissal 
still 
not 
warranted? 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now – so it is indeed – I think you are 
right in saying it was a very high mountain to climb if you 
have been effectively given three dismissals. 
MR TODD:   Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   To show that each one of them was 
unjustified and that these three acts of misconduct, even 
when taken together, would still not warrant a dismissal for 
somebody who is not just a lowly worker, was somebody 
who was CEO of a division of Transnet who was supposed 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 52 of 224 
 
to, I take it, administer discipline to his own team who was 
supposed to be exemplary to his own team.  You know, so I 
just mention that to one, indicate how I understand the 
situation to be, having read these in terms of what the 
situation was when he was going to the arbitration and the 
seriousness.  Thank you, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairperson, what time do you 
intend to take the…? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I did not look at the watch.  I think let us 
take the tea adjournment if that is fine? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are at about eighteen minutes past, 
let us resume at twenty five to twelve. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue.  Your mic, Mr 
Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  We go back to your 
20 
affidavit at page 49 at paragraph 10.  You deal with Mr 
Gama’s referral of his dismissal dispute to the Transnet 
bargaining council.  Perhaps we could go to that referral.  
Could you please turn to page 91? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 53 of 224 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Nine one, Chairperson, 91. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Nine one? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   This is a referral.  If you go to 97 
you see that it is dated the 22 July. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Of 
some 
importance 
is 
the 
statement, annexure A, that was attached to the referral. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could you take the Chairperson 
through that?  What was the case made out by Mr Gama in 
this statement?   
MR TODD:   In essence – and I do not recall and I have not 
read the statement very recently but I do not think he said 
it very explicitly but there was no suggestion here that Mr 
Gama disagreed with the conclusions that he had been 
guilty of misconduct and primarily it looked as though he is 
really complaining about the process that was followed and 
then he does rely on what I would call a substantive 
20 
unfairness ground in 4.4 where he said his contract allows 
for termination in the event he is found guilty of serious 
misconduct and I was charged with misconduct.  I suppose 
the assumption not serious misconduct, Presiding Officer 
found 
me 
guilty 
of 
misconduct 
and 
not 
of 
serious 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 54 of 224 
 
misconduct and therefore I contend Transnet in violation of 
its own contract of employment.  So – I mean, it was a very 
narrow argument really which went to sanction and then – 
ja, so that really is where he set it out.  It was a little 
surprising because the disciplinary process had been 
fought very hard on every point and this referral seemed to 
suggest that there are going to be a far more limited 
grounds of complaint about fairness than might have been 
anticipated. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Then 
you 
mention 
also 
10 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I see that on page 101 at the 
bottom it does submit that – well, he says: 
“The disciplinary hearing was both substantively 
and procedurally unfair.” 
I am not sure what that means.  He may have intended to 
say his dismissal was substantively and procedurally unfair 
but he does not say that, he says his disciplinary hearing 
was substantively and procedurally unfair.” 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I am going to come to that right 
20 
now, Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, you say in paragraph 10 of 
your affidavit that the contentions in the statement were 
subsequently clarified and limited in a letter from Langa 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 55 of 224 
 
Attorneys.  Could I take you please to page 102?   
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is the letter from Langa 
Attorneys dated the 14 October. Could I please direct your 
attention to paragraph 3? 
MR TODD:   Yes.  Yes, this is where the attorney 
representing Mr Gama clarified and it was the first time 
they made it explicit.  It was a bit confusing from the initial 
referral because it did not seem to take squarely  - take on 
the findings of guilt and he then clarified in this letter: 
10 
“Our client will not contest that he was guilty of the 
charges 1, 2 and 4 as found by the Chairperson of 
the enquiry.  Our client, however, wishes to submit 
that dismissal was an inappropriate sanction.” 
So that is where he said explicitly how he would narrow his 
case in the bargaining council arbitration. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do they in this letter indicate what the 
grounds or bases would be for saying the sanction of 
dismissal was not appropriate?  I ask that because when I 
was looking at his statement referring the dispute to the 
20 
arbitration, it was – I did not – as I recall, it was not very 
clear what the grounds were.  So you know whether in this 
letter they dealt with that part or not? 
MR TODD:   No, that is not elaborated upon there.  There 
was – I mean, there was this point we had looked at, at 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 56 of 224 
 
page 99, paragraph 4.4 where he talked about serious 
misconduct versus misconduct, but that was a kind of 
contractual argument and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it amounted to saying the conduct 
of which I was found guilty is not serious enough to justify 
dismissal. 
MR TODD:   To justify dismissal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR TODD:   But other than stating it broadly along those 
lines there was not any direct explanation now.  There 
10 
were subsequently some submissions that were delivered 
in the bargaining council and I do not recall, I do not think 
I have submitted those but effectively - essentially Mr 
Gama’s 
contention 
now 
was 
well, 
if 
you 
read 
the 
Chairperson’s finding I accept I was guilty of what he says 
I was guilty of but I submit that I should not have been 
dismissed for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   It was not serious enough to warrant 
dismissal. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Was there in the statement or in 
the pleadings in the bargaining council, as you recall, was 
there a contention or allegation that he had not been 
treated consistently? 
MR TODD:   Ja. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 57 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of, you know, discipline had not 
been consistent? 
MR TODD:   So there was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or did that come some other time? 
MR TODD:   There was a statement in 4.5 of the – again, 
that is at page 100 where he says – it is again, it is not 
clear that he is suggesting inconsistency but if I may, 
Chairperson, he had reason in both the disciplinary hearing 
and the sanction submissions the contention that this – his 
conduct was of a kind which there were other people who 
10 
did the same sort of thing as he did and they had not been 
disciplined. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   But the Chairperson dealt with that and said, 
you know, if you are going to say that, you would have to 
show me who those people are, what their conduct was for 
me to assess whether there was actually some similarity or 
some basis for me to say that you have been inconsistently 
treated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR TODD:   And …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he had not led any evidence to show 
those instances. 
MR TODD:   No, there had been no suggestion at all in the 
course of the disciplinary process that Mr Gama was aware 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 58 of 224 
 
of similar facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   For similar situations or had already similar 
situations or the details of similar situations in front of the 
Chairperson 
and 
in 
fact 
the 
evidence 
before 
the 
Chairperson was that others had been dismissed, for 
example, in relation to the GNS contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who were under him. 
MR TODD:   Who were under him and that Percy Mosweu 
had - was the individual who had been dismissed in 
10 
connection with the 50 like new – so there were other 
people who had been dismissed but he never said if 
somebody who is guilty of similar conduct to what you have 
found me guilty of, then I can show you who they are so 
that the Chairperson could actually make an assessment 
and there was never any evidence like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So but are you saying that the complaint 
about him having been treated inconsistently or differently 
to others who may have been guilty of something similar, 
he raised that for the first time in relation to sanction, he 
20 
had not raised in relation to the stage of the enquiry that 
related to whether he was guilty or not guilty? 
MR TODD:   No, he had raised it in both, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Oh, 
he 
had 
raised 
them 
both 
…[intervenes] 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 59 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   When the Chairperson …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he had had full opportunity to bring 
the evidence that would have shown those cases. 
MR TODD:   He raised it in both and the Chairperson, in 
dealing with it when he made written representations on 
sanction, Chairperson said but I have already dealt with 
this when  - because you had an opportunity to bring 
evidence if you wanted to and I dealt with in the findings 
on guilt. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR TODD:   And then he made similar submissions on 
sanction and said, you know, inconsistency.  And the 
Chairperson said I have not got any information to work 
with, it is no different from what it was during the hearing 
itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And I do not know – I mean, the 
issue of – there is the issue consistency, there is an issue 
of condonation and it may be that the issue of consistency 
was dealt with separately and discretely from the issue of 
condonation but what you have said might be quite 
20 
important because I think the board, the new board 
subsequently commissioned some investigations to look 
into whether he had been dealt with inconsistently and so 
on.   
So 
that 
becomes 
important 
if 
they 
were 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 60 of 224 
 
investigating something that he had had a opportunity to 
present fully before the Chairperson of the disciplinary 
enquiry and had decided not to present.  Okay, alright. 
MR TODD:   Chairperson, to the best of my recollection the 
matters that were subsequently investigated by the new 
board were either not known to Mr Gama or he did not have 
any information about them that  he presented in any way 
that 
would 
support 
a 
consistency 
argument 
in 
the 
disciplinary enquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that is quite important because 
10 
when the board – or when you have to settle any matter, an 
important issue that you look at is how strong is my case? 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you do that by looking at what are 
the issues and what are the issues being raised by the 
other side, what kind of evidence do they have or are they 
likely to have and therefore, it is important to look at what 
were the issues that he was raising in his pleadings and 
what was the ground on which he was subsequently raised, 
he restated and so on but we will deal with that at the right 
20 
time.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Todd, at paragraph 
11 of your affidavit at page 49 you then sum up really what 
the state of play was further to the referral and Mr Langa’s 
letter.  Could you please deal with that? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 61 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   Yes.  So this was the first time, once this was 
clarified, since the very earliest conversations since we 
had been involved in May the previous year and advised 
Transnet to raise the issues with him in a detailed letter 
that he could have an opportunity to reflect on and respond 
and his response from outset had been absolutely no merit 
in any complaint against me, this is a conspiracy and for 
the very first time now in October 2010, actually about 18 
months later, Mr Gama said fair enough, I am guilty of the 
misconduct. 
10 
 
That does have consequences in employment law 
because one of the ways when you deal with the question 
of sanction, people who understand what has gone wrong 
and commit to redress are much easier for an employer to 
accept might be suitable for future employment but at the 
time that Mr Gama the sanction was applied, he still 
vigorously resisted any suggestion that he had ever done 
anything wrong.   
So I do not – I think this would have been an 
example of saying okay, I was guilty of misconduct, was 
20 
rather late in the day to be able to say at the bargaining 
council I am actually accepting the wrongdoing but it was, 
in any event, it was the first time and he now said he would 
still say that dismissal was an unfair sanction in the 
circumstances 
and 
he 
would 
now 
raise 
procedural 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 62 of 224 
 
complaints.  In other words, he would persist in arguing 
that there had been procedural unfairness. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what were those procedural 
complaints? 
MR TODD:   The first one was one I alluded to earlier that 
he said you should have run an arbitration and not a 
disciplinary 
hearing, 
a 
pre-dismissal 
arbitration 
of 
a 
disciplinary hearing.   
Apart from the fact that on the face of it it is 
difficult to understand what could possibly be unfair about 
10 
that.   The truth was, if one looked at our report and the 
history of how we tried to do it, we actually tried on 
Transnet’s behalf extremely hard to get an arbitration 
going and were met with serious resistance and opposition 
at every level by Mr Gama and his team.  
 
So 
in 
fact 
Transnet 
had 
converted 
it 
to 
a 
disciplinary hearing which favoured Mr Gama by not 
making it final and binding in order simply to move the 
process forward.  So it was not a point that anybody I 
thought had – was going to have any legs in an arbitration. 
20 
 
And 
then 
he 
also 
raised 
the 
point 
that 
the 
Chairperson had previously performed work for Transnet.  
That is a curious complaint.   He had in fact proposed the 
Chairperson.  But, you know, when you appoint an 
independent outsider you do so as a proxy for a manager.  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 63 of 224 
 
Actually you can be employed fulltime by Transnet and 
fairly sit and preside over a disciplinary hearing.  So the 
proposition that you had to appoint a Chairperson of a 
disciplinary hearing that had never done work for Transnet 
was a very weak one.  And there is a – you know, that is 
the kind of argument that he brought on a procedural 
basis, we did not think there was much merit in any of that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Even if Mr Gama had succeeded in 
establishing those procedural complaints would that have 
been enough to secure his reinstatement? 
10 
MR TODD:   Well, no, in labour law if you show procedural 
unfairness it is very clear and for good reason.  If you 
show procedural unfairness only, it is apparent that there 
was good reason to dismiss you but there is some 
procedural unfairness, you can expect of ask an arbitrator 
to give compensation.  So your remedies are limited to 
some form of financial compensation to the maximum of 12 
months pay but you cannot get reinstatement for a 
procedural unfairness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What would have been the legal position 
20 
at the time – I know that there was a time when if 
procedural unfairness had been shown the employee had to 
be awarded compensation and could not be awarded 
nothing but at the time when this happened could he have 
found himself in a situation where there is a finding of 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 64 of 224 
 
procedural 
unfairness 
but 
because 
of 
the 
specific 
circumstances of the case and the seriousness of the 
misconduct and what Transnet may have lost financially as 
a result of his actions, could it have – was it possible that 
the arbitrator might well say he should get nothing? 
MR TODD:   Yes, the provision says just and equitable 
compensation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   So there is no prescribed amount other than a 
cap at 12 months. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   So it is quite possible – whether, if as an 
arbitrator should say I am finding it unfair in giving you 
nothing or – and it is theoretically possible, he said you 
committed extremely serious misconduct with very serious 
consequences for the company.  There was a procedural 
irregularity but it cannot be said to have affected you 
materially.  So just and equitable, you do not get any 
compensation, it is possible to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja because I am just thinking if, through 
20 
your conduct, your employer has lost R100 million, for 
example. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No it is shown that the employer, in 
running the disciplinary hearing, you know, has slipped up 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 65 of 224 
 
a bit so there was procedural unfairness but when you look 
at what the employer has lost through your conduct, you 
say why should we say this employer must give this 
employee R100 000 because of that, you know? 
MR TODD:   Yes.  And there are cases where that has 
happened and otherwise an arbitrator might give just a 
nominal compensation.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR TODD:   Some arbitrators are anxious that if there has 
been an unfairness there should be a consequence but 
10 
justice and equity mean that you must moderate and take 
into account all relevant factors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps, I could just ask you -  Mr 
Todd, if you need to reflect on this, you can, but we know 
that currently there is a statutory bar to reinstatement if 
there is a finding only of procedural unfairness.  Was that 
also the position in 2010? 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So in order to secure reinstatement 
20 
– and you deal with this in paragraph 13 – what would Mr 
Gama have had to establish? 
MR TODD:   Well, he would have had to have establish 
what in labour law terms is called substantive unfairness, 
under the Labour Relations Act and in this particular 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 66 of 224 
 
context his only contention that could have established 
substantive unfairness was that dismissal was too harsh a 
sanction or that - the proper language is dismissal was not 
an appropriate sanction for the misconduct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now – I am sorry, just on that, because 
that is important because when Transnet negotiates a 
settlement with him on the basis that there is this unfair 
dismissal claim pending before the bargaining council, one 
– it needs to be looked at how strong his case is.  Is the 
position, as you understand it, that at the bargaining 
10 
council at that time he was only complaining about 
sanction and he had stated the grounds why he was saying 
the sanction was unfair or inappropriate quite clearly or 
was this a situation where you knew that he was saying 
dismissal was not appropriate but exactly on what grounds 
he was saying it was not appropriate was not clear? 
MR TODD:   Chairperson, he had set it out in broad terms 
in some written submissions that had been delivered but 
this arbitration that was scheduled in January 2011 would 
have involved oral evidence.  So Mr Gama was free to 
20 
come to the arbitration and, as it were, lay out his story 
and say, you know, these are my reasons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   And so we did not treat it as though he was 
limited but he had not in those written submissions or in 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 67 of 224 
 
any way said anything that caused the legal team of 
Transnet to experience any anxiety that he might have a 
point.  We were - you know, he had not said anything that 
suggested or that caused us to think that an arbitrator was 
likely to be persuaded. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes no, I understand that maybe he 
could add or whatever because this was an arbitration, it 
was not pleadings in a civil case or anything like that but 
in terms of his known case, known in terms of the 
documents that had been exchanged, are you clear or were 
10 
you clear in your own mind what his grounds were for 
saying dismissal was not appropriate or because of the 
lapse of time your recollection might not be so clear. 
MR TODD:   I am afraid I cannot say in detail, Chairperson.  
There were two basis things.  One was the proposition that 
the conduct was not serious enough and he had intimated 
if not said that explicitly.   
 
And the second was that he felt and believed he 
had been signalled out and that sort of consistency theme 
still ran through his general complaints. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Thank you, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  At 
paragraph 14 you deal with something that you already had 
and that relates to the fact that at the disciplinary hearing 
when it came to the sanction stage Mr Gama decided not to 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 68 of 224 
 
participate in the leading of evidence. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just explain who that worked? 
MR TODD:   Well …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   How the hearing then panned out? 
MR TODD:   Well, the way it worked is that a hearing was 
scheduled at which you were entitled – the parties, both 
parties, were entitled to deliver oral, to lead witnesses and 
deliver evidence and raise any points that they believed 
were relevant to the question of sanction.   
10 
 
Transnet led the evidence of its then Acting Chief 
Executive, Mr Wells, who really dealt and took the 
Chairperson through primarily the seriousness of having a 
Chief Executive in Mr Gama’s position doing what had 
happened in relation to all three charges separately and 
that evidence was led and recorded but Mr Gama has 
chosen that he would not and he would simply make written 
representations on sanction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remember whether Mr Gama or 
his lawyers stated what they were submitting would be an 
20 
appropriate sanction if dismissal was not an appropriate 
sanction or did they not commit themselves to what the 
appropriate sanction would be for having been found guilty 
of these three acts of misconduct? 
MR TODD:   I cannot remember, Chairperson, it was in the 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 69 of 224 
 
written submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   But I cannot remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, you go on to explain that 
Mr Gama was dismissed at the end of June 2010.  This is 
at paragraph 16.  And then you go on to deal with the 
arbitration.  You say it was initially scheduled during 
October 2010 and was postponed, is that correct? 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And when was it then rescheduled 
for? 
MR TODD:   So it was scheduled and I cannot remember 
why it did not go ahead in October.  It is not uncommon 
that – and I recall that it may well be the bargaining 
council did what it normally does, is schedule something 
for one day and the parties agreed and said let us pick a 
week and it could be three or four or five days when we are 
all available and nobody wanted to delay it so January 
2011 was picked as a date when all of the legal counsel 
20 
and everybody was available to run it and then the parties 
agreed that it would be set down and disposed of in the 
week of 24 January 2011. 
 
So that is fairly expeditiously, bargaining labour 
disputes are supposed to be resolved quite quickly, the 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 70 of 224 
 
dispute having been referred in July, it pushed it into 
beyond six months but it was not unreasonable period and 
so but the parties certainly intended that it be disposed of 
concluded in January. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Was the whole week then set aside 
for the matter? 
MR TODD:   My recollection is the whole week, if it was – 
might have been four days instead of five but I think the 
parties had agreed that they should be available the whole 
week because they wanted to complete it in that week. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And was your view that this matter 
was capable of being completed in that time? 
MR TODD:   Definitely.  With the relatively limited issues, 
with the admission of guilt on the charges, focus on 
sanction, there would have been a limited number of 
witnesses required and we had no doubt that it could be 
disposed of in that week. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You then go on to mention that in the 
interim in October 2010 a new minister was appointed.  
Could you deal with that please? 
20 
MR TODD:   Yes.  And so I do not – I know this from public 
statements but I have followed those public statements 
quite closely because they had very big bearing on our 
conduct of this matter and the – effectively the public 
events that impacted on this were that in October Minister 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 71 of 224 
 
Hogan was replaced. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mrs Hogan. 
MR TODD:   I have read in her evidence that she was 
appointed to be the ambassador of Finland. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, she was dismissed on the 31 
October 2010. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Minister Gigaba was appointed in 
her position with effect from the 1 November 2010.  That is 
the evidence that Mrs Hogan gave. 
10 
MR TODD:   Yes.  And I think I also saw from then Minister 
Hogan’s evidence that she had been – I referred to it 
earlier, had been for some time wanting to get a new 
board, there needed to be replacement, you know, terms of 
office come up and she had needed to get a board in place.   
And, as I have said, she was obviously anxious to 
get a board replaced that was suitable, bit for purpose, and 
so one of the things – presumably one of the first things on 
the new minister ’s desk was to appoint new members to 
the board and so those appointments happened in early 
20 
December 2010.  They were publicly announced then, at 
least.  
 I do not know the details of how they were made 
but certainly I read the public announcements from the 
ministry about who had been appointed.  There were twelve 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 72 of 224 
 
new members and three members remained.  Three of the 
existing members were reappointed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR TODD:   And then what happened is because this 
position of Group Chief Executive was still vacant, I do not 
know in exactly what circumstances Mr Wells ceased to 
continue to act in that capacity because he had been 
acting as Group Chief Executive since the previous Group 
Chief Executive had left which was probably 18 months or 
more prior to this.  In fact it was probably two years prior, I 
10 
have not looked at it exactly. 
 
But Mr Mkhwanazi was appointed as Chair of the 
board and he assumed the role of acting Group Chief 
Executive Officer as well and so he was servicing in both 
of those roles which, from a corporate governance point of 
view, is not ideal but I understand it was intended to be a 
short time only until they had appointed a Group Chief 
Executive Officer. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, Mr Mkhwanazi …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it would be interesting – well, I 
20 
assume that Mr Wells must have left but it would be 
interesting to know whether he had not left or if he left the 
circumstances under which he would have left.  Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, how before the scheduled 
arbitration commencing on the 24 t h of January was the new 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 73 of 224 
 
Board and Mr Mkwanazi then appointed. 
MR TODD:   Yes sir they were appointed in December of 
2010, so I think I suggested that was around six weeks 
before the arbitration was due to take place, and they – so 
it wouldn’t – well it may or may not have surprised any 
need to know that they regarded this as a high priority, it 
could have been a low priority, it could have been one 
which they decided or they knew the Chief Executive said 
can I just check it is all in hand, anything I need to know 
about.  I probably would have said to him no not really, 
10 
everything is all in hand, you don’t need to worry about it, 
but it is apparent and from the thing – from what followed 
for Mkwanazi this was a very high priority and he had a 
very particular desire to resolve or to deal with Mr Gama 
let’s say. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    So as of January 2011 what was the 
position in relation to the cost order that had been made 
against Mr Gama in the High Court application? 
MR TODD:   Well ja, it had not been paid and we had been 
instructed to recover the costs, it is a fairly standard 
20 
procedure, one has a bill of costs, initially taxed, you then 
request that it be paid and settled and it hadn’t been paid 
settled and around this time we had been instructed to 
proceed and you do by issuing a Writ though your Sheriff’s 
office. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 74 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there was a bill that had been taxed, 
so what was the total costs that Mr Gama owed Transnet, 
in terms of that cost order? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja, the cost order to Bowman 
Gilfillan was – it was taxed and allowed – in the amount of 
R426 000 666,37, R426 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There were other, there was a second 
team, director ’s team, Eversheds also had a bill and I don’t 
know what, I was not responsible for recovering those 
costs. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright, so this amount related to 
seemingly Transnet’s costs. 
MR TODD:   Transnet’s tax costs in the  high court 
litigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the High Court application, excluding 
the costs granted by the High Court in favour of the 
individual directors. 
MR TODD:   Yes, that was the subject of a second cost 
order which would have been taxed – prepared and taxed, 
that was the bill of  Eversheds. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So how far were you with trying to 
recover that amount at that time? 
MR TODD:   We had instructed the sheriff to attach and I 
think the property they had attached of  Mr Gama was 
shares, certain shares that he owned, there are different 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 75 of 224 
 
ways in which a sheriff attaches property but they can 
attach shares held in a company and they had attached 
some shares owned by Mr Gama. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Todd could we then 
turn to the events of Friday the 21 s t of January, that’s the 
Friday immediately preceding Monday the 24 t h when the 
arbitration was due to kick off. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Myburgh, do you intend to 
come back to asking him about what ultimately happened 
10 
to their efforts to recover that amount? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes I do, it’s part of the chronology 
that flows. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Todd?    
MR TODD:   Well on that day, on Friday, the Friday before 
the Bargaining Council arbitration was to commence I 
received first a telephone call and then an email from a 
Transnet legal advisor who I knew, Mr Ndipiwe Salinga, 
and he very simply communicated instructions, he said the 
20 
new chairperson of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, 
Mr Mkwanazi has instructed me to instruct you to postpone 
the 
Bargaining 
Council Arbitration 
pending 
settlement 
discussions and to allow settlement discussions to take 
their course and insofar as you have attached, are seeking 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 76 of 224 
 
to recover the costs which – in which the Sheriff has made 
an attachment you are to immediately stop all further steps 
to recover those costs, so those were in essence t he two 
instructions given.  I don’t recall whether I said please put 
that in writing or whether he volunteered to put it in 
writing, but he did immediately afterwards because they 
were serious instructions that had a big impact on matters 
that had been entrusted to us on behalf of Transnet. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now perhaps in relation to the issue 
of costs, could I ask you please to turn to page 105 and to 
10 
Annexure D. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you look at the foot of the page 
there is an email from Mr Salinga to you on this day, the 
21 s t of January. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could you just deal with that, what 
was the instruction that you received in this email. 
MR TODD:   Yes, that’s the email that I was referring to 
when Mr Salinga put it in writing, I see he copied Zola 
20 
Stephen and Siyabulela Mapoma in that email instruction to 
me, I think they were and in fact when I replied I did reply 
to both of them as well, but the instruction was to postpone 
the matter but then as regards the attachment of shares 
and the recovery of costs that any sale in execution be 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 77 of 224 
 
cancelled forthwith, the attachment must immediately be 
released and the warrant of execution held in abeyance 
pending further instructions.   
 
So in fact the appeal instruction followed regarding 
the – they call it – people call it appeal but actually it is 
not, it was an arbitration but – and then the instruction was 
to postpone it, sine die using the legalese which means 
without agreeing a further date, postpone it indefinitely to 
allow the negotiations between the parties to run their 
course. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And at the top of page 106 as you’ve 
said it says I confirm that the Acting Group Chief Executive 
and Chairman of the Board of Transnet, Mr Mkwanazi, has 
instructed as follows.   
MR TODD:   Yes, he specifically did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then if we come to the Monday the 
24 t h what did you do then in relation to the arbitration? 
MR TODD:   Well we postponed the arbitration as 
instructed, and I confirmed that in writing to Transnet to 
the same, to Mr Salinga copying Ms Stephen and Mr 
20 
Mapoma by email, you have just referred me to page 105, 
and attached a letter which I have prepared just very 
briefly and at this point in time really  we were just very 
concerned, I was personally very concerned that the 
incoming Chairperson and Chief Executive had initiated a 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 78 of 224 
 
settlement process without us even being aware of it, 
having advised Transnet through I was very concerned that 
he might not have been briefed on the matter, that he 
might not have information necessary for him to make – to 
enter into settlement discussions and make appropriate 
decisions and nobody was asking us for – to brief him so I 
thought it appropriate and sent a letter to them on the 24 t h 
of January saying please can you bring this to the 
Chairman’s attention and say that in essence what was 
communicated in the letter of that date, but I wanted to say 
10 
please don’t enter settlement discussions on a wrong 
assumption that you have weak prospects of success in the 
your Bargaining Council matter but I don’t know if you want 
me to deal with that now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes perhaps we can deal with this 
letter at this point, as you say that’s found at 107.  Could 
you perhaps go through the letter? 
MR TODD:   Well we simply confirmed that we had carried 
out the instructions and then said in paragraph 3: 
“To ensure that we carry out our professional 
20 
obligations as legal advisors to Transnet and to 
enable Transnet to make a decision on possible 
settlement ...” 
which we had now been made aware of for the first time.    
“...with the benefit of full knowledge of the present 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 79 of 224 
 
status of the dispute and the likely outcome of Mr 
Gama’s challenge to the fairness of his dismissal it 
is appropriate for us to record that ...” 
And then we record something, the first one that we are 
recovering from Mr Gama is actually due under a court 
order, it is not something that somebody just decided to 
recover from him, he has been ordered to pay that amount 
to Transnet. 
 
The second thing was to record how the issues had 
been narrowed, his complaint was no longer that he hadn’t 
10 
been guilty of misconduct, and to say insofar as he is 
challenging 
the 
sanction 
we 
said 
the 
nature 
and 
seriousness of the misconduct on the part of a senior 
executive such as Mr Gama, and the effect of that 
misconduct on Transnet are set out clearly in a number of 
extracts 
in 
the 
written 
findings 
of 
the 
disciplinary 
chairperson.   
 
The 
written 
findings 
also 
identify 
a 
range 
of 
concerns about the credibility of Mr Gama’s version in the 
disciplinary process.  Third, the legal team representing 
20 
Transnet in the Bargaining Council Arbitration, including 
senior counsel, is satisfied that even on Mr Gama’s own 
current version it is likely that the sanction and dismissal 
will be upheld as fair for the three separate charges of 
misconduct of which he has now admitted guilty. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 80 of 224 
 
 
The Chairperson of the inquiry who reads the 
conclusion is a highly respected senior counsel and labour 
arbitrator who was initially proposed as arbitrator by Mr 
Gama and whose integrity has never been called into 
question. 
 
Four, in addition Transnet and its legal team are 
aware of and are ready to present in the Bargaining 
Council arbitration further facts and circumstances that 
show Mr Gama’s current version is false in material 
respects.  This significantly aggravates the seriousness of 
10 
the misconduct and makes it more likely still that the 
Bargaining Council Arbitrator will find Mr Gama’s dismissal 
to have been fair, and then we acknowledge that maybe 
prospects of success is not the only issue and it may for 
example make commercial sense to pay a certain amount 
to eliminate further legal costs and bring the dispute to an 
end. 
 
There may be other considerations and we – but we 
also 
reminded 
Transnet 
that 
the 
Public 
Finance 
Management Act is also an issue where proceedings of this 
20 
kind are mandated and require where public funds had 
been used or abused or improperly spent, and so we said 
that is also something the Board must take into account.  
Please bring it to the attention of the Chairman and Acting 
Group Chief Executive and we said we are willing, if 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 81 of 224 
 
required, to meet to discuss the issues raised in this letter 
and the facts and circumstances relevant to the dispute. 
 
So I wanted to make sure that the Chairman 
realised there is a channel to brief you if you want to use 
it, but I did not want him to proceed without knowing that 
there is a story here which should impact on settlement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And in particular you make it quite clear 
in paragraph 3.3 page 108 that there is – was every reason 
to believe that the arbitrator would uphold the dismissal. 
MR TODD:   Yes, we were very clear on that point, and we 
10 
tried to communicate it as crisply – you know Chairperson 
we accept lawyers can be overly optimistic about their 
cases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR TODD:     So one has to be a bit careful but on the 
other hand if you learn in a case that you had advised your 
client it is most likely to win that your client without telling 
you is proposing to settle you get a bit worried that they 
might be settling on a wrong assumption about the strength 
of their case and that was what happening here and we 
20 
were very concerned to make sure that it is possible that 
no such mistake should be made. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course it seems to me that this 
was an easy case for a lawyer to advise on, compared to 
many cases that lawyers in practice have to deal with and 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 82 of 224 
 
give advice on, simply because by that time you had a 
situation where Mr Gama had – was admitting guilty in 
regard to the misconduct, acts of misconduct that he had 
been found guilty of so you knew that there was no risk 
that at the arbitration the arbitrator could find that he was 
not guilty. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you know whereas in other situations 
you might have that kind of situation to say well there 
might be a change of the finding of guilt but this was a 
10 
case where, that he was guilty of these three acts of 
misconduct was not in issue any more, it was admitted, so 
all that was left was him being guilty of these three acts of 
misconduct.   
 
Was 
there 
anything 
unfair 
about 
him 
being 
dismissed? 
MR TODD:  That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd you mention in paragraph 
3.4 that you were ready to present evidence that would 
20 
establish that Mr Gama’s version was false in material 
respects, you have explained the impact of that in relation 
to sanction, but can you recall what evidence you are 
referring to here?  
MR TODD:   I cannot, I can’t recall exactly what is being 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 83 of 224 
 
referred to but certainly a material of our preparation for 
the arbitration was the point that I raised earlier that the 
Chairperson had been generous with Mr Gama, because 
there were a number of respects in which his evidence 
apart 
from 
the 
admitted 
false 
evidence 
about 
his 
relationship with General Nyanda there were a number of 
other 
areas 
in 
which 
on 
his 
own 
version 
he 
had 
contradicted himself to an extent that it simply wasn’t 
possible that he had been telling the truth, and when you 
deal with whether dismissal is an appropriate sanction it is 
10 
very important to deal – to know whether or not a person 
who is saying it is not appropriate is actually a truthful 
witness arbitration and we were confident that we should 
show that Mr Gama was not a truthful witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words are you saying even 
though he admitted guilt in respect of findings that didn’t 
go to his honesty and so on as made by the Chairperson of 
the disciplinary inquiry your approach as the legal team for 
Transnet was that you would see to show that his 
evidence, or some parts of his evidence in the disciplinary 
20 
inquiry had been dishonest? 
MR TODD:   Yes, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR TODD:   In simple terms if somebody is guilty of 
serious negligence, but in dealing with it they have told 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 84 of 224 
 
lies, even dishonest or false or misleading evidence about 
their negligence in an attempt to conceal or cover it up it 
becomes a material aggravating factor, and you assess 
whether should you dismiss somebody for that negligence 
and  you are comparing that to a person who says I see 
what has gone wrong, I am really sorry about that, I will do 
whatever I can within my power to fix it. 
 
They are two very different types of situation and 
Mr Gama we were very confident was the former, the 
person who had told many untruths in an attempt to 
10 
conceal the conduct that he had now admitted he was 
guilty of. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd did you ever receive a 
response to your letter of the 24 t h of January? 
MR TODD:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 24 of your affidavit at 
page 53 you go on to explain that you were contacted by 
Mr Gulay, could you deal with that please. 
MR TODD:   Yes so no response to the letter but it became 
20 
apparent to us what Transnet and its chairman were doing 
for whatever reason they had decided, the Chairman had 
decided to appoint a new law firm and perhaps let’s 
assume to bring a fresh set of eyes to the problem.  I don’t 
take these sort of things personally, feel personally 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 85 of 224 
 
affronted, the Chairman might have his 
own trusted 
advisors or people that he feels that would be better and 
so – better suited to advice in this instance or he just 
wanted a fresh pair of eyes, so what we learnt between 
this letter and over the next few days is that the law firm, 
Deneys Reitz, had been appointed to advise Transnet and 
the Chairman on a settlement discussions effectively on 
dealing with the Transnet matter and the settlement 
discussions. 
 
We were not told that they would be taking over the 
10 
conduct of the arbitration so in my mind if they had advised 
the Chairman that settlement was not a good idea or 
settlement hadn’t been possible it is quite – it was quite 
possible still at that stage that we would have continued to 
run the matter, but I understood Deneys Reitz had been 
briefed to advise the Chairman on the matter and so I 
communicated, and I don’t remember whether the attorney 
at Deneys Reitz phoned or whether I was asked to call him, 
but certainly I subsequently sent him an email with as 
much information as I could, and said that if he had any 
20 
questions or needed to be briefed or to understand 
anything about the matter please to let me know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So at that stage your mandate had not 
been terminated to conduct their – or to present Transnet 
at the arbitration. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 86 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, but of course it was 
strange, was it not, that while you were representing 
Transnet in relation to the arbitration and you were the law 
firm that had been involved for a few  years in the matter, 
maybe two years or whatever, from the time of the 
disciplinary 
hearing 
when 
there 
were 
settlement 
negotiations you were not asked for anything about the 
settlement. 
MR TODD;   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were not told anything, you just 
heard that another law firm would advise on settlement that 
must have been strange. 
MR TODD:   Chairperson it was very strange to us that we 
weren’t even aware that settlement negotiations had been 
initiated without recourse to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:  Now lawyers don’t have a monopoly or control 
or the right to say I must control, but the reason I had 
written to the Chairman specifically was – or written the 
20 
letter asking to be brought to his attention was at the very 
least we would have expected to be asked to brief the 
company or whoever was going to be looking at settlement 
so that they understand whatever, whatever we know about 
the matter Transnet has the right to know, and so it would 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 87 of 224 
 
be very – it is very strange not to take the benefit of what 
your 
advisors 
who 
have 
represented 
the 
company 
throughout have learnt and can tell you about the matter 
and not to even engage with it or whatever your views are 
about who you would prefer to engage with and I meant 
here was no way in my view that Deneys Reitz could advise 
without a full briefing either. 
 
How could they advise Transnet as fresh pair of 
eyes without a full briefing from the lawyers who had been 
responsible for managing the matter, but so effectively 
10 
Transnet hadn’t contacted us, they had appointed Deneys 
Reitz to look at the matter and then I really just tried to 
assist to brief them with as much information as possible 
so that they could execute their – you know that they could 
advise Transnet appropriately whatever they were being 
asked to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps I could just ask you in that 
regard how long had the disciplinary inquiry gone on for? 
MR TODD:   Well the process had been instituted, I mean if 
20 
you include the pre-charging engagement it dates back 
roundabout June the previous year, so June 2009, I think 
Mr Gama was formally charged in about August and then 
the inquiry eventually resulted in his dismissal in June 
2010, so it had been going on for that period and then this 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 88 of 224 
 
period of the dispute, the Bargaining Council dispute had 
stretched from June until it was about to be finalised in 
January 2011. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And Mr Todd can you recall how many 
days the disciplinary inquiry ran for?   
MR TODD:   Well I know that the finding records 14 days 
on hearing, I don’t recall all 14 days but it was a long 
inquiry with lots of witnesses, stretching over 14 days of 
hearings over a period of a few months, stretched over a 
period of a few months. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is your impression that it took longer 
than 14 days or less than 14 days? 
MR TODD:   No I think 14 days as it were in hearing of 
evidence ja it would be about right, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think we saw yesterday from some 
of the taxed bills that there were 14 days of hearing, so 
your evidence has been that you provided Mr Gulay with as 
much information as you could, amongst the things that 
you provided him was Annexure A referred to in paragraph 
25 of your first affidavit and that you find at page 65, it is 
20 
headed “Report for Transnet on disciplinary process.” 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Involving Mr Gama prepared on 2 
February 2011.  Now as you know Mr Todd this is an 
important document because at least some of the directors 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 89 of 224 
 
accept that they had sight of it and it in fact served before 
the Board at a point.  What caused you to write this report, 
a lengthy report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page is that report again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   65. 
CHAIRPERSON:   65, okay.  
MR TODD:   In fact I believe that I – that Mr Mapoma had 
said can I prepare a briefing note of some kind for the 
Board and I was delighted to have an opportunity to do that 
because for the same reason I had sent the letter on the 
10 
24 t h saying please don’t take steps here without full 
information and had heard nothing between then and the 
2 n d of February, so by the 2 n d of February the opportunity 
to communicate in more detail I wanted to take again to 
discharge what I thought were our responsibilities as 
lawyers to Transnet to ensure that they were properly 
briefed, so it may have some imperfections but what I 
wanted to do was to make sure that I dealt with matters 
that had found their way into Mr Gama’s complaints in the 
Bargaining Council arbitration, the procedural complaints, 
20 
the way, the reason why we ran a disciplinary hearing and 
not an arbitration, and so effectively I sent them what – 
and I also had the feeling that although our mandated 
hadn’t been terminated our services didn’t appear to be 
any longer required, so it was quite important to give a 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 90 of 224 
 
detailed you could call it a handover note in the hope that 
somebody would read a detailed handover note on the 
basis of proper information. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I want to take you through this 
report, some of this stuff contained in it you have you have 
already dealt with and I won’t then ask you to repeat it but 
you start out at pages 65, 66, 67 and 68 dealing with the 
investigations that preceded the disciplinary action is there 
anything in there – excuse me – that you would like to 
highlight? 
10 
MR TODD:    My apologies, you said page – up to page 
...[intervenes]    
ADV MYBURGH SC:   65 through to 68. 
MR TODD:   No I think the reason for setting up that 
background was primarily because there had been so much 
noise at the beginning of these proceedings that there was 
ulterior purpose and that it was an attempt to thwart Mr 
Gama’s ambitions to be made Chief Executive and it wasn’t 
clear to me that the new Board would be properly cited on 
that and there was – there had been a lot of noise that it 
20 
included political formations or politicians making very 
public statements that Mr Gama had been unfairly singled 
out and that he had been somehow the victim, really 
reiterating the case that he had brought and lost in the 
High Court, it was still very much alive in the public of 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 91 of 224 
 
course, and so I thought it necessary to set out what we 
had really understood and had been put into the high court 
proceedings 
how 
did 
all 
this 
happen, 
it 
wasn’t 
a 
conspiracy. 
 
So those pages really deal with that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I ask you to look at paragraph 
16 where you mention that in March 2009 ENS was asked 
to advise on whether the conduct of Mr Gama justified 
disciplinary action. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And provided a legal opinion.  
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   How did Bowman Gilfillan then come 
to be involved? 
MR TODD:   Well at that point in time and Mr Phiswana, 
who was then the Chair of the Board, had been discussing 
with other – and I knew this from their affidavits in the High 
Court litigation, had been discussing what to do about 
these complaints and how they should be managed. 
 
The Chief Executive, Group Chief Executive had 
20 
recently left and Mr Wells, who as an acting Group Chief 
Executive and they discussed it and they decided that they 
would 
like 
to 
get 
a 
legal 
opinion 
on 
whether 
this 
constituted misconduct that needed to be dealt with.  I 
can’t say exactly why, they probably were a bit cautious 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 92 of 224 
 
because Mr Gama had put his hands in the ring, to become 
the Group Chief Executive Officer and they probably 
wanted to make sure that they proceeded with caution, I 
am surmising. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So in fact at paragraph 19 at the 
foot of page 67 you say in discussion with ENS and other 
executives Wells decided to seek his own independent 
legal advice as to whether to proceed with disciplinary 
action against Gama.  Bowman Gilfillan Attorneys were 
then instructed in early May ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR TODD:   Yes I apologise I didn’t answer your question 
which was when did we get involve, that’s when we got 
involved yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at paragraph 21 you say 
Bowman Gilfillan Attorneys provided a legal opinion dated 
29 May 2009. The legal advice confirmed the early advice 
of ENS and was to the effect that the issues were serious 
and needed to be dealt with through an appropriate 
disciplinary 
process 
which 
would 
give 
Mr 
Gama 
an 
opportunity to respond, is that correct.   
20 
MR TODD:   Yes that’s right. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   In the next part of your report you 
deal with initial attempts to convene the disciplinary 
process, I think you might have already touched on some 
of that, is there anything you wish to highlight? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 93 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   No at that point it was our intention to follow 
the contract and set up a pre-dismissal arbitration process 
and initially it had looked as though that would be possible 
but then Mr Gama decided to attempt to interdict the 
process, which is what he then did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At page 69 you then deal with 
Gama’s high court application to interdict the inquiry, we 
have already dealt with this in some detail.  Is there 
anything that you feel needs to be highlighted there? 
MR TODD:   No I think we have dealt with – I mean I had 
10 
dealt there with the point about Mr Phaswana evidence in 
his affidavits saying that you know Mr Gama was elected 
for the appointment to the position of Group Chief Executive 
but there are important gaps reactive to the requirements of 
the position and he currently requires greater cognitive 
development to handle the complexity of this position.   
 
And there were similar points made by Mr Phaswana 
and I think I referred to them earlier but that is really dealt 
with in the high court of proceedings. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The next part of your report deals with 
20 
attempts to schedule a disciplinary inquiry by arbitration 
through Tukeso [?] 
MR TODD:  Yes.  The contract of employment had provided 
for arbitration administered by Tukeso [?] which is a labour 
arbitration body.  Tukeso [?] appointed initially one of their 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 94 of 224 
 
most senior or their most senior labour arbitrator.  He was 
initially accepted but the objected to and there was quite a 
lot of toing and froing in our attempts to arrange an 
arbitration. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then you deal with Gama’s subsequent 
objection 
to 
John 
Myburgh 
SC 
and 
the 
proposal 
of 
alternative arbitrators. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  Effectively what happened is he initially 
accepted that John Myburgh would be the arbitrator. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that John Myburgh? 
10 
MR TODD:  Yes.  Advocate John Myburgh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TODD:  He was the nominator – he was the arbitrator 
nominated by Tukeso [?] and as we – I pointed out in the 
report he was their most senior panellist and former high 
court judge former president of the labour appeal court.  He 
seemed to be imminently suited to an arbitration if not rather 
over qualified for an arbitration of this kind. 
 
But – and initially Mr Langa Gama’s – Mr Gama’s 
lawyer recorded that that was fine and we started setting 
20 
dates.  But then on 5 November as I indicate here then Mr 
Langa changed his tune and said, actually we still have to 
agree on the arbitrator and then proposed seven alternative 
arbitrators. 
 
And we then – I record a few discussions where we 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 95 of 224 
 
thought well we actually have an arbitrator.  We do not have 
to now agree a new one but we eventually decided let us not 
kick off an arbitration with an argument.   
There was a point about recusal that was raised by 
Langa that he had grounds to seek the recusal of Advocate 
Myburgh.  It looked tenuous as a ground for recusal.  But we 
thought why start off a disciplinary process like this and we 
clarified 
with 
Mr 
Langa 
you 
have 
proposed 
seven 
alternatives can we pick any one of those seven?  And they 
said yes.   
10 
And we said well in that case let us avoid an 
argument and a recusal and we will pick one of your seven.  
And number 1 on the list was Advocate Antrobus who was 
subsequently appointed. 
 
So 
we 
picked Advocate Antrobus 
and then 
an 
objection was raised to that too.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  This you then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  He – he -  he included Advocate Antrobus 
in the list of arbitrators that he was proposing? 
MR TODD:  That is right. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said we are not going to come with our 
own list. 
MR TODD:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will pick one from your list? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 96 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that fine and he said that is fine then 
you picked Mr Antrobus. 
MR TODD:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then there was an objection to 
that.  You deal with it at page 72 under the heading Gama’s 
refusal to accept the appointment of Advocate Antrobus SC. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could you deal with that please? 
CHAIRPERSON:  How could that happen? 
10 
MR TODD:  And this was put here because this had been 
raised as one of Mr Gama’s grounds of procedural unfairness 
that he was entitled to an arbitration not a hearing.  And so I 
thought it important to include this background.  So we then 
had a situation where they – as I have described it – 
repudiated the appointment of Advocate Antrobus SC and 
said no now they want us to agree – submitted – what – we 
want this one to be the arbitrator and then they submitted a 
further person.   
And we discussed this with Transnet and said you 
20 
know we actually cannot go on like this.  We have – we are 
going to be – there is too much cloak and dagger about who 
the arbitrator is.  All of these people are imminently suitable 
to arbitrate and we have picked one.  We could have stuck to 
Myburgh we did not we said we will pick one from your list; 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 97 of 224 
 
we did and he said it cannot be that we are going to – to 
recycle these kind of problems.   
So we then decided then instead of continuing to 
change – try and further negotiate arbitrators to say we will 
proceed with a disciplinary chairperson who you chose as 
one of your arbitrators but we will accept that his decision is 
not final and binding.   
So we will proceed with a person that we have got no 
doubt about and you will then be – you will not – because 
you have repudiated his appointment.  I mean we could have 
10 
taken a more legalistic approach and said, we holding you to 
it being final and binding.  But we really wanted to hold the 
inquiry to get to the end of it to see what the outcome was 
not to get involved in these kind of procedural – this kind of 
procedural wrangling.   
So that is the basis on which we proceeded with 
Advocate Antrobus as the chairperson and Mr – Mr Gama 
then 
accepted 
that 
and 
participated 
initially 
with 
a 
reservation of rights but subsequently we conducted the 
whole disciplinary process with – chaired by Mr Antrobus – 
20 
Advocate Antrobus. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I think you have made the point before 
that if the pre-dismissal arbitration process had been 
followed then Mr Gama would not have been able to 
challenge the fairness of his dismissal he would have been 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 98 of 224 
 
confined to a review application. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  The reason we were not concerned about 
that is that we wanted a fair outcome and Transnet wanted 
one.  They did not want – they were quite – they wanted the 
disciplinary they were not worried about the prospect of the 
find – outcome of the disciplinary chairperson being found to 
be unfair later.  Because they wanted a fair outcome and 
were committed to being fair.  They did not think there was a 
big risk that it could subsequently be found to be unfair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At page 73 you have a heading 
10 
Decision to Proceed by way of disciplinary inquiry instead of 
arbitration.  I think you have dealt with that. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then at 74 the disciplinary inquiry 
and its outcome and we know that broadly.  But I would like 
to now focus on if I may is a summary of the key findings.  
And this becomes important because what you have done is 
you have made the – the findings of the chairperson which 
as you have already mentioned are very long – quite 
digestible. 
20 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At paragraph 55 you record that the 
finding set out a very detailed – the key findings were as 
follows:  Perhaps you could take the Chairperson through 
this part of the report in slightly more detail please? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 99 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  Yes so this – I did mention that there were a lot 
of obstacles.  There were a number of preliminary and 
technical points raised in the disciplinary process and they 
are all dealt with in detail in the finding. But those were 
points it was alleged by Mr Gama that Ms Ramos had 
actually already considered and dismissed the allegations 
concerning fifty like new locomotives that the delay was 
unreasonable, that the charges were too vague and that 
there was inconsistency.   
This is where it was raised upfront as a preliminary 
10 
point that Mr Gama said I am being singled out in the inquiry. 
 
So they were all raised and dealt with at great length 
by the chairperson in the – of the disciplinary hearing and – 
and it was found that there was no merit in those points. 
 
And then turning to the specific charges he deals with 
the GNS charge and I do not know – I mean these are – 
these are fairly lengthy extracts from a very long finding.  
But they… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you can just mention the main 
features. 
20 
MR TODD:  Yes.  So in relation to the GNS charge the 
chairman makes the finding that clearly Gama ought to have 
known that what he was signing was a confinement.  The 
document which he signed was headed GNS confinement.   
And it clearly reflects in no less than fifteen placed over 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 100 of 224 
 
seven pages that it is a contract on confinement.  Even as 
the busy CEO of a large organisation Gama was negligent if 
he failed to observe that what was presented to him was a 
document for the approval of a contract on confinement.  And 
then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that just to interrupt you.  Is that one of 
the aspects where you seem to suggest that the – the 
chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry may have been 
generous in accepting that Mr Gama may have been 
negligent and did not see that what he was signing was 
10 
approving a confinement route for the transaction? 
MR TODD:  Ja.  It is Chairperson and in fact parts of the 
finding suggests in fact that the chairperson had reached a 
more serious conclusion and I extract that at page 11 as well 
where it says: 
“Gama’s explanation for his” 
Sorry it is at page 75 in the middle of the page. 
“Gama’s 
explanation 
for 
his 
failure 
to 
properly read the document was that he 
trusted Beattie’s [?] explanation.  This may 
20 
of course be a false explanation in that 
Gama may well have known at the time that 
what 
he 
was 
approving 
was 
a 
service 
contract on confinement etcetera, etcetera 
and that the value of the contract exceeded 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 101 of 224 
 
its delegated authority and that the contract 
was being awarded to GNS a company owned 
and controlled by a person with whom he was 
personally 
associated 
General 
Nyanda.  
These are all facts which a careful and non-
negligent CEO should have known and could 
have ensured that he was aware of by the 
simple precaution of reading the documents 
placed before him.” 
And then he says: 
10 
“Gama’s explanation about what occurred on 
the 5 December may be a false explanation.  
In this regard it is relevant to consider that 
Gama was not open about his relationship 
with 
General 
Nyanda. 
 
He 
initially 
downplayed and denied the fact that he was 
more 
than 
merely 
an 
acquaintance 
of 
General Nyanda.  Gama put up a false 
contention during the hearing that he knew 
General Nyanda only as any other member of 
20 
the public would.” 
So these are all parts of the finding which – which show and 
tend to show that the chairman was heading in a conclusion 
in this direction.  But he ultimately pulled back from it and 
said, you know on looking at all of this I am going to find Mr 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 102 of 224 
 
Gama – I am going to accept effectively that Mr Gama did 
not actually know what he was signing and I am going to find 
though that for a Chief Executive of a – an important the 
largest division – operating division of Transnet that is just 
not acceptable. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Two things.   
1. You said earlier on that ahead of the arbitration at the 
Bargaining Council the Transnet’s legal team intended 
to show at the arbitration that Mr Gama had actually 
not been truthful in certain respects in his evidence.  
10 
Was – was one of those the explanation that when he 
signed that document of confinement he was not aware 
that he was approving confinement.  Was that one of 
the areas where? 
MR TODD:  Yes we were certainly going to show. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  To do our best to show through proper 
questioning of Mr Gama and through really just an analysis 
of what the chairman had established. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR TODD:  That a better conclusion was that he did know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  And that that .. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And that by saying that he did not 
know he was not being truthful. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 103 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  Yes Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR TODD:  And also that for example in other areas he – at 
other times he said that he had been shown the name of the 
successful bidder and yet he then denied it and said I only 
saw the last place.  There were a number of points like that 
that simply were not credible and we thought impacted very 
negatively on Mr Gama’s truthful you know perceptions of his 
truthfulness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course you did say earlier on the other 
10 
one – the other area where you intended to show that he had 
not been truthful was in relation to the relationship between 
himself and General Nyanda. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I see that here he – you quote the 
chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry as having said that in 
regard to that issue Mr Gama put up a false contention 
during the hearing. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That he knew General Nyanda only as any 
20 
other member of the public would.  But your evidence earlier 
on was that once he was confronted with either telephone 
records or cell phone records which showed that there had 
been quite some interaction between himself and General 
Nyanda then his – the he changed his story. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 104 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right? 
MR TODD:  Yes that was found that it was apparent from the 
chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  In fact was aware of that and did make that 
point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  Continue Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd unless there is something else 
that you want to highlight to the Chairperson I thought I 
10 
would take you to paragraph 55.3 where you record:  
“That the chairperson went on to consider 
whether it had been proved that Gama’s 
conduct in fact constituted wilful misconduct 
rather 
than 
simple 
hear 
and 
serious 
negligence.  He concluded that it had not 
been shown on the probabilities that Gama 
acted wilfully rather merely negligently.” 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then you go on to record: 
20 
“The chairperson concluded on this charge as follows:” 
Perhaps you could deal with – with that conclusion. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  He found that he –  
“That Mr Gama had negligently authorised 
the conclusion of a contract for the provision 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 105 of 224 
 
of security services by GNS on confinement 
and failed to carry out his duties as CEO in 
the manner expected of him.   
 
And secondly he negligently failed to 
take appropriate steps to investigate the 
irregularities associated with the halting of 
the open tender process and the replacement 
thereof with the GNS confinement tender 
process and the presentation to him of a 
document for approval which was the product 
10 
of a confinement process that which was 
presented to him on the basis that it was an 
open tender process.” 
 
Effectively what the chairperson was finding in that 
second part was it is another – it was another problem of – 
that Mr Gama faced but his explanation to the chair was that 
he had been seriously misled into doing something that was 
fundamentally wrong and yet he showed no interest or 
inclination to find out about it and correct it and investigate 
it or to take steps.  It was ultimately the only – only after his 
20 
own disciplinary proceedings that were initiated that Mr 
Khanya and Mr Senemala for example were charged.  
Because.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is – this is the one where I think I 
read I do not know whether it was in the disciplinary hearing 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 106 of 224 
 
– the ruling that one of the issues was that he knew on his 
own version he knew that certain people under him had done 
wrong things. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But no disciplinary action had been taken 
against them.  That is one of those things. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Did he have an explanation at 
the 
disciplinary 
hearing 
for 
not 
taking 
any 
action 
– 
disciplinary action against them in – timeously? 
10 
MR TODD:  At one – he said that it was only after the 
investigation had started and he had been started to be 
shown the documents such as the confinement document 
that he said and in his evidence I – I would – can refer to it 
where he had said I then realised there was something fishy 
and I then started to realise what this scam was all about.  
But having realised there was something fishy and a scam he 
did nothing.   
He did nothing and he did say once the investigation 
had started he thought it better to just wait and see what 
20 
happened as an outcome of the investigation and he did not 
want to interfere.  But effectively that is – we would submit – 
certainly have submitted in the Bargaining Council Inquiry 
indicative of a state of mind that is not outraged at what you 
have discovered has been done under your watch.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 107 of 224 
 
But indicative of a state of mind which will cautiously 
observe what emerges on the investigation which was not 
what one would expect of a Chief Executive who has been 
misled into signing a false procurement document under a 
fraudulent procurement process. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd at page 80 paragraph 56 of 
your report you deal with the essence of the chairperson’s 
conclusion of the fifty like new charge.  Perhaps you could 
read that please – that paragraph? 
MR TODD:  Yes.  
10 
“I mean the chairperson in relation to that 
concluded the fifty like new was an important 
contract for a significant amount of money.” 
He mentioned elsewhere that it was in excess of R800 
million contract. 
“The board had laid down only one single 
condition 
and 
had 
tasked 
Gama 
with 
executing the contract.  He should in the 
circumstances have taken extraordinary care 
to ensure that he captured the import of the 
20 
condition in the contract this he failed to do.  
On his own version Gama failed to read the 
fifty like new contract and make himself 
efficiently 
aware 
of 
its 
content 
and 
implications in order to ensure compliance 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 108 of 224 
 
with the board resolution.  There is no doubt 
that Transnet has established that Gama was 
negligent in failing to secure a contract in 
terms which provided for TER that is Rail 
Engineering to perform all the local work 
even though he had conferred with his legal 
department on some aspects but not on the 
critical aspect of compliance with the board 
resolution. 
 
This 
negligent 
failure 
does 
constitute misconduct.” 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then at paragraph 57 you deal with 
the key findings made in relation to the criticism charge. 
MR TODD:  Yes so that was the –  
“The finding that the statements which were 
critical of Wells in particular but also infer a 
wider criticism of Transnet Executives and 
arguably even of the Transnet board for 
having an ulterior motive and conspiring in 
preferring the charges against Gama.  These 
are serious allegations and alleged dishonest 
20 
conduct.  This constitutes serious disrespect 
and gross insubordination insofar as criticism 
were made of Wells who was then the acting 
Group Chief Executive Officer.  Certain of the 
criticisms also constitute insulting behaviour 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 109 of 224 
 
and conduct which is defined and provocative 
of persons in authority. TIA which was the 
Internal Audit Function was criticised as was 
the previous Group CEO, the chairman of 
Transnet and Transnet in general.  The fact 
that Gama is blatantly prepared to apologise 
is belated prepared to apologise to Wells and 
discuss the issues with him whilst perhaps 
going some way to resolving their personal 
differences does not constitute a reason why 
10 
this conduct should not be regarded as being 
misconduct as defined in the Transnet Code.  
In my view Mr Gama overstepped the mark 
with his trench and criticism which impugned 
the 
honesty 
of 
Wells 
and 
other 
senior 
executives.” 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then at pages 81 all the way through 
to 88 you deal with how the chairperson dealt with the 
question of sanction.   
MR TODD:  Yes.  And we included there an important 
20 
principle 
about 
sanction 
because 
ultimately 
people 
sometimes 
think 
of 
and 
still 
erroneously 
refer 
to 
a 
disciplinary 
sanction 
in 
a 
workplace 
context 
as 
a 
punishment.  It has really got nothing to do with punishment 
and the chairman actually made that point where he – in – in 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 110 of 224 
 
his approach to sanction is that – and he referred to labour 
appeal court authority.   
It is about ultimately – it is about a sensible 
operational response to risk management in a particular 
enterprise.  That is why you discipline people because their 
conduct in breach of the rules presents a risk to the correct 
operating operation of the business.   
And so he says that is the frame work which I have 
got to look at this.  I have got a Chief Executive of a – of 
Transnet’s largest operating division and I need to assess 
10 
whether this conduct can be tolerated by Transnet of a 
person in that position or whether it presents an unrealistic 
or unreasonable risk to the enterprise.  And that is really 
how he deals with it.   
He talks about then the – the negligence on Gama’s 
part in signing the GNS confinement document.  He is 
particularly inexcusable as he is the authorised person with 
delegated authority on behalf of TFR who as such is the 
gatekeeper tasked with ensuring the contracts of that nature 
can only be concluded for a value of more than R10 million if 
20 
an open tender process has been undergone.   
He is the key person in the procurement process 
whose duty it was to ensure.  And he goes on and really I 
mean again it is – there are long extracts where the 
chairman wrestles with this problem.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 111 of 224 
 
But he says, ultimately this is – I found it is negligent 
not wilful but it is – it goes to the heart of whether this 
person can be trusted to do his job for Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this is – this is where on his version he 
signed the documents on a transaction involving what R18 
million? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  R18 million without reading them? 
MR TODD:  Yes without – on his version without seeing who 
it was in favour of.  Without seeing if anything to do with the 
10 
process that had been followed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Without checking that the money or the 
contract would be going to the right person who entity and 
without checking that proper processes had been followed. 
MR TODD:  Right.  On his version that they arbitrate 
effectively accepted.  He simply signed the last page and did 
not look at anything else on the document.  On the strength 
of what Mr Beattie had told him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is quite risky for any company 
because somebody can sign away R100 million without 
20 
reading what they are signing at that level. 
MR TODD:  This is really what the chairperson found and as 
we – we – as we said we would have gone into the 
Bargaining Council arbitration saying it is worse than that 
but even if that is all it was it was serious enough for this 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 112 of 224 
 
chairman you cannot – it is inconsistent with the continuing 
relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  It might R10 million or R18 million now 
which is a lot of money but tomorrow or next week or next 
year it could be R100 million and the question is can you – 
can you keep a person in such a high position who does 
that?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd in fact the – the Chairperson 
Mr Antrobus makes that very point at the foot of page 82. 
“Transnet is placed in the position where it 
10 
can really not be confident once negligence 
of this nature has occurred that Gama will in 
future be sufficiently careful to ensure that 
he knows whether what he is signing is a 
confinement or an open tender contract.” 
So he goes on, is that correct? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then Chairperson I see that it is 
exactly one o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us take the lunch adjournment 
20 
and we will resume at two.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES:    
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 113 of 224 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Todd, 
before lunch we were dealing with the finding by the 
chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry in relation to sanction 
in respect of charge 2.   
 
Could I ask you please to turn to page 83 of Bundle 3?  
And now we deal with findings on the sanction in respect of 
charge 2.  Fifty-Like-New contract.   
 
Can I take you to page 84 at the top where the 
chairperson recorded that he was found guilty of negligent 
misconduct.   
10 
“For having failed to ensure that the contract 
complied with the board resolution.”   
 
Could you please deal with the next paragraph? 
MR TODD:   Yes, in essence, the chairperson of this hearing, 
I think was reiterating a point that we mentioned before the 
break which is simply that it is fundamental to the successful 
operation of a company like Transnet that the head of its 
largest operation division can be relied upon and trusted to 
do what it is expected to do.   
 
So in this passage, the chairperson said: 
20 
“One must have regard to the fact that the board 
needs to be able to be confident that when it 
delegates authority to a divisional CEO, subject to a 
particular condition, that he will take specific and 
reliable steps to ensure that condition is complied 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 114 of 224 
 
with.  
In fairness to the Transnet Board, it would be a big 
ask for the board to be required to continue and 
trusting Gama with large management projects when 
he had exhibit negligent failure of this nature and 
with these consequences.   
Bearing all these factors in mind, the misconduct 
under this charge, you would in isolation, would 
probably 
be 
specifically 
graved 
to 
warrant 
a 
sanction, a severe dismissal on the first offence.” 
10 
 
And that is what he then finds. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that at page 83, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   84. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   84. 
CHAIRPERSON:   84.  Okay.  Okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That then ties in Mr Todd with the 
evidence 
that 
you 
gave 
that 
the 
chairperson 
of 
the 
disciplinary inquiry right at the beginning, quoted that 
passage and give the chairperson a judgment.   
20 
 
I think it is from the NNAC’s judgment in De Beers, 
where the point was made that dismissal is not about 
retribution.   
 
It 
is 
really 
about 
the 
sensible 
response 
to 
risk 
management. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 115 of 224 
 
 
And here, the chairperson, like in relation to the 
previous finding in regard to sanction, makes the point that it 
would be a harder call to expect Transnet to keep someone 
as a CEO in these sorts of circumstances.   
 
Is that correct? 
MR TODD:   Yes, that is essentially what he was saying. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then when we deal with charge 4, 
unwarranted criticism of the Transnet... oh, sorry.  Of 
Transnet and its executives.   
 
If I could just direct your attention to the top of page 85 
10 
where it is recorded that: 
“Gama’s 
public 
statements 
demonstrate 
without 
doubt that there has been a total breakdown in trust 
and confidence between the parties.” 
 
Is that correct? 
MR TODD:   Yes, that was the conclusion he reached.  On 
grounds, I think.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if you to page 88, just above 
paragraph 60, the chairperson of the inquiry finds: 
“Transnet submits that no employment relationship 
20 
can continue to exist in the circumstances of this 
public attack on its executives and on Transnet 
itself.   
In short, whilst it is his evidence on this aspect set 
out above, is overwhelming and is uncontradicted. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 116 of 224 
 
This charge goes to the heart of Transnet’s loss of 
faith in Gama and there can be no doubt that 
dismissal is the only appropriate penalty for Gama’s 
conduct under this fourth charge.” 
 
You confirm that? 
MR TODD:   Yes, that is what he found.  And again, you 
know, it is... it seems to me to be clear that when a senior 
person and you hold a senior position in the organisation, in 
this case not on the board itself. 
 
But typically managers, a chief executive officer of a 
10 
division of this size, holds judiciary responsibilities towards 
the company to launch in defence of your own. 
 
Because you feel that you should not be charged with 
misconduct onto an attack against the company and its 
leadership, is completely at odds with your DG’s to the 
employer. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR 
TODD:   It 
is 
incompatible 
with... 
completely 
incompatible and at odds with those duties.  So I think it 
would be a welcome change in our...  
20 
 
The culture of our public live if we found executive 
responding to this sort of situation in a more measured way 
without going onto the attack against the employer that they 
serve.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And I guess when you have attacked 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 117 of 224 
 
senior executives, your colleagues like that for doing their 
job to bring disciplinary charges against you where they 
bona fide believe that there were proper grounds to do so 
and you attack them.  
 
And you attack them publicly as people who were not 
bona fide in doing what they are doing but who were part of 
an agenda against you to drop you from appointment as 
Group CEO.   
 
What you are actually saying when you make that 
criticism is.  They know that they have got no case against 
10 
me.  They are doing this for other purposes, agendas. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But later on when you admit that you are 
guilty of exactly the acts of misconduct that they brought 
against you, it raises question about you. 
MR TODD:   Yes, about your judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   About your judgment. 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, you have attacked these people, 
your colleagues as pursuing some agenda against you in 
20 
bringing these charges but later on you actually accept that 
you are guilty of all these three charges.   
 
The only thing that you are complaining about is 
sanction.  Ja, it is proper in that situation to ask the 
question, you know, how is your judgment?   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 118 of 224 
 
 
And all of that would be things that I would imagine 
would be relevant if and when the same employer is asked to 
take you back. 
MR TODD:   Well, yes Chairperson because that is one of 
the questions that is always at issue here is.  Can this 
relationship continue?  What will happen if in future a board 
or colleagues raise with Mr Gama serious concerns about his 
conduct?   
 
Is this... this is how he appears to react or articulate.  
And so that is the problem is that you effectively poison the 
10 
relationship and cause a breakdown in confidence that that 
is how you are going to, you know, that you will behave as 
an executive should in the future. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually, it is raises other questions too 
even in terms of people under you.  If you are taking back.  
If you want to discipline people who need to be acceptable to 
you for them to start accusing you of all kinds of things, 
when all you are doing is, you genuinely believe there should 
be charges against them.   
 
Will you say:  Okay, this is acceptable because I have 
20 
done the same thing to other people.  Okay Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you Chairperson.  Suppose 
I just wanted you to confirm this.  It should not be lost from 
sight that Mr Gama was a Divisional CEO and this charge 
relates to an attack on the Group Executive and the Group 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 119 of 224 
 
Board. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The chairperson of the disciplinary 
then makes his recommendations.  That you find at page 88.  
I think Mr Todd you have already dealt with this.  You have 
told the Chairperson that he recommended dismissal in 
respect of each isolated charge and more so collectively. 
MR TODD:   Yes, correct.  Each of the charges viewed in 
isolation and the appropriate sanction is dismissal. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And as we have seen, in relation to 
10 
the fourth charge, he had found that the only appropriate 
penalty was dismissal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So effectively, was he saying.  You cannot 
really impose any other sanction for this kind of conduct.  
Dismissal is the only one that would be appropriate.  Is that 
what he was saying in effect? 
MR TODD:   Yes, it seems to go far and he goes further than 
say:  I have hesitated.  I am in two minds.  This could go 
either way.   
 
But I think on a balance, it is... dismissal would be 
20 
appropriate.  It is not that kind of finding.  It is a finding 
which is very unequivocal in respect of each of the charges. 
 
And then very decisive as regards to accumulative 
consequence.  I think that is very clear from his decision 
making. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 120 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   In the next part of your report at page 
89, you will deal with dismissal and dispute referred to the 
Transnet Bargaining Council.  You have already given that 
evidence.   
 
Could I perhaps then direct your attention to the heading 
towards the foot of the page, Gama’s weak prospects of 
success in the Bargaining Council and arbitration.   
 
Could you please take the Chairperson through those 
paragraphs  In particular, 65 and 66. 
10 
MR TODD:   Yes.  I must just say, this largely repeats what 
I... we had communicated on the 24 t h of January in the letter 
that I referred to earlier when we had been instructed to 
postpone the arbitration pending settlement discussions. 
 
And so it was again at the end of this report to the 
board.  I was not sure.   
 
I had no answer to the letter or further indication that 
our letter which we wanted the board to hear and receive 
what our views were around prospects of success. 
 
We did not know whether they had landed and so I 
20 
thought it important to repeat what I had said in that letter 
about prospects of success. 
 
And so really repeating... some of it is verbatim what 
was said out in that letter that the legal team including 
senior counsel believes that the sanction of dismissal will be 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 121 of 224 
 
found by the agreed Bargaining Council arbitrator to have 
been a first sanction. 
 
And in addition, the additional point about Gama’s 
dishonest evidence, we made again.  And then further 
considerations.  There were two additional points, I think, 
that we made here. 
 
The point... oh, sorry.  Well, actually, there are some 
additional points that we then added here and they were 
these.   
 
The GNS contract which had been approved by Gama 
10 
had resulted in Transnet instituting civil proceedings for 
repayment of the total amount of R 95 million. 
 
The fact of the matter is that that irregular contract 
which 
purportedly 
was 
supposedly 
was 
authorised 
for 
R 18 million, very quickly ramped up, doubled in size in 
March, two or three months later under the watchful eye of 
Mr Senamela. 
 
And a few months later in the following year, it got 
ramped up again so that the amounts being paid monthly to 
the security company had grown to and was... it reached 
20 
R 95 million in just over two years.   
 
And Transnet had looked at that.  We advised on it.  We 
sought advice from counsel and believed that there were 
grounds to the cover or seek repayment. 
 
And so civil litigation had been instituted but... and 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 122 of 224 
 
criminal charges had been laid in respect of that contract.   
 
So we wanted to say to the board:  Please know there 
are consequences of the comeback that Mr Gama has been 
dismissed for including this civil litigation, potential criminal 
proceedings, and do not overlook that. 
 
We reiterated the point about the PFMA.  The Public 
Finance Management Act.  That these were obligations to 
take disciplinary steps in cases like this. 
 
And 
then 
the 
point 
about 
consistency 
and 
which 
Chairperson, I think, you raised that just now.  If you say 
10 
internally that for conduct of this kind which this chairperson, 
Advocate Antrobus holds this view. 
 
But that actually is okay.  Then you were sending a 
message about future treatment of similar conduct which 
says:  We will...  
 
I did not know what was being proposed at that point in 
time.  But whatever you settle, people will then expect, this 
is the standard that Transnet is setting for its senior 
executives as they go forward. 
 
And not just for all of them.  I mean, that would apply to 
20 
everybody, you know.  In particular, if you... whatever 
standard you now set for a senior person like this, he is 
going... you are going to be held to in future and expected to 
be held.  You should be held to it. 
 
So that was a big worry about, let us call it an easy way 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 123 of 224 
 
out for Transnet here.  That they are reacting under the 
Public Finance Management Act. 
 
They are setting a standard.  They got to be careful.  
And we then made the point that there would have to be 
compelling reasons not to abide by the outcome of the 
properly constituted disciplinary inquiry. 
 
It is also... there is a public law element to this.  We 
have authorised, delegated, mandated and it has been 
conducted properly. 
 
And before we decide that we are not going to follow 
10 
that, there have to be a very, very good reason.  And we 
then again said that similarly, the outcome of the Bargaining 
Council are the impression.   
 
We have not arrived yet but we fully expected that the 
Bargaining Council would confirm the decision.  So, yes.  
Those were just points that we thought it important to bring 
to the attention of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you ultimately... I know you still 
go to the issue of the settlement and the reinstatement.  
When Transnet had to consider the issue of resettling the 
20 
matter or reinstating Mr Gama.   
 
One of the things that it would have had to consider is 
how much trouble it had gone to, to try and make sure that 
Mr 
Gama 
had 
been 
subjected 
to 
a 
proper 
and 
fair 
disciplinary process.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 124 of 224 
 
 
And obviously, the money that had been spent on the 
lawyers and the arbitrator to do that.  Because I mean, if this 
was an... I am saying arbitrator, I mean chairperson of a 
disciplinary inquiry.   
 
If this was... it seems this inquiry took days in terms of 
the actual hearing.  That is almost like a big trial, civil trial 
or criminal trial.  That must have cost Transnet quite a lot of 
money.   
 
So when you decide as Transnet not to follow the 
outcome of that very independent process, you have got 
10 
think carefully about that.   
 
Because you have spent so much money and if you do 
not have... if there is no criticism, justified criticism of how 
that process was conducted, you are going to have to 
answer why you did not follow it. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR TODD:   I agree, Chairperson.  In simple terms.  
Transnet had gone to great lengths and it was much more 
difficult than it should have been but it had gone to... it 
20 
take... it had gone through great lengths to establish the 
standard of conduct it expected.   
 
And so, to just over to... you have to be very careful that 
you do not... for all the reasons you are going chairperson 
but also you would have to have compelling reasons to 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 125 of 224 
 
depart from that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  H’m.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, if we could back to your 
affidavit at page 54 of Bundle 3.  Having now dealt with 
Annexure A.  Pick up at paragraph 26.  Did you ever receive 
any response to your report or any enquiry in relation to your 
report? 
MR TODD:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Were you involved in Mr Gama’s 
matter at all after that? 
10 
MR TODD:   No.  Nobody came back with questions, queries, 
points of clarification or asked us just to brief anybody else 
beyond that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you go on to say that you then 
came to learn from public reporters that Mr Gama had been 
reinstated? 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you then say, you have been 
provided with a copy of the settlement agreement that you 
noted it was signed by Mr Mkwanazi.  You do not know 
20 
whether the board was involved in taking the decision.   
 
Perhaps I could ask you to expand upon paragraph 30 
where 
you 
talk 
about 
a 
complete 
capitulation 
in 
the 
negotiation. 
MR TODD:   Yes.  Yes, I have since been provided with 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 126 of 224 
 
documents.  Been provided by Transnet, the document 
showing a process under which that decision appears to 
have been... the route it followed.  I just make that point.  So 
when I deposed to this affidavit, I have not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   Since then, I have.  But yes, as regards to the 
settlement agreement itself.  I mean, I think it is fair to 
describe it as a complete capitulation.   
 
And in fact, as I point out here, Transnet went further 
than the absolute best case that Mr Gama could have got in 
10 
the arbitration. 
 
So in the arbitration that had just been postponed.  If 
assume I and the rest of the legal team responsible for 
advising Transnet, had got this completely wrong and Mr 
Gama had won his case at the Bargaining Council.  He could 
have secured retrospectively reinstatement.   
 
So by giving him retrospective reinstatement, Transnet 
agreed to give him the best possible outcome that he could 
conceivable had got. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR TODD:   So even if one assumes that this is one of those 
hard cases that was evenly done.  Transnet abandoned its 
half of the odds in which it might have prevailed and decided 
simply to give in to what Mr Gama was seeking in the 
arbitration. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 127 of 224 
 
 
So 
that 
is 
the 
first 
point 
about 
retrospective 
reinstatement.  And then there are other elements of it.  I 
mean, there are agreements to pay costs that I can talk 
about.   
 
But I mean, in essence, in a Bargaining Council 
arbitration, it is most unusual for a Bargaining Council 
arbitrator to award costs. 
 
It would normally only do so, an arbitrator to show real 
disapproval of a party in labour arbitration.  It is just part of 
the culture of the dispute resolution that parties should have 
10 
access and should not be burdened unnecessarily with 
costs. 
 
And the amount of costs that if you were in fact awarded 
costs in a Bargaining Council arbitration is extremely limited.  
It would be... it is... they are normally taxed on a 
magistrate’s court tariff which makes the difference. 
 
And so in general, the best case scenario for Mr Gama if 
Transnet’s legal team had things completely wrong, was that 
he would be reinstated retrospectively and in the most 
unusual circumstances, get a very limited cost order in a 
20 
Bargaining Council. 
 
But instead, Transnet actually agreed to reverse even 
the orders that it had been made in its own favour in the high 
court litigation. 
 
So whereas Mr Gama had completely unjustifiable 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 128 of 224 
 
approached the court and criticised and attacked Transnet in 
the way that he had done, completely unjustified had been 
under a court order, ordered to pay Transnet’s costs for 
doing so. 
 
Transnet in this agreement, turned out on its head and 
said do not worry.  Even though it did not say it expressly, I 
think it was implicit.  Do not worry.  You do not need to pay 
our costs after all. 
 
And not only that.  We will pay 75% of yours in the high 
court litigation.  So we will actually pay for the pleasure of 
10 
having had you bring completely unjustified litigation against 
us. 
 
Well, that was more than a capitulation.  That was a 
capitulation with a whole lot of benefits.  And the most 
extraordinary thing about it to us at the time when we - well, 
certainly when I learnt of this – is that there was simply... it 
seemed to suggest a degree of bargaining power or some 
decision making ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   ...that is completely unrelated to ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, to the merits. 
MR TODD:   ...the merits of the... of what... of the competing 
contentions in the dispute between the parties.  And that is a 
mystery that I cannot answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, you... I think you are right about that.  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 129 of 224 
 
It is a very strange settlement agreement.  But before one 
goes further.  You were talking... you were saying that.  Well, 
if Transnet reinstated Mr Gama with full retrospectivity, they 
would be giving him... they would have given him the best 
that he could ever think of.  And I am putting it in my own 
words. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of getting in the arbitration.  You said 
something about costs or maybe you do add costs but let me 
ask this question.  You have been a labour lawyer, a 
10 
specialist in labour law for many years as you have 
indicated. 
 
On the facts of this case where he himself was admitting 
that he had been correctly found guilty of this three acts of 
misconduct what I think most people would regard as serious 
acts of misconduct. 
 
They might not have regard than as serious.  I do not 
know.  But serious acts of misconduct.  Was it even able that 
any arbitrator even if he or she found that dismissal was not 
an appropriate sanction, that in addition, he or she would 
20 
order Transnet... she could order Transnet to pay costs, 
given the culture on labour law matters and arbitration and 
dismissals on your experience? 
MR TODD:   Chairperson, it would have been a most unusual 
outcome of the arbitration ...[intervenes]  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 130 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   ...to have a retrospective reinstatement order in 
those circumstances. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   It is difficult to... that question is influenced of 
course by well what would the arbitrator be finding and what 
would be unfairness that the arbitrator was finding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  H’m, h’m. 
MR TODD:   But at the most... at the worst, it would say:  
Transnet, we accept that Advocate Antrobus... we accept all 
10 
of his credentials and there is no legitimate criticisms of his 
views on this matter.  And we accept that you acted on his 
views.  But I am finding that it went too far. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR TODD:   That is all an arbitrator could have done to find 
in favour of Mr Gama.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR TODD:   It is most common in circumstances like that for 
an arbitrator potentially to grant a prospective reinstatement.  
So if an arbitrator feels this person should not have lost their 
20 
job.   
 
But yes, they actually were guilty of various acts of 
misconduct which they did not admit at the time and now 
admits.   
 
Actually, 
it 
would 
be 
most 
unusual 
to 
have 
a 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 131 of 224 
 
reinstatement in those circumstances. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR TODD:   But even if there was.  To reinstate 
retrospectively and say:  I am going to treat this as if this 
never happened in itself.  Chairperson, so the prospects of 
that happening were very slight.  And the prospects of that 
decision was small.  And the prospects of that remedy were 
even smaller.  A fraction of a fraction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  That is fine.  I hope Mr 
Mkwanazi will come tomorrow and tell me why I should think 
10 
that was thinking of it.   
 
An arbitrator in a labour matter dealing with a senior 
executive who has been found guilty and accepts that he 
was found guilty of these types of misconduct had the 
possibility of not only getting reinstatement but also Transnet 
being ordered to pay costs.   
MR TODD:   But mister... with respect Mr Chairperson, this... 
Mr Gama could not have been reinstated because anybody 
thought that was a likely outcome of the arbitration. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR TODD:   I say that because, why not let the arbitration 
takes its course?   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR TODD:   Even if you only believe you had a small chance 
of winning, ...[intervenes]  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 132 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   ...you gave it up for nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR TODD:   So there was no... it is very difficult to work out 
why ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The reasoning. 
MR TODD:   ...that... it could have been a response.  
Because it was never a rational response to the risk of the 
matter.   
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, it is possible.  I mean, you made 
10 
the point earlier on that.  It is like there was some power 
somewhere ...[intervenes]  
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ... in terms of bargaining.  Well, it may be 
that the fact that settlement negotiations were decided upon 
by Transnet without Transnet talking to you when you were 
the attorney... their attorneys who had been handling this 
matter for about two years or more. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe it says something about whether 
20 
the issues of the merits... whether the merits or the 
prospects of success was a relevant factor or not.   
 
But I heard evidence yesterday and there is something 
that might go towards to what you are saying.  Mr Mapoma 
said that after Mr Mkwanazi had a meeting with mister... a 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 133 of 224 
 
one-on-one meeting with Mr Gama talking settlements. 
 
Mr Mkwanazi reported to him that the two of them 
could not agree on a settlement because Mr Gama, instead 
of asking for reinstatement to the position from which he had 
been, namely CEO of TFR.  He was actually wanting to be 
appointed as Group CEO of Transnet so the question that 
arises is how does an employee who has been dismissed 
from the position of CEO of TFR and has referred a dispute 
about being reinstated to that position to the bargaining 
council come to the negotiations for settlement and 
10 
demand even a higher position?  How is that – what is it 
that makes him even put that on the table?    
So those questions arise as one seeks to try and 
make sense of what the board of Transnet did in this case 
in reaching the settlement that it reached on these terms.  
When one looks at all of these things and ask questions 
and answers are difficult to find.  But Mr Mkhwanazi will 
come and he might well be able to throw light on some of 
the things that at stage I might have difficulty with and 
maybe he will be able to explain them and one will see 
20 
matters the way they same them.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  Mr Todd, I just want 
to back to the issue of costs …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, before you do that, Mr 
Myburgh, I have just noted – you will remember that before 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 134 of 224 
 
lunch at some stage I asked you, Mr Todd, whether in the 
statement, Mr Gama’s statement that he relied upon at the 
bargaining council to set out his case whether the grounds 
of unfairness that he relied on were articulated clearly, I 
actually see that they were articulated at paragraphs 4.1 to 
4.6 of that statement.  The statement starts at page 98 and 
goes up to page 101.  I thought I would just mention that  
for what it is worth, that I have identified that he did set 
out certain grounds there.  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Todd, when it comes 
10 
to costs in the CCMA or in a bargaining council, in your 
experience how often are they granted and what is the 
scale upon which costs are granted? 
MR TODD:   Very rarely, normally only in circumstances 
where a party has behaved abusively.  In some way the 
language is frivolously or vexatiously.  That is normally the 
only time when costs are awarded in those sorts of 
proceedings and when they are awarded on a Magistrate’s 
Court tariff.  I think there may be a special tariff now but 
essentially at that level it is not considered appropriate to 
20 
award costs at a High Court level most often because the 
litigation is not involving high – it is not going to involve 
high stakes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And would those costs run from the 
time of the referral, would they be costs in relation to the 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 135 of 224 
 
arbitration? 
MR TODD:   Ja, costs in a bargaining council dispute might 
include completing a referral form and serving it but that is 
– those are minimal. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   So really the only cost that you would expect 
would be preparation for a trial, for a hearing and the 
hearing itself. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps this goes without saying but 
does a bargaining council arbitrator have the power to 
10 
award an employee costs of his disciplinary hearing? 
MR TODD:   No, he would have no such power. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And presumably your answer would 
be the same if I asked whether he or she would have the 
power to disturb a High Court costs order? 
MR TODD:   He would have no such power to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually, I have not checked Mr Gama’s 
statement or referral to the bargaining council in regard to 
this but I have a suspicion that he did not ask for any costs 
in the arbitration because I think it would be unusual for 
20 
anybody to ask costs but maybe he did.  I did not seem to 
see anything in his referral that talked about him asking 
the bargaining council to award him costs. 
MR TODD:   Chairperson, there is a document missing 
which is a set of submissions that his counsel made in 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 136 of 224 
 
October. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR TODD:    And it is possible that his counsel including a 
request for costs.  I do not recall but …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
but 
that 
would 
be 
in 
the 
submissions. 
MR TODD:   In his submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As opposed to the actual referral 
documents. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  It would be like an afterthought. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But assuming that Mr Gama had 
gone to the arbitration and his position was consistent that 
he was prepared to accept the final written warning, what 
would the prospects have been of him getting any costs? 
MR TODD:   Negligible. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   I do not know if one can say zero, I think it is 
zero. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I can hear Mr Todd is very cautious. 
MR TODD:   Zero. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   We have got the zero. 
MR TODD:   Zero. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So …[intervenes] 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 137 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is not thinking of adjectives like 
unthinkable. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, Mr Todd, perhaps whilst we are 
on the issue of a final written warning, you do deal with 
that at page 55 of your affidavit, paragraph 30(b).  Would 
you speak to that please? 
MR TODD:   Yes.  Well, this was not in a bargaining 
council but this was the final written warning that the board 
decided was an appropriate sanction. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR TODD:   So effectively what the board says is there is 
admitted serious misconduct, it is – we have decided that 
cumulatively that misconduct should produce a final written 
warning from Mr Gama.  A warning – a final written warning 
is – look, giving very senior executives final written 
warnings in itself is quite an odd thing but it is a competent 
message to send because it is basically saying you are 
actually on – borrowed might be the wrong thing but put 
another foot wrong of this kind and you are going to be 
dismissed.   
20 
So it means that they must have done something 
very serious to put them in that but you are just hesitating 
before saying that you are going to dismiss them but what 
you are trying to do is influence their conduct going 
forward.  For some reason what the board thought was 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 138 of 224 
 
appropriate was to give a final written warning that was 
valid for six months as at the date of his dismissal.   
So they welcome Mr Gama back saying you have 
already served your warning time.  So you are no longer on 
a final written warning.  It was a very strange thing to do, it  
was very strange message to send and it went to the 
question of consistency of future conduct as well.  It sort 
of said actually Mr Gama is back in full sway with no real 
consequence for his conduct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if as a result of a disciplinary 
10 
hearing an employee is given a final written warning and 
continues working  - let us say the final written warning is 
for six months or one year, during that period the employee 
knows that there is an axe hanging over their head.  You 
go through that situation but where you say we give you a 
final written warning but it started working the day you left 
the company and it lapsed while you were out of the 
company, the employee never goes through – there is no 
risk, never goes through that – when he comes back as in 
the case of Mr Gama it seems to me he comes back as an 
20 
employee without any disciplinary – without any final 
written warning.  Is that your understanding as well? 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chair, I would agree, Chairperson.  And 
the other point is that for a senior executive to be told that 
your conduct is so serious, in our view, that we will dismiss 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 139 of 224 
 
you if it occurs again but only if that is in the first six 
months.  Even the principle that would say to a chief 
executive that that kind of – that message that we are 
communicating to you is only valid for a limited period of 
time, is just a very strange thing, it just literally shows they 
wanted, in my view, they wanted to put something down to 
say there was a consequence applied because otherwise, 
short of that, he was admittedly guilty of serious negligent 
conduct 
described 
by 
the 
Chairperson 
and 
had 
no 
consequence of whatsoever.  I mean, that is the practical 
10 
effect. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
But 
practically, 
there 
was 
no 
consequence for him. 
MR TODD:   No, there was no consequence ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was imposed other than that for the 
period that he was dismissed he was dismissed as in – but 
otherwise in terms of sanction.  And then, of course, when 
he was reinstated then he was given full back pay and all 
benefits that kind of undid whatever the dismissal had 
done. 
20 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, of course, then I suppose it 
would follow that insofar as he applied for the position of 
Group Executive of Transnet, he would then be treated as 
someone with a clean record. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 140 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   Yes, that is so.  What the board was saying is 
we will treat you as having a clear record. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   From the date you come back.  Quite, that is 
what they were suggesting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then perhaps before we move on, if 
a bargaining council arbitrator had found that the sanction 
of dismissal was inappropriate that a final written warning 
was warranted, when would that warning have run from 
typically? 
10 
MR 
TODD: 
 
 
No, 
that 
would 
run 
from 
after 
his 
reinstatement if he was reinstated. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, perhaps I could take you to 
page 56 of your affidavit and to paragraph 31.  I think it is 
something that you have already mentioned where you say: 
“It is manifestly clear, however, that the terms of 
the settlement agreement were materially adverse 
to 
Transnet 
and 
they 
bore 
no 
resemblance 
whatsoever to a proper or reasonable assessment 
of the respective legal positions of Transnet on the 
20 
one hand and Mr Gama on the other.” 
MR TODD:   Yes, I stand by that statement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you at paragraph 32 say 
that 
the 
settlement 
agreement 
was 
concluded 
approximately three weeks after your report, it is possible 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 141 of 224 
 
that legal advice was obtained from other sources during 
that period that was manifestly different from our advice or 
alternatively that legal advice was considered irrelevant. 
 
Have you in working up this case been exposed to 
the documents that are before the Commission, have you 
come across any materially different legal advice? 
MR TODD:   No, Chairperson, I have been shown in 
consequence of after deposing to this affidavit and perhaps 
because I raised the question seems to me we give our 
advice, hear nothing and then learn of a capitulation 
10 
settlement.   
 
So the question is well, was there different advice 
or was the advice regarded as irrelevant and in the 
consequence of that we have learnt that advice was given 
from – a very detailed piece of advice on the procedure 
that was followed, was given by another firm and their 
conclusion was – and that was – it does not matter whether 
it is a big or a small firm but a very reputable firm, Webber 
Wentzel gave legal advice which confirmed that the 
procedure was fair and, as I understand it, I have seen 
20 
correspondence from Deneys Reitz, which was the firm 
most immediately advising Mr Mkhwanazi on this question 
that it also regarded the dismissal to have been fair. 
 
So it does appear very clear to me that no legal 
advice contradicted what we were saying to the company.  I 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 142 of 224 
 
did not – I am not aware of anybody saying that there was 
any different assessment of the legal position which again 
seems to indicate to me that whether the strength of 
Transnet’s legal position or otherwise was not considered 
relevant to the decision to reinstate Mr Gama. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at paragraph 33 you say that: 
“The decision to conclude the agreement and the 
terms upon which it was concluded could not 
rationally have been motivated by Transnet’s legal 
position in the arbitration…” 
10 
The point you make now.   
“…by 
Transnet’s 
financial 
interest 
or 
by 
the 
requirements of good governance.” 
And then you redress each of those points. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think you have probably dealt with 
the prospects of success issue.  Is there anything you want 
to highlight in that paragraph 33(a)? 
MR TODD:   Yes, I think the only point that I would 
reiterate 
is 
that 
if 
people 
were 
concerned 
that 
the 
20 
possibility 
that 
a 
bargaining 
council 
arbitrator 
might 
reinstate Mr Gama, why fulfil that possibility voluntarily?   
In other words, if you feared that it was a possibly even or 
probability, why not let the bargaining council arbitrator 
decide it and then say we will accept the outcome whatever 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 143 of 224 
 
it is?  In other words, it was – it actually clear to me that 
the decision-makers did not want the arbitration to take 
place because the likelihood was that his dismissal would 
be found fair and that would make it impossible – if 
Transnet won the arbitration, it would have been very 
difficult to see on what basis Gama [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It would have been a disaster. 
MR TODD:   And so consequently it strongly supports an 
inference that a decision had been taken to reinstate Mr 
10 
Gama and what was happening now were arrangements to 
try and make that happen, not the other way around. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what you have just said, it is quite 
important, Mr Todd, and maybe there is merit in it because 
when you think about the merits of Transnet’s case it is 
difficult to rationally conclude that a settlement that 
included 
reinstatement, 
particularly 
fully 
retrospective 
reinstatement was justified and then I am not even talking 
about the costs, you know, that is just something else. 
MR TODD:   Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So …[intervenes] 
MR TODD:   If the – sorry… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so – but do not forget your point.  
Since I got to know about this settlement I keep on trying 
to see whether there is a way of seeing this settlement 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 144 of 224 
 
from another angle and not in this manner that I am seeing 
it.  I am trying to see if there is a way of seeing it from the 
angle of the board and saying okay, no, maybe I can see 
this, I can see that, and it is so difficult.  But Mr 
Mkhwanazi will come here tomorrow and maybe he will be 
able to say that.   
 
But when you think about the merits of the case, the 
prospect of success, it is difficult to understand it and then 
when you go to the issue of them paying costs, it just 
complicates the whole thing further.   So there may well be 
10 
– it may well be that the question of the prospects of 
success, the strength of Transnet case was simply not a 
relevant factor for the board.   
 
But 
I 
know 
that 
yesterday 
Mr 
Mapoma 
gave 
evidence which said that at some stage Mr – at some 
meeting which involved Deneys Reitz or Norton Rose, Mr 
Mkhwanazi said that if he could get an opinion, a legal 
opinion that said there was some unfairness in the 
dismissal of Mr Gama, he could then – he thought he could 
succeed in persuading the rest of the board members to 
20 
settle or to reinstate Mr Gama and I said to Mr Mapoma it 
gives me the impression of somebody who is keen to just 
find something to cling onto in order to justify the 
reinstatement.  Yes, you wanted to make some point, Mr 
Todd? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 145 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   Yes.  Chairperson, just on that point, I have 
not seen, unless I have not been shown any legal opinion 
that says there was some unfairness towards – any legal 
opinion that there was some unfairness towards Mr Gama 
that could have prompted the board to make that decision. 
 
But the point really is this.  If the board’s mindset 
was if Mr Gama is reinstated, well, we can work with him, 
we do not mind him very much but let us see what 
happens, the logical would be to do, would be to let the 
arbitration decide and then you say well, either we will win 
10 
the arbitration, as our lawyers say we will, or if we do not, 
we will make do with it, it is fine. 
 
But the fact that they decided not to run arbitration 
and then to capitulate indicates that actually they wanted 
Mr Gama to be reinstated irrespective of the outcome of 
the 
arbitration. 
 
Did 
not 
matter 
what 
outcome 
the 
arbitration was going to deliver, they wanted Mr Gama to 
be back in the business.  That is the only logical 
conclusion to draw in these circumstances, with respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And, of course, once – if that was their 
20 
position, the question that arises which out to have 
troubled a board like Transnet board, would be how will we 
ever be able to discipline any other executive if similar 
things happen?  How will we ever be able to dismiss any 
executive or even lower-ranking employees and officials if 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 146 of 224 
 
we reinstate a senior executive who accepts that he was 
correctly found guilty of these very serious acts of 
misconduct because every other executive, every other 
employee will say well, no problem, what I have done is 
less serious than what Mr Gama did, so you cannot fire me. 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, at page 58 you then deal 
with financial interests followed by governance.  Do you 
want to reiterate that? 
10 
MR TODD:   Yes, financial interest really – just the point 
was the settlement was much worse for Transnet than the 
worst case scenario in a litigation and financially.   
So if you are the stewards of -  you govern – if you 
are on the board or you are the Chief Executive Officer, on 
what possible basis would you do that?  I do not know.  It 
was not in the financial interests of Transnet. 
And third, as regards governance, we have been 
through it at length, I mean, I have thought about this a lot 
because it goes back to the former Minister Hogan’s – 
20 
exactly 
what 
she 
wanted 
was 
levels 
of 
governance 
appropriate to manage massive capital expenditure and 
infrastructure development.  What – who were the people 
we need to steer this ship?  And at every level, when you 
read the Chairperson’s findings and his reasons for 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 147 of 224 
 
deciding that dismissal is the appropriate sanction, it is all 
about what expectations Transnet can have of its senior 
executives 
and 
effectively 
the 
settlement 
– 
the 
reinstatement of Mr Gama completely unravelled all of 
those considerations.   
So nobody could be sitting there saying I think what 
we need to do to improve governance is bring Mr Gama 
back.  It  could not have been what they were trying to look 
after.  They were not trying to look after good governance 
and how to get the right people in the right places.  That 
10 
consideration was not there either. 
So when – if you discount those three, your legal 
risk and your financial interests and your governance 
considerations, I am left without thinking of a single reason 
why a board would do this.   
I do not – I cannot think of a single reason other 
than – I cannot think of a reason why a board acting in a 
manner which is in the best interests of the company would 
ever do it which must then, as matter of logic, lead to the 
conclusion that the reason lies elsewhere. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Well, it is difficult to look at 
how the board handled Mr Gama’s matter, this board that 
reinstated and reinstated him and then later on promoted 
him to the position of Group Chief Executive of Transnet.  
Difficult for me to listen to all of this evidence without 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 148 of 224 
 
remembering Mr Koloane in relation to the Waterkloof 
plane landing.  I heard the evidence, I heard evidence last 
year, I think, where he – it was accepted that he – or 
rather, he had said he had been instructed by the former 
President, Mr Zuma, or Mr Zuma wanted everything to be 
done to facilitate the landing of that Gupta plane and then 
later on he said no, he had lied to involve – to say Mr 
Zuma knew about that, Mr Zuma did not know about that.  
 
But then – and he had been found guilty in a 
disciplinary enquiry.  Strangely, he was not dismissed, you 
10 
know, but then in a few months time, maybe nine months, 
he was promoted to the position of ambassador on the 
recommendation of the Minister of International Relations 
to Mr Zuma and Mr Zuma appointed him an ambassador 
and at that time my question was, I would have thought 
that Mr Zuma would have been very unhappy about this 
person if this person had lied about him like that but now 
he was – this person was being promoted. 
 
So here you have this situation, Mr Gama is 
reinstated and later on he gets to be made Group Chief 
20 
Executive of Transnet.   
 
So when you keep on trying to understand some of 
these things you have challenges, you try to follow and you 
want to try and understand, you want to try and look at 
things from the point of view of other people involved so 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 149 of 224 
 
that you can end up with a balanced and correct view.  
Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Todd, at paragraph 
35, page 60, you in fact deal with this issue and you 
mention at (b) that Mr Gama went on, as we know, to 
become the Group Chief Executive and then in the balance 
of your affidavit you deal with the consequences of the 
decision to reinstate Mr Gama.  You see at the end of the 
text at paragraph 37 you say: 
“I do, however, have 
some knowledge 
of the 
10 
consequences of Mr Gama’s subsequently admitted 
misconduct in approving the appointment of GNS.” 
And then you set out some evidence in that regard over the 
space of two pages or so.  I think this is something you 
have already raised in your evidence.  Is there anything 
you wish to reiterate in that regard? 
MR TODD:   No – well, I will say this, Transnet had 
instituted proceedings, as I said, for just over R95 million 
for a repayment of the amounts it had paid to GNS, 
General Nyanda Security and one of the consequences of 
20 
reinstatement of Mr Gama – it may not be a consequence, 
you may say it was caused by something else, was that the 
management of TFR, now again led by Mr Gama, became – 
lukewarm would be probably the wrong word, became 
positively unenthusiastic about pursuing that litigation and 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 150 of 224 
 
in 
fact 
they 
came 
up 
with 
a 
number 
of 
different 
explanations why that litigation should no longer proceed 
and ultimately they persuaded further advisers, other 
outside legal advisers and the board to withdraw that 
litigation and not persist with it.  But that is an example of 
a consequence and I think I deal with that in a separate 
affidavit 
where 
effectively 
over 
a 
period 
of 
time 
management make points and it is under the leadership of 
Mr Gama.   
Mr Gama arranges for management to make a 
10 
presentation to the board saying that actually, Transnet got 
value for this contract.  And so whereas in his disciplinary 
proceedings Mr Gama said this was fishy and a scam, once 
he is reinstated the idea of persisting with this litigation to 
recover the 95 million would be deeply uncomfortable for 
Mr Gama and consequently, whether it is consequently or 
just a coincidence, for me, I do not accept that it was 
coincidentally, managers under Mr Gama’s authority then 
set up effectively obstacles to pursuing that litigation and 
ultimately produced a decision that the litigation should not 
20 
be proceeded with. 
But that is an example not just about governance 
generally but that decisions to in this case bring back a 
very senior leader and then escalate that leader within the 
business has very, very far-reaching governance very 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 151 of 224 
 
practical consequences for Transnet’s operations. 
So in that sense I suppose the only point I make, 
Chairperson, is that it is a matter of common sense.  These 
decisions, it is not reinstating a shop floor worker, not in 
any way to disrespect a shop floor worker but who is one 
of 50 people on the shop floor in a manufacturing facility, it 
is the Chief Executive of your largest  division.  So it has 
far-reaching consequences for the whole business. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd your second affidavit, that 
you find at page 156; you say at paragraph 4 that I have 
10 
been provided with a copy of an affidavit deposed to by Mr 
Mkwanazi on 31 August and have been requested to 
comment on the statements in paragraph 9 of that affidavit 
and the reference there to the concept of condonation of 
procurement irregularities. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    Now perhaps I could start by asking 
you to turn to Bundle 4 and to page 18, one eight.  Bundle 
4A,18.  Now Mr Todd you do in your affidavit and we will 
come to that in a moment analyse various statements made 
20 
in paragraphs 9.4 and 9.5, this is from Mr Mkwanazi’s 
affidavit. 
MR TODD:   Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And perhaps you can have regard to 
those paragraphs and then at the same time to your 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 152 of 224 
 
analysis in paragraph 5 of your affidavit.     
MR TODD:   Yes, I mean I was surprised to read this 
affidavit when I was provided with a copy of it and I noted 
in paragraph 9.4 Mr Mkwanazi’s says: 
“I 
personally 
fully 
agree 
with 
the 
disciplinary 
process and findings of the then Transnet board.” 
So he personally fully agreed with, associates himself with 
everything which advocate Antrebus has said it is what I 
understand him to be saying and then he says but the 
issue was that there is a process called condonation and 
10 
he then says in 9.5 that we as a board had to somehow try 
and deal with the Gama matter on the assumption that he 
would have been granted condonation had it been offered 
and therefore had to try and put him in a position that he 
could have been in had a condonation been offered.  So 
that didn’t make any sense to me for a number of reasons 
which I have explained but I can just summarise very 
briefly. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, please go ahead.  
MR TODD:   I mean the first point is that condonation as 
20 
the Transnet’s own internal document show is a procedure 
that 
is 
possible 
to 
avoid 
a 
finding 
of 
unauthorised 
expenditure when a person has exceeded his or her 
authority but there are good grounds for the expenditure 
and he or she approaches the person who has the authority 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 153 of 224 
 
and says I exceeded my authority will you agree that this is 
good expenditure.   
Now that is a simple example of when the concept 
of condonation going to the level which has the authority to 
ensure that you regularise something which where you 
have exceeded your authority.  It is completely different 
from the question of how blameworthy or culpable the 
employee 
was 
who 
exceeded 
authority. 
 
So 
if 
that 
employee had decided to do so deliberately ignoring 
knowing that he did not have authority but had decided to 
10 
ignore it and ask people to cover it up and later it was 
found out it is quite possible that expenditure could be 
regularised because the higher authority agrees that it is 
good expenditure but that you would discipline the person 
below who had knowingly exceeded their authority and had 
tried to hide the fact that they had done so.   
So in other words there is no relationship direct 
relationship between condoning unauthorised expenditure 
and whether you accept or do not accept the conduct or 
behaviour of the person who caused that expenditure to be 
20 
exceeded 
and 
I 
think 
that 
is 
absolutely 
clear 
from 
Transnet’s policies and it is completely clear.  In fact, even 
from Mr Mkwanazi’s affidavit himself where he at some 
point refers to some procurement which he considered 
ought to be condoned but he instructed that the people 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 154 of 224 
 
responsible be disciplined in consequence.   
So it really makes no sense to say we have – so the 
first point is condoning expenditure does not have anything 
to do with how culpable or blameworthy the conduct was of 
the person who caused it and then the second point is that 
- there are a few points but the second one which maybe 
most obvious none of the three instances of misconduct 
were in anyway suitable for condonation because if one 
starts with the fifty like new contract what had happened 
was a complete deviation from the board authorised 
10 
process which actually had to be unwound.   
In other words, the board far from saying it is okay 
let us leave this aside that you have implemented the fifty 
like new transaction in the very way that we said you must 
not and we will condone it.  No they actually unwound that 
and went back to their original – so there is nothing to 
condone irregular or an unauthorised expenditure in any 
case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if you condone you then leave 
as is, is it not? 
20 
MR TODD:   Yes, you really saying that the expenditure 
was properly incurred and it was authorised at the wrong 
level and in fact fifty like new misconduct had nothing to 
do with exceeding authority or irregular expenditure in that 
sense. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 155 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was like you defied the instruction of 
the board.    
MR TODD:   Correct you implemented…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say when you do this job this is the 
condition that you must comply with.   
MR TODD:   Yes, and it is ignored and in fact did exactly 
what the board did not want to happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR TODD:   And so there was nothing for the board then to 
condone that arrangement or if it had you would have 
10 
expected the board okay you disregarded us but we are 
happy with the arrangements you have set up we will leave 
them in place and in fact they would still be entitled to say 
but we are very upset that you have put us in this position 
and we going to charge you with misconduct.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it a conduct like that it is disobeying 
an instruction in some way or another.   
MR TODD:    Yes, I think that is how the board, how it was 
characterised and that is what was serious that is why that 
fifty like new contract was found to be serious misconduct 
20 
by Mr Gama and Chairperson you often do not know what 
all of the reasons are that underlie these things but the 
Transnet board was alerted to the risk that if you introduce 
a parallel set or yard workshop assembling our locomotives 
which we could be doing ourselves, there is another whole 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 156 of 224 
 
area where value leaks out of Transnet I am just putting it 
in plain words and that is what they did not want to happen 
and that is what Gama allowed to happen.   
So yes there is no question of condonation arises 
there.  As regards the GNS contract I have referred to how 
completely fundamentally fraudulent that contract and that 
procurement process was from the outset.   
It would never have qualified for condonation nor 
even did Mr Gama himself believe it because he called it a 
scam.  So there is no question of saying well could Mr 
10 
Gama have gone and said I exceeded my authority I have 
spent instead of R10million we actually spent R95million in 
two years, these put Transnet at a higher level approve  
that, he said it should never have incurred in the first 
place.  He said that he would never have approved a 
condonation in those circumstances and he should not 
have.   
So that case situation too so you could not have 
said oh well let us treat this as expenditure that was 
condoned 
and 
then 
wave 
Mr 
Gama 
contribution 
or 
20 
blameworthy conduct and the third thing of course had 
nothing to do with procurement at all the attack on 
Transnet and its executives unwarranted attacks on a team 
who had nothing to do with this.   
So for Mr Mkwanazi to say we were under a duty 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 157 of 224 
 
effectively to treat the conduct as all accepted by Transnet 
and the board there is no foundation in the policies nor any 
factual basis on any of the incidence of misconduct to 
justify that statement.  Yes, so I found it quite bewildering 
actually that he would suggest that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that was the second point and we 
will come to the detail in a moment, if you go to page 158 
you say that: 
“Condonation was a procurement process entirely 
distinct 
of 
the 
decision 
making 
about 
the 
10 
consequences.” 
You have dealt with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am sorry Mr Myburgh I am sorry.  
Mr Todd let me go back to your point that the third charge 
had nothing to do with procurement.  If the board used 
condonation as justification for saying that the appropriate 
sanction was a final written warning and condonation did 
not apply to the third charge, does it seem like therefore 
they can only be said to have applied that final written 
warning – they could only apply that final written warning 
20 
on whatever charge they believed related to procurement 
but it cannot be the third.  So even on their reasoning it 
means they did not give a sanction for the third.         
MR TODD:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So if they had given a sanction for the 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 158 of 224 
 
third were they going to give two final written warnings or 
would they have fired him?  
MR TODD:   Chairperson if condonation meant treat as if 
we treat it as it is all okay then you would not apply 
sanction at all but they did not do that they obviously 
thought that Mr Gama needed a sanction.  So it is not a 
plausible explanation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is difficult to explain.   
MR TODD:   But there is also a different reason I mean 
there is a more obvious reason why it is not plausible is 
10 
that I have been shown the memorandum that was 
prepared for Mr Mkwanazi to submit to the board meeting 
when Mr Gama when the board considered reinstatement 
and it makes no mention of this topic at all.  So as a matter 
of fact I mean I am not sure you cannot just decide as a 
board that you must grant condonation for these three acts 
of misconduct without this very discussion that we are 
having 
now 
and 
without 
some 
analysis 
and 
recommendation of how it applies in Mr Gama’s case but 
there was not anything like that.  So as a matter of fact it 
20 
seems 
to 
be 
something 
that 
Mr 
Mkwanazi 
has 
misremembered.     
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually as I read the Transnet policies 
or manual that has got something on condonation it seems 
that 
the 
employee 
has 
to 
apply 
for 
condonation 
or 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 159 of 224 
 
somebody 
must 
apply 
for 
condonation 
or 
request 
condonation and here it does not look like Mr Gama ever 
requested condonation in terms of what we have on 
records.   
MR TODD:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I would imagine and I seem to have 
come across something that suggested that even where 
condonation applies you do not get it for the asking and if 
that is so it would mean that there would have to be a 
motivation or why should condonation be granted in a 
10 
particular case and if that is so it does not look like the 
board had anything in front of it which motivated why 
condonation should be granted.         
MR TODD:   Ja, all of that is true Chairperson, all to the 
best of my knowledge all of what you have just said is 
correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Mr Myburgh.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  So your second 
point is that in none of the three instances of misconduct 
are capable of condonation.  Then you make two other 
20 
points which you expand upon later in your affidavit.  Third 
such contentions as Mr Gama sought to make during his 
disciplinary enquiry process concerning consistency of 
treatment were putting fairly, carefully fairly considered by 
the disciplinary Chairperson as appears from his lengthy 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 160 of 224 
 
finding.  So as I understand the point that you make is that 
the Chairperson considered this issue in any case.        
MR TODD:   Yes, I mean it had been raised as a 
preliminary point during the enquiry and in relation to 
sanction and what the Chairperson said or Mr Gama says 
there is inconsistency but there is no evidence of another 
set of similar never mind identical circumstances in which 
Transnet made different decisions or adopted a different 
approach to disciplining its employees from their approach 
adopted in Gama’s case.   
10 
So that is what the Chairperson was saying in 
Gama’s case and it is inconceivable that a board could 
conclude this but I mean this is about consistency now, I 
do not know it is inconceivable that a board could have 
decided that condonation is normally granted to other 
people it was not granted to Mr Gama therefore Mr Gama 
needs to be reinstated unless somebody had put in front of 
the board facts which said this is how we normally deal 
with this and here are other cases where we would deal 
with it in this way that would be what I would expect if the 
20 
board was going to be acting on that information.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually it says - one cannot stop 
picking up things that are difficult to follow here in this 
case.  I have not come across throughout all these bundles 
and a lot of documentation that the Commission obtained 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 161 of 224 
 
from Transnet and from your firm and from Deneys Reitz or 
Norton Rose, I have not come across any document 
whether memo or affidavit or a letter where Mr Gama or 
somebody on behalf of Mr Gama puts this case of 
condonation during the settlement negotiations, and says 
here is the motivation which one would if there had been 
such a document then one would say the board in pursuing 
this issue of condonation was acting as a result of this 
documentation that was furnished by Mr Gama or by his 
lawyers but it is difficult to see anything.   
10 
It is like it came from the board it came from Mr 
Mkwanazi and then it was pursued. 
MR TODD:   Yes, I mean Chairperson I have only seen - I 
have not seen any legal advice that suggests that this was 
a problem and I had seen the board memorandum that went 
- the note that was prepared by Mr Mapoma to the board it 
makes no mention of this topic at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR TODD:   And then there is later work done by Nkonki 
which was only commenced in January and had not been 
20 
reported until the middle of the year on an interim basis 
and then finally at the middle of the year which could not 
possibly have had a bearing on the decision that Mr 
Mkwanazi and the board were taking in February, middle of 
February 2011. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 162 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR TODD:   So it is very hard to believe that these are not 
– it is possible that as I say misremembered I think another 
board member also says that she thought this was the 
issue but it is difficult to see how it could have been if you 
see what documents were being presented to the board 
when it made the decision to reinstate Mr Gama.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course you might not be aware of this 
but I think Mr Myburgh is probably aware, the is an – oh in 
his affidavit well you would be aware as well because it is 
10 
Mr Mkwanazi’s affidavit to the Commission.   
One of the things he says is that he met with Mr 
Gigaba in October 2010, he had a meeting with Mr Gigaba 
in October 2010 and it is at that meeting that Mr Gigaba 
offered him the position of Chairperson of the board, of the 
new board that was going to be appointed for Transnet 
which he says he thought about and then later accepted.  
He says in that meeting Mr Gigaba mentioned certain 
matters which he asked or which he said he thought the 
new board must focus on or the Chairperson must focus 
20 
on.  One of the items he puts in his affidavit is that Mr 
Gigaba said he was concerned about procurement issues 
at Transnet 
and 
he 
said 
there 
is 
this 
thing 
called 
condonation at Transnet where deviation from procurement 
can be condoned.  He raised that issue and then we see 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 163 of 224 
 
that it seems when Mr Gama ultimately gets reinstated that 
is the issue relied upon to justify bringing him back, but we 
do have an affidavit, also that the commission of Mr 
Gigaba 
saying 
he 
played 
no 
role 
in 
the 
settlement 
agreement or relating to Mr Gama and his reinstatement 
although yesterday Mr Mopoma gave some evidence to say 
that the Mr Gigaba special advisor, Mr Mhlangu, put some 
pressure on him to say Transnet was delaying reinstating 
Mr Gama, so there are those issues. 
MR TODD:   Chairperson I have been given the legal 
10 
opinions and the Board memorandum that are available 
that served before the Board but none of them are able to 
explain is how Mr Mkwanazi reached the conclusion or in 
what conversation or discussion or meeting he reached the 
conclusion that Mr Gama should be reinstated, which led 
him to instruct Deneys Reitz in the middle of January 
,within 
a 
month 
of 
being 
appointed 
and 
to 
offer 
reinstatement to Mr Gama. 
 
So something, there is still something missing.   
What I had is what he and Deneys Reitz did after that, I 
20 
have seen what they said to the Board and how they – in 
what why they sought to persuade board members that it 
was a good idea, but something – you don’t just wake up 
one day and say Mr Gama needs to be reinstated. 
 
If you are a – if you take up the position you might 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 164 of 224 
 
get a briefing from an in-house legal person or your 
predecessor and that leads you to conclude that there is a 
big risk here or a reason for something to happen, but Mr 
Mapoma says there was no briefing, Mr Mkwanazi doesn’t 
refer to any briefing from anybody and it is apparent when 
he is dealing with Deneys Reitz that he actually hasn’t yet 
been briefed on the Gama matter, but yet he has an 
instruction for Deneys Reitz to offer reinstatement by 
January, so it does seem, I mean really these are matters 
that I don’t have personal knowledge of but one just has to 
10 
apply a matter of logic and say that a conversation, 
discussion or series of discussions caused Mr Mkwanazi to 
reach the conclusion by mid-January that Mr Gama should 
be reinstated and where that happened it is not minuted 
and I do not believe it is at the Board or that it was within 
Transnet because otherwise you would know about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And of course I said yesterday Mr 
Mapoma testified about the fact that Mr Mkwanazi told Mr 
Mapoma and the legal team from Deneys Reitz who were 
assisting him, Transnet, told them that he wanted to have a 
20 
one on one meeting with Mr Gama to talk settlement ,so 
there is that one on one meeting that took place, only the 
two of them know what they discussed.   Of course Mr 
Mapoma did say that one of the things that Mr Mkwanazi 
told him about that meeting is that they could not reach 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 165 of 224 
 
agreement because Mr Gama was demanding in effect 
appointment as Group CEO of Transnet as opposed to 
demanding reinstatement as CEO of GFR.   
 
Yes, I mean part of the reason 
why one is 
mentioning some of these things is because one knows Mr 
Mkwanazi is probably listening, so when he comes he 
knows what are the issues that worry me and he can 
explain, he can deal with issues properly.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank  you Chairperson.  Mr Todd I 
am going to see if I can walk you through your affidavit to 
10 
the end, because I have got a lot of other important 
questions I want to ask you whilst you are here and in 
particular to comment on the various versions of the 
directors, and could I ask you please to go back to page 
158 of your affidavit and then you flesh out your four 
points, 
you 
say 
condonation 
of 
procurement 
process 
distinct from decisions on employee conduct. 
 
Now much of this you have mentioned, but over the 
page at 159 you deal with an internal memorandum on the 
issue of condonation and you then explain at paragraph 11 
20 
and 
here 
you’re 
quoting 
from 
the 
memorandum 
that 
condonations are not there for the asking, as a general 
rule condonation should be given for relatively minor 
transgressions 
on 
procurement 
rules 
and 
procedures, 
material non-compliance will usually not be condoned 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 166 of 224 
 
because these have PFMA implications and result in civil 
criminal and disciplinary steps being taken and that you 
are quoting from the memorandum. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Over the page ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, where are you reading from 
Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At 159, at the foot of the page, 
Bundle 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I’m sorry I should have alerted you 
to the fact that I was going back to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank, I have got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at page 150 still dealing 
with that – sorry 160, at the top, still dealing with the 
memorandum, you record a condition submission was 
required to state whether disciplinary steps had been taken 
because of non-compliance and even where matters have 
20 
been submitted for condonation where certain individuals 
are found to be guilty of transgression disciplinary action 
should be considered. 
 
That you all take from the memorandum that one 
finds at page 168. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 167 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then if we go back to 160 you then 
flesh out no condonation would or could have been 
applicable to Mr Gama’s misconduct and you at 13A deal 
with the 50-like new locomotives, that I think you have 
covered an then at B you deal with GNS.   
 
Is there anything there that you wish to highlight or 
reiterate. 
MR TODD:    No, other than to emphasize that in his own 
version Mr Gama believed that that procurement process 
10 
was a fraud, a scam, and so the idea that he would have 
asked somebody to condone it is completely, that would 
make no sense.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps – can I ask you is this an 
accurate description of Mr Gama’s misconduct in relation 
to GNS.  That on his own version he signed blind a 
...[indistinct] that allowed a fraud to be perpetrated on 
Transnet?    
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that his case? 
20 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now that reminds me I am going to put a 
question to you Mr Todd, just think it through carefully, you 
have been very careful about certain things, so continue in 
that way, but I just want to see whether it is your 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 168 of 224 
 
understanding of this situation.   
 
Would it be justified or correct to say if Mr – if the 
acts of misconduct that Mr Gama had involved himself in 
that led to his dismissal, were not intentional including 
fraud, and maybe corruption I don’t know, but if they were 
not intentional, because the Chairperson of the disciplinary 
inquiry said he was negligent, then that kind of negligence 
that was involved would show him to have been very 
incompetent.  Would it be justified to describe it like that, 
or would that be going too far? 
10 
MR TODD:   No Chairperson, I would go as far as to say 
they showed him to be completely unsuitable to hold the 
office of a Chief Executive of a division such as TFR, and I 
say 
that 
particularly 
because 
of 
the 
surrounding 
circumstances.   In other words it is presented as – if you 
present it as the finding was just mere negligence.   The 
finding was negligence of a most serious kind precisely 
because it fell completely short of what was expected of 
somebody like Mr Gama. 
 
So the lack of that finding of the Chairperson does 
20 
not mean that we now treat it as something benign or 
something which we should be able to accept.  So I strongly 
would endorse and argue that the chairperson’s findings on 
sanctions were entirely justified in all of their respects.  
Unless you were setting a completely standard for Transnet.  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 169 of 224 
 
Unless the board had decided you know what let us have 
Chief Executives who do not read documents or who do not 
mind and who try and cover it up and who fights like crazy 
when held to account.  Because that is the bottom line – that 
is what Mr Gama did.  So I am quite confident and 
comfortable to say Mr Chairperson that the – the sanctions 
were 
fully 
justified 
for 
he 
reasons 
set 
out 
in 
the 
Chairperson’s finding and more for 
concluding that 
a 
dismissal was the appropriate sanction for negligence.  And 
negligence was of such a serious nature that is complete – 
10 
the person – rendered Mr Gama unsuitable to hold office that 
he held. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  And then at 162 Mr Todd 
the point you have made on multiple occasions that it will 
see of course the third charge of misconduct that had 
nothing to do with condonation at all? 
MR TODD:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then in the next heading Gama’s own 
contentions at page 163 on inconsistency were fully and 
20 
fairly considered in the disciplinary process.  I think that is a 
point you have already made? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you quote here from the findings 
of the chairperson where he dealt with those things? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 170 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  If a board member was going to take a different 
view I would have assumed that they have a lot more 
information 
available 
to 
them 
than 
the 
disciplinary 
chairperson had who had sat over fourteen days of hearing 
and multiple files of relevant documents.   
But I mean that is really the point is that this – to the 
extent that it is was ventilated by Mr Gama as an issue in 
the disciplinary hearing he did his best – he had senior 
counsel representing him and the chairperson reached a 
conclusion that I think is entirely right.   
10 
So a board member to say oh but actually I am going 
to take a different decision for this reason must have had 
materially different information in front of him to reach a 
different conclusion on this topic. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The next thing you deal with at page… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh did you want to add a point here? 
MR TODD:  No I actually said that is the next point that I 
made in the document that Mr Myburgh is going to refer me 
to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Oh.  Now can we then deal with the 
heading 
No 
Evidence 
of 
a 
report 
or 
other 
credible 
information before the board at condonation would have 
been applicable to Mr Gama’s response.  Well that is 
respectively the point you have made now? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 171 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You have not come across anything, 
no? 
MR TODD:  And on the contrary what has been shown to me 
that was put in front of the board says nothing about this.  
So one can reasonably infer from that that there was not – 
unless there is another report that Mr Mapoma did not think 
was necessary to refer to when he did a two page 
memorandum for the board and nor did Deneys Reitz who 
was settling that memorandum they were not aware of this 
10 
evidence 
or 
argument 
because 
they 
did 
not 
think 
it 
appropriate or necessary to put it in front of the board. So I 
really think one can conclude safely that there was no such 
evidence or report put in front of the board when it made this 
decision. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then perhaps finally Mr Todd on this 
affidavit could I just ask you to deal with the point that you 
make at paragraph 23 and further in concluding your 
affidavit? 
MR TODD:  Yes.  There is a minute of the Transnet 
20 
Corporate Governance and Nominations Committee held on 
the 11 April and that is around two months a little under two 
months after the Transnet board has decided to reinstate Mr 
Gama.  And one of the things that minute records is that 
management is requested to prepare a presentation to that 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 172 of 224 
 
Corporate Governance Committee about how the system of 
condonation works in Transnet two months after this decision 
was supposedly taken. 
 
So it is very difficult to believe that the board was 
properly informed and understood and knew about how 
condonation may or may not have impacted on Mr Gama’s 
case – I – back in February.  It really makes the same point.  
There is no evidence that any such knowledge or report had 
been presented to the board and on the contrary it appears 
that two months later the Corporate Governance Committee 
10 
are saying can somebody educate us on this topic? 
CHAIRPERSON:  So after – after the fact. 
MR TODD:  Two months later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja they are asking to be told how 
condonation is used – how it works. 
MR TODD:  What it is, where it originates, where matters get 
approved and regularised.  Very basic questions. Those are 
the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that in Annexure F? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can we just go there? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Page 479 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 179. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  479. 
CHAIRPERSON:  479.  Yes.  Oh no I am sorry.  I am now 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 173 of 224 
 
looking at the red numbers instead of black numbers.  479.  
Are you able to guide me as to where in particular?  Is it on 
page – oh is that 479 is just where the… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  479 is where the minute starts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Minute starts ja. 
MR TODD:  If I may assist Chairperson there is what is 
confusing about these minutes is that I have referred in my 
affidavit to paragraph 5.2.3.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR TODD:  They have got two such paragraphs on different 
10 
pages of the minute. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  But it is the second one of those.  It is at page 
482. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR TODD:  There is a paragraph 5.2.3.4 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Oh. 
MR TODD:   
“The 
committee 
request 
management 
to 
make a presentation covering amongst other 
20 
things the following issues:   
What is a condonation process?   
Where does it originate from?   
Where 
does 
it 
get 
approved 
and 
regularised?” 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 174 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I mean the – this committee – the members 
of this committee would have been – are also members – 
were also members of the board? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That on Mr Mkwanazi’s evidence in his 
affidavit would have decided on the basis of the condonation 
process to reinstate Mr Gama and the point you were making 
is how could they have been influenced by the issue of 
condonation in February to reinstate Mr Gama if in April they 
are asking management to tell them what is a condonation 
10 
process?  Where does it originate from?  Where does it get 
approved and regularised? 
MR TODD:  But it is the – there is no doubt that this was an 
important topic for the board the Risk Committee or the 
Corporate Governance Committee get on top of.  But there is 
no way that it was the issue that motivated them to – or 
could not have provided a rational basis for them to act in 
February. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes. 
Because 
those 
questions 
are 
questions they would have been expected to ask before they 
20 
used condonation to bring back Mr Gama if indeed they did 
use condonation. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you – part of the point you make is 
they could not have used condonation given what we see? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 175 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MR TODD:   And in fact there is no document indicating. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And there is no document indicting that 
they relied on condonation.  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd I want to take you to the 
various opinions that there are and statements how the 
company and its attorneys on prospects of success in this 
matter.  Could you please go to Bundle 2 that is the thinner 
bundle.  And could I ask you to start by going to page 13 – 
10 
13.  Now this is the memorandum prepared by Mr Mapoma 
and then settled or finalised by Deneys Reitz on the 15 
September – oh sorry the 15 February 2011.  You will know 
that the board meeting was the next day. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I take you please to page 15 and 
ask you to direct your attention to paragraphs 10 and 11 and 
to comment on them? 
MR TODD:  Is this page – the paginated page 17? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon 17 yes. 
20 
MR TODD:  Yes I have seen these.  They referred here the 
paragraph refers to the fact that in the arbitration before the 
Bargaining 
Council 
Mr 
Gama 
has 
challenged 
the 
appropriateness of the sanction of dismissal.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 176 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  Now – yes that is so.   
“The issue of sanction is a very complex and 
perplex matter to which there is no clear and 
straightforward answer.” 
Well that really is a very strange statement because any 
sanction what is appropriate depends on the facts.  You 
cannot say that in principle what is an appropriate sanction 
is an incredibly complicated question.  It all depends on the 
facts.   
 
This is demonstrated by the celebrated cases of 
10 
Seduma and Shoprite/Checkers cases.  What is being – 
apparently being pointed out here is that it is possible to 
have cases in which two quite experienced properly carefully 
thinking people might reach different conclusions on the 
question of what is an appropriate sanction. 
 
That is undoubtedly true.  No doubt that is true.  That 
does not illustrate that it is very complex but it does 
illustrate that experienced people applying their minds 
properly might reach different conclusions depending on the 
facts. 
20 
 
If there is no doubt there are many cases where all 
right thinking people would reach the same conclusion.  
Serious sexual assault in the workplace.  I do not think 
anybody would say sanction is very complex because people 
could think – reach different conclusions follows. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 177 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Fraud. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  So once – so the fact that it is possible 
that there are hard cases where right thinking people might 
reach different conclusions is self-evident and yes it has 
been confirmed.   
It was not the principle established in these cases 
but these cases illustrated they were about the standard of 
review you should apply when a reviewing court does not 
agree 
with 
the 
assessment 
of 
an 
arbitrator 
on 
the 
appropriateness of sanction.   
10 
But – yes so if you want me then to comment – so 
actually that paragraph says nothing really intelligible or 
useful to anybody who is wanting to know but what about the 
appropriateness of a sanction in Mr Gama’s case?  It does 
not really tell us anything about that. 
 
But it seems to lead to a conclusion which is an 
extraordinary conclusion in paragraph 11 because paragraph 
11 starts: 
“It is accordingly our view” 
So it cannot still – it appears to – that the authors of 
20 
this paragraph are saying because different people could 
reach different conclusions it follows in our view that there is 
a 
probability 
that 
the 
Bargaining 
Council 
or 
a 
court 
considering the appropriateness of the sanction of dismissal 
of Mr Gama may reach the conclusion that dismissal was not 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 178 of 224 
 
appropriate having regard to the challenge on sanction 
advanced by him. 
 
Now that is legally Chairperson if you will indulge me.  
You said I have been very careful with my choice of words.  
It is nonsense. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  It does not make any sense.  It first of all does 
not follow from paragraph 10 which is merely a general sort 
of statement that it is theoretically possible.  And no person 
could express a view on the probabilities in Mr Gama’s case 
10 
without reference to the facts of Mr Gama’s case and why it 
is that there may be a possibility or a probability that a 
different decision maker might reach a different conclusion 
from the one reached by Mr Antrobus – Advocate Antrobus. 
 
So – and then there is also problems with the 
language to say there is a probability that someone may 
reach a decision is also not the way a lawyer could ever talk 
about assessing probabilities.   
 
Because I do not know if that means – that certainly 
does not mean it is probable.  Because probably may just 
20 
means may.  Or – so there is – it seems to be something 
similar to a possibility. 
 
When I read it Chairperson I have to say it leads to a 
very 
uncomfortable 
conclusion 
that 
this 
is 
deliberate 
obfuscation.  It may be accidental but it is using a word like 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 179 of 224 
 
probability completely out of place without an assessment of 
the facts of the case or why that conclusion would be 
reached.  Because probability include [00:14:57] minds 
suggests that that is a likely outcome. 
 
Then qualified by the word may which means it is not 
really probable at all.  It is just a possibility and effectively 
what these two paragraphs say is there is a theoretical 
possibility that one decision – a decision maker could reach 
a different conclusion [00:15:10] says nothing more than 
that. 
10 
 
Whether that is a useful thing to tell a board or not I 
do not know.  I would not pay anybody a fee – professional 
fee to tell me there is a possibility that something may 
happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also there is nothing stated as to why 
the probabilities are as stated in that paragraph -  in other 
what is the basis for that unless – for that conclusion – for 
that view unless the idea is that the basis for that view is 
what is said in paragraph 10. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  It surely does not say on any assessment 
20 
of Mr Gama’s case there is any unfairness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  Or let me even say there is a risk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  Of such and such being found to be unfair. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 180 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  It merely says it creates this – it is obfuscatory – 
it is – this is complicated therefore you are probably going to 
lose – you probably may lose your case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TODD:  I do not know if you can put it any higher than 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TODD:  But anyway I do not know if that – what I – the 
reason why I said I – it worries me is that it is deliberate. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  The way this is worded is the – I probably am 
thinking of the request that I have seen from a file note from 
these 
attorneys 
meeting 
with 
Mr 
Mkwanazi 
when 
Mr 
Mkwanazi said he would need something indicating some 
unfairness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unfairness. 
MR TODD:  Which could lead him to persuade the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  But if this is the paper that went to the board 
20 
whether or not they considered our paper. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TODD:  This would be an extraordinarily – it would be an 
extraordinary basis on which to reach a conclusion to 
reinstate Mr Gama. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 181 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TODD:  I do not know if I can put it any differently from 
that.  But I do not know if anybody – in fact interestingly and 
maybe you will show me Mr Myburgh if there are any board 
members that say this is what influenced them I do not know.  
Because 
they 
seem 
to 
say 
other 
things. 
 They 
say 
condonation 
influenced 
them, 
they 
say 
other 
things 
influenced them nobody says this is what influenced them. 
MR TODD:  Well Mr Mkwanazi – I do not remember him 
saying that this is what influenced him. What he does say in 
10 
his affidavit if I remember correctly is that KPMG and Nkonki 
I think who were asked to investigate something about I think 
the condonation issue or consistence in treatment he says 
they gave an interim report and it was on the basis of that 
report that the board deliberated.  He says they gave their 
final report much later in the year but that interim report I 
think he says in his affidavit he has not found and I have 
been trying to see if we have got it.  I do not think we have 
got it and I think attempts have been made if I am not 
mistaken to find it and it seems difficult to find.  Mr Myburgh. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes we made a request for information 
on KPMG and we then subsequently issued a summons.  We 
have not yet received an answer.  It is something that I 
asked the investigators to chase up today because we would 
ideally like that information before Mr Mkwanazi gives 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 182 of 224 
 
evidence.  But… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But Chairperson your recollection is 
entirely correct.  He talks about a first and a final KPMG 
report.  He said consideration was given to this first stab at 
the report and also to a legal opinion.  He refers to that but 
we do not know what legal opinion he is talking of.  He will 
have to tell us tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  I saw that also.  But also I kind 
of – found it strange that there had been according to I think 
10 
a letter or memorandum from Deneys Reitz/Norton Rose and 
I think from what Mr Todd said there had been about three 
opinions from law firms Bowmans, Webber Wentzel.  I have 
not seen Webber Wentzel’s opinion – I do not think I have 
seen it.  I do not know if we have got it here? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it has been mentioned and – and 
Deneys Reitz opinion about the fairness of the dismissal and 
that they all came to the conclusion that the – Mr Gama’s 
dismissal was fair.  So it does seem strange to me that you – 
20 
if you want to – if you still want an opinion you are going to 
leave law firm – leave lawyers and go to KPMG for a legal 
opinion on this issue. 
 
Of course KPMG might have lawyers or would have 
some lawyers within but I thought that you would stick to 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 183 of 224 
 
practicing law firm – lawyers for such an opinion. 
MR TODD:  If I may just say Chairperson that whatever – I 
mean I understand one might ask Mr Mkwanazi for that 
report but if the internal lawyer advising Mr Mkwanazi was 
Mr Mapoma and the day before the board meeting Mr 
Mapoma prepared a two page document which makes no 
reference to any preliminary findings or any work or any 
consistency issue raised by Nkonki, KPMG or anybody else.  
So Mr Mapoma who is the closest internal legal advisor to 
this and on the 22 February which is the date that Mr 
10 
Mkwanazi signed the agreement and he is furnished with an 
opinion or a report by Deneys Reitz which – which is – I 
have also been shown dated the 22 February that document 
– so the lawyers advising Mr Mkwanazi also makes no 
reference to any preliminary work, findings, submissions, 
representations on any other matters that would affect the 
consistency or fairness of Mr Gama’s case.  In fact they say 
on the 22 February we have advised that the dismissal was 
fair.   So it is very hard to believe that Mr Mkwanazi is not 
misremembering when he got reports from in – on – in the 
20 
basis of any subsequent investigations of executives.  I do 
not believe it possible that – that it was put – that was put in 
front of the board.  Because the people most closely 
advising on the 15 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do not talk about such a report. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 184 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  15t h and the 22 February.  So on either side of 
the board meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TODD:  The internal and external legal advisors advising 
on settlement make absolutely no reference to any such 
thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd in fact I wanted to take you 
then to the Deneys Reitz report of the 22 February that being 
at page 18 of Bundle 2. 
10 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I direct your attention please to 
paragraph 1.1 over the page at page 20.  
“There are various opinions which have been 
obtained from reputable firms of attorneys 
with regard to the prospects of success of Mr 
Gama 
in 
successfully 
challenging 
his 
dismissal by the company.  All the opinion 
including ours which we gave after perusing 
documents 
pertaining 
to 
the 
disciplinary 
20 
inquiry were of the view that Mr Gama’s 
chances 
of 
success 
be 
challenging 
his 
dismissal are not good.” 
As you say either the same day or the day before Mr 
Mkwanazi signed the settlement agreement. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 185 of 224 
 
MR TODD:  It is very hard to believe that there was any 
other advice being given to Transnet at this point in time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then if I could direct your attention 
to page 21 under the heading Sanctioned.  You will see that 
that is a reproduction of paragraph 10 of the note of the 15 
February. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that the advice then ends with 
reproduction of what was paragraph 10 of – or sorry 11 of 
the note of 15 February. It is the same wording. 
10 
MR TODD:  Yes unfortunately I regret to say that there is 
that wording on the attorneys report saying  
“It is accordingly our view that there is a 
probability that the Bargaining Council or a 
court considering the appropriateness of the 
sanction 
or 
dismissal 
may 
reach 
the 
conclusion 
the 
dismissal 
was 
not 
appropriate.” 
It is irreconcilable as far as I am concerned with the 
proposition that Mr Gama’s prospects are not good unless it 
20 
means there is a remote possibility.  But that I do not 
understand … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it cannot be saying there is a remote? 
MR TODD:  But I – it is also questionable what the purpose 
is?  I mean it says it is a report but – and what purpose it is 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 186 of 224 
 
serving is setting out – I am not sure Mr Mkwanazi can 
explain whether it was considered useful after the board had 
reached a decision to settle that there must be a report of 
this kind I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well also –  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then I would like… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Also that paragraph now it seems that what 
it is saying is that the view expressed there is based on the 
challenge on sanction advanced by Mr Gama.  So one goes 
back to saying what is the – what was Mr Gama’s challenge 
10 
on sanction that they are talking about?   
 
 
Now of course in terms of the statement that went to 
the Bargaining Council we can look at that and see what that 
challenge was and if there was something else that we know 
nothing about maybe the written submissions that you – or 
heads of argument that you mentioned Mr Todd maybe that is 
what they are talking about – I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then Mr Todd I just wanted to take 
you to both Deneys Reitz’ and Mr Mkwanazi’s response to 
the Public Protector.  Just to place that in context whilst – 
20 
why they may be of some importance is because they were 
written later in the day.  Some months later no doubt upon a 
fuller reflection of the facts. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Let me take you please to page 41.  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 187 of 224 
 
This is Deneys Reitz to the Public Protector on 6 April.  
Could I ask you please to turn to page 44 and to paragraph 
10.   
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  There it is recorded to the Public 
Protector. 
“In addition to the findings made by Antrobus 
SC 
at 
the 
disciplinary 
inquiry 
and 
the 
grounds on which Mr Gama has referred the 
matter for arbitration there are legal opinions 
10 
that have been furnished by two reputable 
firms of attorneys relating to the procedural 
and 
substantive 
fairness 
of 
Mr 
Gama’s 
dismissal.  These firms are Webber Wentzel 
and Deneys Reitz Incorporated. All these 
opinions confirm that Mr Gama’s dismissal 
was substantively and procedurally fair.” 
You confirm that? 
MR TODD:  Yes I mean I note they do not refer to our advice 
to the company but – which was to the same event they 
20 
could add us to the list of law firms that are advising this.  
But it is to the same thing – same extent. Substantively and 
procedurally fair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then at paragraph 12 they say well 
in any event the dismissal dispute referred to the Bargaining 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 188 of 224 
 
Council has been settled amicably. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that the terms of the settlement 
are confidential.  So let us go then to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburgh did you – you say 
something about whether we have obtained Webber Wentzel 
opinion? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I do have the opinion Chair but the 
point I wanted to make is this.  Webber Wentzel were one of 
the attorneys that were instructed at the time that the KPMG 
10 
report was prepared and they were instructed to advice on 
the procedural issues that had been raised by Mr Gama.  It 
does not relate to substance.  I have the opinion it is very 
lengthy.  I am not sure that it adds much to this matter 
because it does not deal with substance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is in the bundles? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is not in the bundle I can… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not in the bundles. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I can… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no that would be… 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Provide it to you tomorrow if… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That  - that is fine.  I just wanted to make 
sure whether that we have got it.  Maybe – maybe it might be 
appropriate to just put up the relevant page. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Certainly. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 189 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or pages to say this is the conclusion they 
reached.  This is what they were looking at namely 
procedural fairness and this is the conclusion they reached 
even if we do not put up the whole opinions. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We will do that.  The other thing – 
another reason why it was not put up here is that in the 
KPMG report itself it actually refers to the Webber Wentzel 
opinion and it sets out the advice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is how.. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you have got it somewhere? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no if we have got it somewhere that 
is fine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  Of course – of course part of 
the reason why maybe it might be said that we might not 
need to take much trouble to get the whole opinion is that at 
the arbitration Mr Gama was not relying on procedural 
unfairness anymore.  He was relying on whether the sanction 
20 
was – was appropriate.  As I understand the position.  In the 
– in the statement that he filed at the arbitration – at the 
Bargaining Council he sought to challenge the substantive 
and procedural unfairness.  But based on the letter that his 
attorneys sent to Mr Todd in October 2010 it seems that he 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 190 of 224 
 
nailed his colours on the past and said it is just a sanction 
that I am challenging.  Is my understanding correct? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I think I have a different recollection 
perhaps Mr Todd can assist us.  But I have always 
understood that he had two – this is what Mr Todd I think has 
in his affidavit.  That he had two procedural challenges.  
They were not of the ordinary sort that we might be used to.  
The one is he contended that there should have been a pre-
dismissal arbitration and not a disciplinary hearing.  And 
then there was also some reference to him being concerned 
10 
about the appointment of Mr Antrobus.  But Chairperson I 
will put up the opinion I have it.  No problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Mr Todd what is your 
understanding of… 
MR TODD:  Yes he was raising those two.  I did deal with 
them Chairperson.  He did persist with the two. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is right… 
MR TODD:  Procedural points. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Right up to when your firm withdrew? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright. 
MR TODD:  When the matter was – up to when the matter 
was settled. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay then in that event maybe it is 
important that – at least it… 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 191 of 224 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I will do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The conclusion of that opinion should be 
somewhere.  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then Mr Todd something that is a – I 
did not deal with yesterday with Mr Mapona but it seems an 
important document.  If you go to page 48.  This is now Mr 
Mkwanazi’s response to the Public Protector.  If you have a 
look at page 55 it is dated the 30 June 2011 – sorry 55. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry what page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is at page 48. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  48. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh we – we are at a few minutes 
past four.  We must talk about how much more time we need 
just so that we might take a break if we still need some time. 
But if we are about to finish in a few minutes then obviously 
we might not wish to take a break.  So what is your 
indication? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson I think we would probably 
need not more than another hour.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I do intend to take Mr Todd. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To the individual affidavits of the 
directors. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 192 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And to ask him to comment on them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no that is fine. Then maybe we 
should take a short break now and then return and continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will take a short break and resume at 
quarter past four.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe I must mention this for the benefit 
of Mr Todd and you, Mr Myburgh.  I think I have come across 
minutes - I do not know if they are here - of the Board of 
Transnet 
where 
there 
was 
reference 
or 
reference 
to 
condonation in discussing the matter of Mr Gama and his 
possible reinstatement.   
 
Although the discussion was not detailed, I think, but I 
think I have come across those.  So to the extent that Mr 
Todd was saying and I may, at some stage, seemed to have 
thought maybe that is true it is unlikely that the board may 
20 
have relied on condonation to reinstate him.   
 
I think there is some reference somewhere, even though 
it might not be detailed.  But I think also, it may be that in 
the affidavits of various board members that they maybe be 
saying they relied on that as well.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 193 of 224 
 
 
So I thought I would mention that for what it is worth.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you Mr Chairman.  You are 
quite correct.  In fact, it is mentioned in the board minute of 
the 16t h of February.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay alright.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Todd, I... the last document that I 
want to take you to before moving to the affidavit of the 
directors, is Mr Mkwanazi’s response to the Public Protector.  
That you will find at page 48 of Bundle 2.   
 
You will see at page 55, that he signs this on the 
10 
30t h of June 
2011. 
 
So 
it 
is 
a 
long 
time 
after 
the 
reinstatement of Mr Gama.   
 
I just want to direct your attention please to two 
paragraphs.  At page 55 under the heading Substantive and 
Procedural Fairness.   
 
If I can ask you to drop down to number 2.  There it is 
recorded that: 
“However, there are matters which the auditors 
discovered where certain employees of the company 
may have been guilty of offences similar to the 
20 
offence with which Mr Gama was charged with and 
yet, no disciplinary action was taken against them. 
In such instances, there is an argument that 
Transnet may have acted inconsistently.” 
 
You can now drop down to 4 at the foot of the page. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 194 of 224 
 
“It would therefore appear that to the extent that no 
disciplinary action was taken in these matters.  Mr 
Gama may have been able to sustain the argument 
on inconsistent treatment.   
Such inconsistency may have had the bearing, not 
only on the decision to charge Mr Gama but also on 
the sanction of dismissal.” 
 
May I ask you for your view on this?  Is this a rational 
basis upon which to settle a case that fact that where this 
may have had an impact?  There may be an argument of 
10 
inconsistency. 
MR 
TODD: 
 
 
Well, 
Chairperson 
it 
looks 
as 
though 
Mr Mkwanazi is expressing what is in June.  Just a very 
preliminary sense of these matters.  Because he says there 
is a preliminary, an interim report now in June.  And it is 
possible, no doubt he says he is attaching it.   
 
And but... but there is also no indication that I can 
comment on whether actually you are dealing with like-for-
like.   
 
In other words, are you comparing similar conduct of 
20 
which employees’ conduct is being compared in respect of 
what.   
 
So it is very difficult to comment on whether what has 
been identified.  Is that there are two examples of matters 
where there was serious executive misconduct.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 195 of 224 
 
 
If so, what was it and so on.  But I have to say, the 
rational response.  If a board...  
 
If further investigation delivers to the board evidence of 
conduct of the kind committed by Mr Gama, the logical thing 
for the board to do, if it is acting in the interest of the 
company, is to deal with that misconduct of these other 
individuals who are brought to the board.   
 
It would be absolutely extraordinary if you said:  We 
have now uncovered examples of serious misconduct and we 
have decided, instead of dealing with them for what they are 
10 
and show Ms Gama’s dismissal as an example of how you 
treat people who commits serious misconduct.   
 
Let us find them and say:  Well, anyway.  We do not deal 
with you because the new standard we have set is that we 
do not dismiss for things like this.   
 
So it really... I mean, I am not sure what to make of it.  It 
looks preliminary interim.  But it certainly is not... it does not 
produce a basis to, as it were, called out by its bootstraps 
the decision to reinstate Mr Gama. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But Mr Todd, my question... I am 
20 
driving in a different place.  It is preliminary.  You are right.  
It is littered with may.  But this was four months after the 
man had been reinstated.  That is what I am looking for you 
to comment on. 
MR TODD:   Yes, well four months later, there is still no... 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 196 of 224 
 
nothing that persuades mister ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   ...Mr Mkwanazi that there was actually any 
inconsistency.  So by doom, he still thinks there might 
possible have been inconsistency but he is not sure   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR TODD:   That also would rather... be rather fatal to the 
contention that this was the reason why the board reached 
the decision. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  If I can then take you to the 
10 
last part of your evidence and I am thankful that you are able 
to stay with us until we complete it.  Could I ask you please 
to turn to Bundle 1?  That is the bundle containing a 
collection of affidavits.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well... I am sorry, Mr Myburgh.  Do not 
forget where you were... wanted us to go. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just see at the end of that letter by Mr 
Mkwanazi 
to 
the 
Public 
Protector 
at 
page 
55 
under 
condonation, I see what I referred to earlier where he says: 
20 
“Insofar as the issue of condonation is concerned, 
we advise that Transnet has a policy for condonation 
available to all employees on application by the 
employee concerned.” 
 
That part of... even in his own letter, he says it is 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 197 of 224 
 
available if an employee applies for it.  And I do not 
remember him pointing out in this case where the proof is 
where Mr Gama had applied for condonation. 
MR TODD:   To my knowledge, he have not.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR TODD:   And for reasons I have said, he could not have 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry.  Chairperson, what page were 
you referring to? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   [microphone not switched on] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, towards the end? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [microphone not switched on] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I have got.  Thank you.  So, Mr 
Todd can I take you to Bundle 1? 
MR TODD:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I would like to deal first with the 
affidavit of Ms Nolwazi Gcaba. which you will find at page 
199.  And I am going to take you to a few highlighted 
passages.   
20 
 
If you turn please to paragraph 41 at page 220.  Now 
before that, she deals with the principle of consistency and 
at 41 she says: 
“I mention these principles because they are directly 
relevant to what informed the decision to reinstate 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 198 of 224 
 
Mr Gama pursuant to the settlement agreement. 
Indeed, the chairperson furnished the board with a 
list of 30 similar transgressions at the time that I 
decided to support the decision. 
Although the KPMG and Conte(?) report was not 
before us at the time, the decision was made 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry, Mr Myburgh.  Did 
you say 222 page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   220. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   220? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  paragraph 41? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So there, she says: 
“The chairperson furnished us with a list of 30 
similar transgressions...” 
 
And she said: 
“Although the KPMG and Conte report was not 
20 
before us, it is illuminating...” 
 
And she goes on to deal with it.  And then in relation to 
this list of 30.  If I could ask you please to go to paragraph 
44 over the page.   
“The issue of Mr Gama’s reinstatement was first 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 199 of 224 
 
raised with the board to the best of my recollection 
at a board meeting on the 25th of January.” 
 
And she says that: 
“Mr Mkwanazi indicated...” 
 
And then if you drop down to the foot of the page, she 
says: 
“In response, the chairperson stated that he was 
occupied with 30 cases with similar allegations as 
those levelled against Mr Gama by Transnet and he 
furnished the board with the list.” 
10 
 
Then she says at 48 over the page: 
“The board met again on 16 February...” 
 
And if you go over the page to 224 at paragraph 48.2, 
she says: 
“The chairperson, furthermore, informed the board 
that there was a list of contraventions that were 
comparable to the case of Mr Gama.” 
 
And then at sub-three: 
“The board resolved that it supported the acting GC 
in its endeavours to settle with Mr Gama.” 
20 
 
So I wanted you to comment on this version that the 
chairperson informed the board that there was a list of 
contraventions that were comparable to the case of Mr 
Gama. 
MR TODD:   Ja. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 200 of 224 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And that it was then on that basis that 
a decision was made. 
MR TODD:   Yes, it is quite extraordinary.  It refers to a list.  
I am assuming that if the board was informed that there is a 
list.  I am not seeing a list.  I am not sure whether...  
 
On what basis Mr Mkwanazi reached the conclusion that 
the list related to cases similar to Mr Gama’s or what he 
thought would happen.   
 
But I am afraid it leads to a rather important question 
that the chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry said which is:  
10 
What is the information?  What are the facts?  Can you 
please show me what it is show that so and so is said to 
have done?  And what do you going to...?   
 
So that you can make an appropriate decision what to do 
it about it.  I mean, it is very... I see that that is what is said 
here.   
 
It looks as though these are things that might have been 
tabled at the board.  They are not referred to in the board 
paper that was prepared by Mr Mapoma or Denys Reitz.   
 
But perhaps it is information that Mr Mkwanazi was 
20 
chairing as in tabling at the board or telling them orally.  It is 
possible.  I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But also, what is strange.  Even assuming 
that there were such cases.  What is strange is, it is not Mr 
Gama or his attorneys approaching the board and saying:  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 201 of 224 
 
Here are the cases I am relying on the inconsistency which 
make my dismissal unfair.   
 
It looks like the board is going out of its way to go and 
try and dig up as many old cases as possible and say:  Are 
they the same as Mr Gama’s?  Oh, yes, they are the same.  
And therefore, we must settle.   
 
But one does not see any document from Mr Gama 
whose 
attorneys 
are 
saying: 
 
Here 
is 
our 
case 
on 
inconsistent discipline or treatment.   
 
But also, another problem.  The board does this in 
10 
circumstances 
where 
Mr 
Game 
being 
represented 
by 
attorneys and senior counsel before a disciplinary inquiry, 
chaired by an independent chairperson has had the full 
opportunity to present his case on inconsistency before the 
chairperson of that disciplinary inquiry.   
MR TODD:   Yes, Mr Chairperson.  And that is my 
assessment either of how this might impact.  In fact, what it 
seems to be the case is, that this board member said:  Oh, I 
accept this as indicating unfairness.  Therefore, I believe the 
appropriate thing is to reinstate Mr Gama.   
20 
 
And I am not sure if their reasoning was that simple.  
But it looks that simple which to my mind would represent a 
rather sorry state of diligence regarding the potential risks 
associated with the reinstatement of Mr Gama.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And it also seems that, if this was the 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 202 of 224 
 
approach there, it seems there was no attempt to say:  If we 
do 
settle, 
what 
are 
the 
options? 
 
Compensation, 
reinstatement, prospective reinstatement, retrospect if... 
partial 
retrospective 
reinstatement, 
full 
retrospective 
reinstatement.   
 
There seems to have been, if we reinstate, we just 
reinstate with full retrospectivity.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then Mr Todd, at page 225, 
paragraph 49, the third sentence, the director says: 
“I acknowledge that the Commission takes issue 
10 
with this decision in the request but I can confirm 
that I did so in the following circumstances.  One, 
having considered Mr Todd’s written advise which 
was before the board.  And two, in the light of all the 
information available to the board at the time, which 
as I have said, went beyond Mr Gama’s case in 
isolation.” 
 
You wish to comment on that? 
MR TODD:   Well, it appears that she is saying that they... 
the board do in fact have before it my written report of the 
20 
process.  And I do not know what else they had in front of 
them but they say all the information available to the board.  
If they had our written advice and the list of 30 people who 
the chairman said were similar cases.  I do not know.  I am 
not sure what they had in front of them.   
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 203 of 224 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   From what you have read here, was 
this department even in possession of this list? 
MR TODD:   It does not say so.  It does not say so here.  
She says elsewhere at 48.2 for example on page 224: 
“The chairman further informed the board that there 
was a list of contravention that were comparable to 
the case of Mr Gama.” 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   So it appears to be that the chairman was 
speaking, not even laying documents on the table but 
10 
referring to information that he has at his disposal.  Perhaps 
that is what was used to persuade the board and that is how 
the board was persuaded that this was a good idea. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And then let me take you to 
the next affidavit.  It is the affidavit of Doris Tshepe.  Now 
the affidavit of the director you are dealing with now and 
Tshepe’s affidavit are very similar having... they are both 
represented by the same firm of attorneys. 
MR TODD:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And her affidavit starts, and this is 
20 
Tshepe, at 763.  If you perhaps just deal with one or two 
parts that are different.  Could I ask you please to go to 
page 783?   
MR TODD:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 36, you will see four 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 204 of 224 
 
lines down, there is the date referenced to the board on 
16 February.  She says: 
“The 
information 
that 
was 
considered 
at 
the 
meeting, justified my support of the settlement as I 
explain in more detail below.  In summary, I 
considered Mr Todd’s memo and noted that it did not 
address the issue of inconsistency of discipline and 
the facts raised by the chairperson on this issue. 
I was satisfied that the issue of inconsistency of 
discipline was weighty enough to justify settlement.” 
10 
 
And she also then goes on to explain at 37 and over the 
page at 37.2 that there was a list. 
“The chairperson further confirmed that there was a 
list.” 
 
You want to comment on that? 
MR TODD:   Well, it appears to bear out the fact that the 
chairperson was informing board members that there is a list 
of matters and that he had satisfied himself that they were 
all, as it were, on all fours with Mr Gama’s case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
20 
MR TODD:   That is what it appears to tell me and it appears 
to say that the board members... this board member was 
satisfied with that explanation from the chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now in your evidence earlier, I 
purposely did not ask you to deal with this paragraph in your 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 205 of 224 
 
opinion or memo as she calls it.  Here she states that you 
did not deal with the issue of inconsistency of disciplinary.  
We 
know 
that 
that 
is 
ground 
up 
with 
the 
issue 
of 
condonation.   
 
Could I ask you please to go back to File 3.  You could 
keep that file open where it is.  But go to back to File 3 and 
turn up page 86.   
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I would like to direct your 
attention please to the second paragraph where you quote 
10 
this finding by Mr Antrobus.   
“It was contended that the first and second charges 
are entirely new formulation of Transnet as it has 
never occurred in the history of that company that a 
CEO or a Senior Executive, for that matter, has 
been 
held 
to 
have 
committed 
misconduct 
for 
activities 
and 
practices 
that 
are 
usually 
automatically condoned and accepted by various 
mechanisms and committees within Transnet.” 
 
Precisely the issue that was been dealt with there.   
20 
“Apart from the fact that there is no evidence to this 
effect, it seems to me that if the conduct in question 
amounts to misconduct and then it is misconduct 
quite 
regardless 
of 
what 
mechanisms 
and 
committees within Transnet may have to say about 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 206 of 224 
 
that. 
If this submission is an attempt to make out any 
case of inconsistency, then it is necessary to say no 
more than have already concluded in the previous 
findings and that there is no merit in the case of 
allegedly inconsistency.” 
 
So what do you say then to what Ms Tshepe has to say 
that you in your memo do not address the issue of 
inconsistency? 
MR TODD:   Yes, I mean one... she may have not read it very 
10 
carefully.  She may have thought that... it sounds as though 
what the chairperson is saying to board members is:  Yes, 
yes, yes.  It is all well and good.  I even agree with 
everything that was done.   
 
But there is a whole lot of new stuff that you guys do not 
even know about and that it is actually exactly the same and 
we must retro fit that and assume that actually that was all 
applied and considered and you do not need to know all the 
detail.   
 
In fact...  Well, I do not know.  He will have to say how 
20 
he knew the detail of these 30 cases.  Look, it sounds very 
implausible to me.   
 
Doris Tshepe is saying:  Well, I read this report but I did 
not think it dealt with those other 30 cases.   Chairperson, I 
do not really have much to add but it is not a sort of decision 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 207 of 224 
 
making that one would hope for from a board in these 
circumstances.   
 
But if I can just say this.  By June, when in their letter 
you have just referred me to a short while ago which Mr 
Mkwanazi wrote to the Public Protector, there are two 
paragraphs.  And I am afraid I do not have the page in front 
of me   
 
One, which deals with that idea that there a whole lot of 
cases where there has been disciplinary action taken and 
therefore that is... that appears all to be in order that 
10 
Transnet has acted consistently.   
 
But then there are cases where disciplinary action has 
not been taken and that there has been some preliminary 
establishment of this.   
 
And then he refers to two examples, not 30.  But by 
June, maybe the list of 30 had been whittled down to two.  I 
am not sure what the... how... what to make of that.   
 
But it seems to be extremely implausible that Mr 
Mkwanazi could have identified 30 cases of similar facts.  
And similar facts...  
20 
 
Also what is extraordinary about that is, as he is talking 
about one thing that went wrong with Mr Gama.  There were 
three charges.  We have looked at them.   
 
So what he has to be saying is:  I have looked at 30 
cases.  Or somebody has.  And ...[intervenes]  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 208 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And say how they compare or relate to Mr 
Gama’s case. 
MR TODD:   Can they show that they are on all fours with Mr 
Gama’s case and those 30 cases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR TODD:   If he said that to me as a board member, I would 
say:  Mr Chair, I find it very hard to believe this.  I am sorry.  
I do not mean to disbelieve that you think that but could you 
please provide us with some granularity to that assertion 
because it sounds implausible.   
10 
 
And in fact, it sounds... although later it was said that it 
had subsequently been established that there were cases 
where action should have been taken.   
 
It does not look like 30 or any remotely similar.  So it is 
very hard.  It really does Chairperson look like this an 
attempt to retro fit an explanation for a decision which was 
championed by Mr Mkwanazi on this ground and board 
members accepted it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now in October 2010 and January 24, 
2011, on all sides the legal teams must have been ready.  At 
20 
least 24 January, they were ready to go until there was a 
request for a postponement. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now at that stage, on your understanding, 
that is a few days before January 24, when the arbitration 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 209 of 224 
 
would have started, had Mr Gama’s attorneys provided your 
team with any 30 cases on any inconsistency that they are 
going to rely on? 
MR TODD:   In preparing for the case?  I go by recollection.  
I do not believe that anything had been brought to our 
attention that had not, on this topic, that had not already 
been argued by Mr Gama previously. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   But in fact, what mister... what the finding of the 
disciplinary chairperson does show is that reference had 
10 
been made by Mr Gama to a list of 45 condonations.  There 
is reference to it in one of the findings.   
 
So that is one of the way that Mr Gama had attempted to 
present his case is, he says:  Look, here is a list showing 
that there had been 45 condonations granted for irregular 
expenditure.   
 
To which this chairperson said:  Well, that well but that 
is not a basis for me to conclude anything.  These might be 
minor transgressions exactly within the ambit of the policy 
which should be condoned.   
20 
 
Or they might be something else.  But, you know, you 
are going to have to share with me a bit more about your 
contentions rather than just say that condonations have been 
granted across the business.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 210 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   So whether it is that list that had been whittled 
down to 30 that Mr Mkwanazi had, I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, it is quite interesting also because 
even on Deneys Reitz’ correspondence this does not seem to 
be much of that one can see in the correspondence about 
this condonation issue and consistency.   
 
So mister... in any event, Mr Gama and his attorney do 
not appear to have worked hard to try and find cases on 
which to rely on.   
 
But the board seems, if there were 30 cases, seemed to 
10 
have been the one doing that job.   
MR TODD:   Yes, Mr Chairman it is very strange again for 
that reason.  If Mr Mkwanazi was presenting the board with... 
it does not sound like evidence.  It was just he was telling 
them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   He did not tell his lawyers and he certainly did 
not seek their advice ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   ...on whether this was a good ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   ...argument or not.  Otherwise, I would have 
expected to see it in a Deneys Reitz memorandum that we 
saw. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 211 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   Unless, he is... they do not refer to it and I do 
not believe lawyers would have given advice that this an 
issue without understanding what those matters are and on 
what basis it is suggested that they are actually compatible 
to Mr Gama’s conduct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Actually, as we talk.  Mr 
Myburgh, I am going back to Mr Mapoma’s evidence 
yesterday. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I cannot remember but it will be 
10 
interesting to see what the date was of the meeting that 
Mr Mkwanazi had, I think, with Deneys Reitz’ legal team and 
Mr Mapoma when he said:  If I can get a legal opinion 
...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that says there was some unfairness. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I was about to ask Mr Todd that.  That 
is on the 22n d of January 2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairperson, where you are quite 
20 
correct.  He actually stated that his intention was to 
persuade the board ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
...on 
the 
16t h 
of 
February 
...[intervenes]  
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 212 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   To bring Mr Gama back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Because if at that date he had those 
30 cases, one would have thought that he would say:  I know 
that there was unfairness because I found these cases.  But 
if he was still looking for some unfairness at that time, it is 
interesting. 
MR TODD:   Sorry, I did not have the 30 cases by then.  He 
did not know the issue because otherwise he would have 
explained it to Deneys Reitz. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   And in... then it means that he came across that 
issue sometime after the 22 nd of January but by which time 
he had already decided to reinstate Mr Gama and was 
simply looking for a basis to persuade the board and 
sometime between the 22 January and the 15 or 16 
February he came into possession of information which he 
believed would persuade the board but he did not refer it 
to his attorneys and ask their advice on it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then the next affidavit I would like 
20 
to take you to is the affidavit of Mr Malungani at page 861. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   861. 
CHAIRPERSON:   861. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now Mr Malungani is one of the 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 213 of 224 
 
dissenters …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is another bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is bundle 1, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  And page 861? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The affidavit starts at 861, I would 
like to go to page 865 please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you may proceed. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 16, different to the two 
previous directors that we have dealt with, he says: 
“I cannot recall the precise detail of the debate that 
10 
then ensued but I did clearly remember that I was 
opposed to the resolution insofar as settlement was 
concerned.” 
17. 
Despite the limited information in and before the 
board meeting, the motivation for settlement of the 
dispute was which effectively would do away with 
the legal processes and recommendations made by 
independent parties and (what seemed to me) the 
one-sided demands made by Mr Gama which were 
set out in the draft settlement agreement simply did 
20 
not seem right and I, together with others, who I 
cannot recall offhand, opposed the resolution.  The 
minutes of the meeting...” 
Annexure so and so. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 214 of 224 
 
“...correctly records that there was a minority not in 
support of the reversal of Mr Gama’s [indistinct – 
dropping voice]” 
I do not know if you have any comment on that.  He does 
not talk about …[intervenes] 
MR TODD:   No, it is – my only comment is I am surprised 
that this view was the minority and not the majority view 
but I do note – and I mean, it is from his recollection, but 
he 
says 
at 
paragraph 
15.2 
on 
page 
864 
that 
the 
presentation – part of the presentation he recalls is that 
10 
the Chairman had received legal advice that the sanction 
of dismissal was too harsh.  I mean, I do not know if he is 
misremembering or whether that was the sort of thing 
which the Chairman was saying in the meeting but it is 
clearly untrue if that is what the – if the Chairman – either 
the Chairman did not actually say that or he did say it and 
what he said was patently untrue.  The advice given to the 
Chairman was the opposite. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the next affidavit and they 
increasingly become shorter really is the affidavit of Mr 
20 
Sikisana(?) at page 873.  There you will see at 876 the 
deponent attaches some wait to the KPM report at 
paragraph 6.5, 6.6: 
“The evidence in KPMG Nkonki report shows that in 
respect of the procurement irregularities which Mr 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 215 of 224 
 
Gama was found guilty of, charge 1, he was not 
given opportunity to apply for condonation.   
And at 6.7: 
“Notwithstanding the fact that the conduct was in 
fact irregular Transnet had a history of condoning 
such irregularities and furthermore, no disciplinary 
action was taken against individuals.” 
Do you have anything to say about that? 
MR TODD:   Well, I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, you were reading from what 
10 
page, Mr Myburgh? 
MR TODD:   Page 876, paragraphs 6.6 and 6.7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR TODD:   Well, in his own evidence Mr Gama himself 
described the GNS contract as a fraudulent scam.  So I 
find it very difficult to accept that this board member was 
genuinely 
of 
the 
view 
that 
there 
would 
have 
been 
condonation granted but perhaps this was the sort of thing 
which the board members believed.  I find it hard to 
believe. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at the end of the affidavit, 
878, under the heading Conclusion, 8.1: 
“The 
above factors information at the board’s 
disposal as well as the legal opinions sought by the 
board were considered during the board resolution 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 216 of 224 
 
to enter into the settlement agreement with Mr 
Gama.” 
Have you come across any legal opinion that supported 
that? 
MR TODD:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then if I can take – we have got only 
two more affidavits, to the affidavit of Mrs Tshabalala at 
page 891.  Have you had an opportunity of studying this 
affidavit? 
MR TODD:   I have not studied it.  I believe it was 
10 
furnished to me, I may have read it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, Ms Tshabalala at page 899 at 
paragraph 23 says that: 
“Mr Todd was a lawyer from Bowman Gilfillan during 
the disciplinary hearing.” 
Then if you drop down to the last five lines she says that: 
“In any event, at a point in December and January 
the Transnet board had sought independent legal 
advice from another international reputable firm to 
advise on the matter.” 
20 
Presumably that was Deneys Reitz. 
“The board had seen it fit to take out emotions and 
bias in the matter and try and evaluate the matter in 
totality for Transnet.” 
Want to comment on that? 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 217 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   Well, that looks like a way of saying what I 
described earlier was asking for a fresh pair of eyes on the 
matter. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   But which it is – I do see that she says also at 
paragraph 9 at page 893 that naturally the board had 
sought legal advice and opinion based on Mr Gama’s 
pleadings lodged at the bargaining council and she says 
she does not have the legal opinion in her possession but 
the 
Group 
Executive 
would 
have 
secured 
same 
for 
10 
discussion by the board.   
 
Again, I do not know what opinion is being referred 
to, 
the 
only 
ones 
I 
have 
seen 
are 
Deneys 
Reitz’s 
statements that it had advised that dismissal was fair and I 
have 
not 
seen 
any 
legal 
opinion 
that 
deals 
with 
condonation or the 30 cases or anything else that seems to 
have been discussed at the board meeting.  So it seems 
that she intended to rely on legal advice but it is mystery 
what legal advice that was or how it supported the 
decision.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then in paragraph 24 in the last 
three lines on page 899 she talks of the fact that the board 
appointed Nkonki and KPMG to look into matters and then 
she reports on what they found.  Of course we know that 
that came later. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 218 of 224 
 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At 25: 
“The board of Transnet took its fiduciary duties very 
seriously in the Gama matter.  It stopped an 
injustice that was being performed when there was 
an overzealous pursuit of one individual.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR TODD:   Well, she clearly differs with the decision of 
the High Court on this topic and I do not know if she had 
read my report on it but is really – appears to associate 
10 
herself fully with Mr Gama’s perception on the matter. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then finally we have the 
…[intervenes] 
MR TODD:   I mean - If I may just add? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   She goes further in paragraph 26 to say that it 
cannot be that those who are being persecuted for being 
upright and standing up to bullying like Mr Gama.  So she 
is convinced that Mr Gama was being bullied for – Mr 
Gama was being persecuted for standing up to bullying. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   And …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder what she would say if she – 
well, that interesting because she would have been part of 
the board when Mr Gama had accepted that he was 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 219 of 224 
 
properly found guilty of these acts of misconduct.  Where 
would the bullying have been? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You mentioned earlier in your 
evidence there were three directors who reappointed on 
the new board. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now can you remember the names of 
those people? 
MR TODD:   I believe that one of them was Mr Peter Moyo. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR TODD:   And one Ms Ntjingela.  I cannot remember who 
the third was because those were the two who did not 
oppose the litigation brought by Mr Gama to interdict the 
disciplinary process. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The last affidavit then is the affidavit 
of Mr Moyo, that you find at page 903. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now Mr Moyo adopts a slightly 
different approach and that is, I suppose, in summary, that 
he was always of the view right from the very outset that 
20 
Mr Gama’s suspension and dismissal was unfair.  Do you 
confirm that? 
MR TODD:   Yes, he does say that.  I did not know that, I 
knew that he had not joined the litigation but I did not know 
that... 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 220 of 224 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is there anything in that affidavit 
that you wish to highlight? 
MR TODD:   Ja, I mean, he says at paragraph 10 that on 
the issue of a security contract it was normal for Transnet 
to go through a condonation process if an executive 
exceeded the limits of their authority and he was aware 
that the Exco and the Group CEO had condoned conduct 
from other executives and in some instances for larger 
amounts.  But he does not seem to have read either the 
full transcript of the disciplinary hearing of even a 
10 
summary of it to – if that is the view that he is able to take 
of the GNS conduct for which Mr Gama was charged and 
he certainly has not read enough to realise that Mr Gama 
himself regarded the contract as completely fraudulent and 
a scam.   
So I see that and – but it is no doubt so, it must be 
so that Mr Moyo did not believe that it was appropriate to 
discipline Mr Gama.  That is what he really says.  He refers 
to Ms Ntjingela at paragraph 15, that was the other board 
member who chose to be represented by different lawyers 
20 
from the rest of the board. because we did not fully agree 
with how the disciplinary process had been handled.  That 
is at page 906.  And he then says that when a new board 
was appointed he reiterated his views. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   In this affidavit of Mr Moyo he 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 221 of 224 
 
appears only to deal with the security contract and the 50 
like new locomotives.  Do you find any reference here to 
third charge, dismissal for having criticised the board and 
executives? 
MR TODD:   No.  It is possible that he regards that as 
entirely justifiable if his view was that Mr Gama was being 
unfairly disciplined, I do not know, but he does not seem to 
refer to it, you are right. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then, Mr Todd, I want to end off your 
evidence or subject to any questions the Chairperson may 
10 
have, by taking you back to Mr Mkhwanazi’s affidavit and 
this is in bundle 4A. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   4A.  Could I ask you to turn to page 
19 please, one nine.  Paragraph 10.1, Mr Mkhwanazi says 
that: 
“When Brian Molefe joined the Transnet board he 
was instructed to take disciplinary action against all 
officials implicated in the KPMG and Nkonki report.” 
Now I just wanted to get your view, is that a way that you 
20 
can deal with inconsistency if it arises?  I mean, does it 
necessarily 
follow 
that 
the 
only 
way 
to 
deal 
with 
inconsistency is to not take disciplinary action against an 
offender or to reinstate an offender? 
MR TODD:   Certainly, this is what – if my advice had been 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 222 of 224 
 
sought I would have advised them that if you find conduct 
that warrants disciplinary action by senior executives and 
if you find conduct similar to that of Mr Gama then you are 
dealing with executives who are not fit for officer and 
should be removed from office in the same way.  So that 
would have been the advice I would have given and I think 
that is good to see.  What is surprising is that you would 
first reinstate Mr Gama… 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then take actions against others. 
10 
MR TODD:   And then take steps against others who, in 
respect of whom, you now set – I mean it is – you get into 
an chicken and an egg because if in fact you should be 
disciplining and dismissing the others then you think oh, 
well now I have reinstated Gama to be consistent with this 
but I had better dismiss him again because I actually want 
to dismiss this person.  I mean it really just does not make 
any sense.   
 
Well, 10.1 makes a lot of sense but it completely 
undermines 
any 
explanation 
that 
these 
investigations 
20 
warranted the reinstatement of Mr Gama. 
ADV 
MYBURGH SC:   And 
also, I mean, 
to your 
consistency point, would it have been possible to dismiss 
any of these people given what happened to Mr Gama? 
MR TODD:   You found conduct on all fours of Mr Gama, 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 223 of 224 
 
your own devotion to consistency would require you to give 
them a final written warning for six months. 
 
So that is the problem that  we had highlighted to 
them, you set a new standard within Transnet of conduct 
within Transnet of senior executives and how we treat 
conduct of that kind and that is what they did when they 
chose to reinstate Mr Gama. 
MR TODD:   Mr Chairman, that completes my examination 
of Mr Todd.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Mr Todd, and 
10 
thank you for being available till this time to assist the 
Commission, we appreciate it very much.  I think your 
evidence has really helped to enlighten some of the areas 
that might have been unclear particularly because you 
have the background of having been the attorney who was 
involved at the time.  Thank you very much, you are now 
excused. 
MR TODD:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will adjourn now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then tomorrow we will hear Mr 
Mkhwanazi’s evidence. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, Chairperson, you will recall that 
he is going to give evidence by way of a video link.  
Arrangements have been put in place. 
15 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 284 
 
Page 224 of 224 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And we are going to have a test run 
at nine o’clock tomorrow morning so hopefully we will be 
ready for you at ten. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.   Okay, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 16 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
   
