 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
08 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 279 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 285 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
08 OCTOBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 3 of 285 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 08 OCTOBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Seleka, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Please administer the oath or 
affirmation again? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes the first witness Chairperson for 
today is Ms Venete Klein. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  Morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Klein. 
MS KLEIN:  Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS KLEIN:  Venete Jolene Klein. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS KLEIN:  No I do not. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MS KLEIN:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 4 of 285 
 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help 
me God? 
MS KLEIN:  So help me God. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Chairperson Ms Venete 
Klein is coming for the second time in regard to the issue 
of suspension of the executives and the – the appearance 
this time around is to complete her testimony in regard to 
that.  We will be using the previous bundle Chairperson it 
is paginated differently from the bundles we have been 
using recently which is the black pagination and the red 
10 
pagination.  In her bundle we only have the red pagination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And that is Eskom Bundle 02. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one I have here has got both black 
and red and it is Eskom Bundle 02. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh so they – they must have printed 
you a bundle different from mine Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes do you know whether the witness’ 
one has both? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I was going to ask her to.. 
20 
MS KLEIN:  Sorry Chair what do you want me to check? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes just assist the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you got red and black numbers at 
the top of each of page – the pagination? 
MS KLEIN:  Red. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 5 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No it seems to be like mine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Only red ones? 
MS KLEIN:  Red ones. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so we will use red numbers – page 
numbers today. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
MS KLEIN:  Thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Klein is legally represented 
Chairperson by a colleague of mine.  Maybe he could place 
himself on record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you; you can do that from 
there. 
ADV MAHON:  Thank you Chairperson.  Advocate Mahon 
representing Ms Klein instructed by Adams and Adams. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  Mr 
Seleka. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will have to try and raise your voice 
this morning I think it is very low today. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  I will – I will do so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 6 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Klein thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – I hardly get asked to raise my voice. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I hardly get asked to raise my voice 
anyway.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chair.  Ms Klein thank 
you once more for coming before the commission to assist 
the commission.  So you have that file before you which 
contains your affidavit.  You see that? 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Klein because we have done your 
testimony. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you – you said affidavit.  The first 
one is a statement is it not? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let us… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one appearing at – starting at page 
2. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  On page 2 Ms Klein. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  It is between tramlines it is 
20 
written statement by Venete Klein to the commission of 
inquiry into state capture; on page 2.  But I believe that 
this has been commissioned.  If you go to page 24 which is 
the last page of the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it has been but it is interesting 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 7 of 285 
 
normally an affidavit will start with I, the undersigned do 
hereby admit oath and say. This one does not start like 
that.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So one wonders whether she took the 
oath – I see the Commissioner of Oaths certifies that the 
deponent 
has 
acknowledged 
that 
she 
knows 
and 
understands the contents of this affidavit which was signed 
and deposed before me at – on this day and the provisions 
of the regulation bla, bla, bla have been complied with.  
10 
But Ms Klein herself does not seem to have said I swear.  
Okay alright but she has confirmed under oath that the 
contents of the statement are true and correct?  Ja so that 
is fine. 
MS KLEIN:  Correct Chair thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Ms Klein.  Ms Klein n regard 
to the suspension of the executives briefly just by way a 
background today we dealt with your appointment as one of 
the newly – one of the new board members in December 
2014.  Correct? 
20 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct; that is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And from – from there we – we 
addressed the activities of the board prior – leading up to 
the meeting of the 9 t h and the meeting of the 11 t h March 
2015.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 8 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  Correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You recall that?  And an issue – it is 
not an issue really there was clarification needed to be 
done as to whether the first board meeting was that of the 
26 February 2015 which got cancelled or whether there 
was a prior board meeting before that date.  Correct? 
MS KLEIN:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And I think you were pointing out to the 
Chairperson that your recollection is that there was a 
board meeting on the – in January. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  2015. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It – I think the reference… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think she was going to check. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because she – she when she left last 
time the issue was still uncertain.  She was going to check.  
Well obviously Ms Klein you can tell me whether you 
checked and what you found? 
20 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But really I do not think there is much 
significance whether the meeting of the 26 February was 
meant to be the first board meeting or there had been one 
earlier.  So if it was the first or second the fact remains 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 9 of 285 
 
that this was a new board; it had not had much time to do 
anything as a board.  There may have been some 
committee meetings the board committee meetings but it 
was a new board.  Did you find anything – did you – were 
you able to find anything when you checked? 
MS KLEIN:  Yes Chair I think for me the question I thought 
I was answering at the time was – was this the first time 
we had engaged with the executives?  And on going back 
we have actually provided a deck of all of its prior 
meetings.  But to your point there were various other 
10 
meetings.  The meeting of the 16 January; the meeting of 
the 16 February so I believe the point I was trying to make 
was it was not like it was the first time.  We certainly were 
a new board but we had engaged extensively with the 
executives over those first three months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the – the extensive engagement 
between the board and the executives that I have not 
heard.  I have heard about the induction which I think I was 
told was in January. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes it was. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have been told that there were a 
number of meetings of committees of the board as opposed 
to the board itself between January and 26 February.  I 
have been told of those.  And therefore members of those 
committees we did meet in between – between January and 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 10 of 285 
 
26 February may you have interacted with some executives 
that part I think I have been told.  Does that more or less 
reflect? 
MS KLEIN:  Yes absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your own understanding? 
MS KLEIN:  Absolutely Chair.  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chairperson.  Yes Ms 
Klein’s legal representatives did provide us with a bundle 
that has minutes of some meetings Chairperson.  But the 
10 
witnesses have come here and testified that there were 
some level of engagement at supplementary levels.  There 
is a minutes of a meeting on the 16 January 2015 where I 
thought maybe Ms Klein was going to refer the Chairperson 
to that.  We already have it in the bundle.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that – that is fine.  I mean when 
you have applied your mind to – to the bundle. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At some stage then we can see what 
needs to be done – what can be done. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But otherwise it seems that the picture 
that emerges is simply that there was an induction of the 
board at some stage in January.  There were certain 
meetings of committees of certain committees of the board 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 11 of 285 
 
after the induction – between the induction and the 26 
February. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So during those meetings of committees 
there may have been some engagement between board 
members – certain board members and some executives. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MS KLEIN:  May I just add something please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  I think just to be clear it is the question of the 
engagement but you know in reading – going back from 
here and going to re-read everything you know the 
Chairperson opens a meeting and welcomes you to the first 
board meeting in January. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  And then later on you know we say but that 
was not the first board meeting this was – so I must say 
when you read it it can become very convoluted as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ja. 
20 
MS KLEIN:  But I think what is of importance is the level of 
engagement and who was all present. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  No that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Klein ja we understand that but just 
to clarify for the Chairperson as well.  In your own affidavit 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 12 of 285 
 
you do say the 16 January was the induction on paragraph 
23; page 6.  So it is not only the Chairperson who 
subsequently says that was an induction others have said 
the same.  But you also have said the same.  And 
remember last time I pointed out in your statement to the 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee you called it a board 
meeting but this affidavit subsequently done you called it 
an induction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe it was a board meeting which was 
used as an induction. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  You know Chairperson it becomes – as one 
delves deeper and deeper into it you pick up different 
things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS KLEIN:  You listen to recordings and then you say okay 
that is what I said then because that is what I knew it to 
be.  Then I come back here and then I go and listen to the 
recordings and I have got a Chairperson saying to us 
welcome to your first board meeting.  So it becomes – all I 
am trying to say Chairperson is that the terms we used 
20 
very interchangeably. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS KLEIN:  Which did allow for I believe a lot of confusion 
in amongst the war – what were they called?  What were 
they exactly?  So it was more for me the issue did we 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 13 of 285 
 
engage or did we not engage ultimately that is the question 
I was trying to answer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes thank you Ms Klein.  So Ms Klein 
then we went through process and we came to the meeting 
of the 9 t h you say you could not attend the meeting of the 
9 t h. 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And – but we saw that you sent an 
email showing your interest in becoming part of the sub-
committee or an ad hoc committee that was being proposed 
10 
to champion to oversee the inquiry. 
MS KLEIN:  That is – that is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And that was in a memorandum 
which we have learned was prepared by Mr Nick Linnell.  
An email of which – it was attached to an email sent to 
board members? 
MS KLEIN:  Correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  With a proposal of the resolution by the 
board? 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Then we have you did not make the 
meeting.  We have the meeting of the 11 t h because the 
meeting of the 9 t h the board members decided that no want 
to see the Minister. 
MS KLEIN:  Correct. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 14 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And then – and the meeting of the 11 t h 
was convened. 
MS KLEIN:  Chair – true can I just add onto – for Chair just 
for clarity.  Obviously after being here the last time I went 
to go and look at why would I have wanted to be part of – 
in fact when you showed me the email I looked at this 
because my recollection was I could not make it.  You know 
I even may have objected because why – why is it that you 
know you calling meetings at such short notice.  But when 
Mr Seleka showed me my interest in the meeting on 
10 
reflection 
Chair 
remember 
there 
are 
two 
statutory 
committees of every board.  The one is Audit and Risk and 
the other one is Social Ethics and Sustainability.  I was the 
Chairperson of Social Ethics and Sustainability which is a 
statutory committee of the board.  These two committees 
are responsible for giving feedback on the runnings of the 
organisation at an audit – sorry at an AGM annually.  That 
was my reason for wanting to be a part of.  I was not 
Chairperson of People in Governance at the time.  Had I 
been I probably would not have put up my hand for it.  But 
20 
as the Chair of Social Ethics and Sustainability which is a 
statutory committee I felt I was obliged to be part of any 
inquiry that would take place. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  But remember that email was 
presented to you Ms Klein because you had said to the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 15 of 285 
 
Chairperson you objected to a short notice and raised the 
governance issue.  You recall that? 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct Chair.  That is exactly what I 
said because I had raised so many objections to such short 
notices in every meeting that I must admit at the time that 
is what I thought I had done with that one.  Until Mr Seleka 
pointed out to me that what I had actually done was to say 
I wanted to be part of it in as much as I was travelling the 
next day can you not just hold it later on in the day so that 
I could become part of it.  So I acknowledge Chair exactly 
10 
what you are saying. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And it became apparent that the 
memorandum and the proposal to establish an inquiry was 
a request of President Zuma at the time. 
MS KLEIN:  It became apparent Chair.  Yes it did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Linnell has said to the Chairperson 
that there seems to have been board members who met 
with the Minister prior to the meeting of the 11 t h in regard 
to this issue of the inquiry.  Do you know of that? 
MS KLEIN:  No I have no clue – I have no idea about that 
20 
Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  When did it apparent to you that this 
was the request of the President? 
MS KLEIN:  Because I was not at the meeting of the 9 t h 
Chairperson obviously board members from what I could 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 16 of 285 
 
tell were becoming very uncomfortable with being given a 
directive from the President and calls were being made you 
know like you know – because remember as you correctly 
pointed out I wanted to be part of it.  So when I could not 
be part of it you know there were calls between myself and 
different board members.  And board members simply said 
this is what… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I am sorry when – when did you 
become aware that it is a request by the President? 
MS KLEIN:  After the meeting of the 9 t h.  Because I was 
10 
not – I was not in the meeting of the 9 t h Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  That was after the meeting of the 
9 t h. 
MS KLEIN:  After the meeting of the 9 t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But before the meeting of the 11 t h. 
MS KLEIN:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  You say you did not become part 
of the committee that oversaw the – the inquiry. 
MS KLEIN:  That was my – like I said you showed me the 
email where I suggested becoming part of it. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  But I was not part of it.  It certainly was not in 
the documentation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But you certainly will recall from the 
board meeting that the delegation was made to People in 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 17 of 285 
 
Governance and Audit and Risk to oversee the entire 
process. 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And that you were part of People in 
Governance? 
MS 
KLEIN: 
 
I 
was 
part 
of 
People 
In 
Governance 
Chairperson but I was not chairing People In Governance. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja no chairing beside the point but you 
want – you did not want to chair the sub-committee that 
was being established or did you? 
10 
MS KLEIN:  No, no of course not.  Of course not Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes you just wanted to part of it. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So you were part of People In 
Governance. 
MS KLEIN:   I was part of People In Governance and we 
had a chairperson of People In Governance Zethembe 
Khoza at that time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And it was the People In 
Governance that effected the suspensions. 
20 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Of which you were part. 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Now the Chairperson has asked 
repeatedly the witnesses who have come here – we 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 18 of 285 
 
understand from Mr Tsotsi that the executives who were to 
be suspended were three. 
MS KLEIN:  Sorry Chair I did not get that last – I did not… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The executives who were to be 
suspended were three. 
MS KLEIN:  Correct. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
Three 
executives 
were 
to 
be 
suspended. 
MS KLEIN:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But ultimately four executives were 
10 
suspended. 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And the question has been how did the 
fourth executive which is the Financial Director ’s name 
make its way into the list.  Are you able to answer that 
question? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson all I can say to you is that the 
morning that the Minister was there you know obviously on 
recollecting now or having – had the benefit of being here 
going away and then applying my mind again.  What I 
20 
recall the Minister said was that the people responsible for 
the areas that were affected she had no problem with ask – 
being asked to set aside.  Because I think the discussion 
was about asking people to step aside.  And if I remember 
correctly the Minister said something to the effect that the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 19 of 285 
 
people who were responsible for the various areas would 
be asked to step aside or could be asked to step aside.  
But she did say that it is the board’s decision but the 
people who were responsible for the – what the board felt 
the areas of responsibility was could be asked to step 
aside. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did then – are you saying to the 
Chairperson it is at that stage that the fourth name being 
the FD was included. 
MS KLEIN:  It was not at the time when the Minister was 
10 
there.  When the Minister was there my recollection was 
there were no names mentioned.  After the Minister left 
which is the meeting which started at twelve o’clock and 
this is where it becomes just a little bit more difficult 
because Chairperson when I was here last time I indicated 
that I had a recording of that meeting which starts at 
12:23.  But the meeting actually started at twelve o’clock 
and I am not saying to prove my point but what I am saying 
to you is the recording which I sent to the commission and 
the recording which I got from Eskom because I wanted to 
20 
make sure that maybe the version that I had maybe there 
was a fuller version.  The recording I got from Eskom are 
actually exactly the same. It starts at twenty-three minutes 
past twelve or thereabouts Chairperson and in the first 
twenty-three minutes that is when the four names are put 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 20 of 285 
 
to the board by the chairperson Zola Tsotsi.  And he goes – 
he does not just put the four names to the board he goes 
as far as giving up a reason why each of those four should 
be suspended.  Now unfortunately for all of us those 
twenty-three minutes is not on the recording.  But the rest 
of the recording you can hear people fighting and saying 
but you know the FD should not be included because you 
know who is saying that she must you know.  So my 
recollection of the whole thing is by the end of the meeting 
that starts at twelve even though the recording starts at 
10 
12:23 and that ends at I think 1:30 the agreement there is 
there is only three people that will be suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I had a look at I think the transcripts 
of what I believe was that meeting and my recollection is 
that when you read that transcript when it comes to the 
question of who the people are who are going to be 
suspended you seem to find different speakers talking 
about different – a different number of people.  Some seem 
to talk about three; others seem to talk about four which 
includes the Financial Director.  But you come to a point 
20 
and it may be that that is at the end of that meeting where 
the issue arises again whether the Financial Director is to 
be included.  And Mr Zola Tsotsi if I under – remember 
correctly comes out quite clearly that no, no, no the 
Financial Director is not to be – is not included.  My 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 21 of 285 
 
recollection is that that is how that meeting ends.   
MS KLEIN:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  My impression is that nevertheless at the 
P&G meeting later on the – the name of the Financial 
Director seems to be included.  Is that your – the same 
impression you have as well? 
MS 
KLEIN: 
 
That 
is 
exactly 
the 
same 
impression 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes,  Yes.  Yes Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Thank you Chairperson.  
10 
Then Ms Klein you have – let me deal first with this aspect 
about 
the 
recording 
which 
you 
say 
is 
apparently 
incomplete.  Now this recording you have had it all the 
time.  We did not know you told us on your last appearance 
that you have it.  There are minutes that have since been 
produced from that meeting of 11 March 2015.  Some of 
those minutes of the various meetings were signed by 
Doctor Ngubane we said more than a year later.  18 
November 2016. 
MS KLEIN:  Correct Chairperson. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And you were still serving on the board 
at the time. 
MS KLEIN:  That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Those minutes would have been 
discussed before they are signed by the board. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 22 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did you at any stage point out to the 
chairperson at the time that – but we are missing 
something from these minutes which should have been 
captured? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson no and I will – let me try and 
answer – answer you this way.  It was not until I was asked 
about the suspensions for preparation for preparatory 
purposes of this committee or this inquiry that one then 
started wanting to refresh your memory.  And then you 
10 
went to go and listen to recordings to make sure that your 
recollection is correct because we are talking about five 
years ago.  That is the first point.  So to answer you 
Chairperson no I did not point that out previously.  The 
point that the minute was only signed a year later I cannot 
talk to.  What I do want to place on record Sir is the 
voracity of the minute as it stands was approved by all 
board members in a meeting of April of 2015.   I cannot 
Chairperson explain to you how Doctor Ben only gets to 
sign it a year later. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me just make sure I understand that.  
Are you saying that when we see the minutes that Doctor 
Ngubane signed more than a year later and there is more 
than one I think – there are a few of those minutes. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 23 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you saying that that does not 
necessarily mean that the board approved those minutes 
more than a year later.  You say the board approved those 
minutes within a short space of time after the meeting 
concerned but the Chairperson for whatever reason signed 
them much later  Is that what you are saying? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and that is the – that falls in regard 
to all those minutes where Doctor Ngubane seems to have 
signed more than a year later. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  From what – from what I have heard from the 
commission Doctor Ngubane – because even in my own 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  All of the minutes I have got is unsigned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  What I do want to say to the commission 
however is that it was not new in Eskom that minutes got 
signed so much later than it actually happened.  In fact 
Chairperson when I got to a number of the meetings that I 
20 
chaired I was asked to sign minutes of 2014 which is of the 
previous board ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...or could you sign those? 
MS KLEIN:   I think, you know, I want to place it on record 
so that... I know you got the company secretary coming later 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 24 of 285 
 
and he can maybe help to enlighten us because the company 
secretary was there when the meeting of the 11t h happened.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   And the company secretary was there 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   ...when we, the board, ratified all of the minutes 
of the meetings that had happened in our time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   So those, why Dr Ngubane signed it a year or 
10 
two later, I cannot... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   You will have to ask Dr Ngubane that, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know whether before the board 
approved any of these minutes whether there was a 
recording of the meeting, the proceedings of the meetings?   
 
Whether they would have been assured that whoever 
20 
prepared the minutes had listened to the recording and 
therefore what the minutes reflected what really had been 
discussed.   
 
Because when you have a recording, you have a benefit.  
You know, you do not have to rely on your notes.  You do not 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 25 of 285 
 
have to rely on your memory when you prepare the minutes.   
 
You can listen to the recording and make sure that the 
minutes you put together reflect in substance what was 
discussed.   
 
Do you know whether the board was told that with the 
minutes that it approved that had been done? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, to the best of my knowledge.  
Every single meeting was recorded.  But I must also say, at 
the time at Eskom there were discussions which I know that 
actually asked for it not to be recorded.   
10 
 
So it is a bit difficult to say that it was all one hundred 
percent recorded, number one.   
 
Number two, I have actually also tried to get access to 
the In-Committee minutes because that would give, you 
know, rise to a lot of the questions being asked and until 
there are no such minutes.   
 
So I cannot conclusively say to you Chairperson that 
every single meeting was recorded.  I think Mr Phukubje 
would be the best person to answer that question for you 
Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Klein, we then 
have these recordings.  We have checked them with 
yourself.  And we have, as you have, relied on them.  
Correct? 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 26 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  To the extent that you say, things 
are not there but yet not raised.  You have not done anything 
about it and that is where it is.  That is what it is. 
MS KLEIN:   Sorry? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So to the extent that you say the audio 
recording is missing something ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...which you did not raise.  There is 
nothing the Commission can do about it. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   I totally agree with you Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So we move on from the meeting of the 
11t h ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I want you, of course...  I am sorry.  What, 
of course, anybody who was at such a meeting can say is:  
Having listened to the recording and having looked at the 
minutes, I am able to say there are things which were 
discussed at that meeting which are not contained in the 
recording or which are not reflected in the minutes.   
 
And the reason why they are not reflected may well be 
20 
because they were discussed before the recording started.   
MS KLEIN:   I agree with you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Ms Klein... Ja, perhaps I do 
not need to belabour the point because Mr Tsotsi has said 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 27 of 285 
 
explicitly that what was presented to him in Durban with the 
president was that three executives should be suspended or 
step aside and that is what he presented to the board.   
 
And I think what you are trying to answer, which is not 
clear to me, is.  What is your answer to when was the FD, 
the financial director’s name added to the list? 
MS KLEIN:   I think if I look at my notes(?), Chairperson.  My 
version which was the same version in parliament as what it 
is here.  Is that it all happened at the same time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when you say it all happened, what 
10 
are you...?  The names? 
MS KLEIN:   The names.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   The names were motivated, according to me, 
which is what I have said in parliament and I say here again 
by Mr Tsotsi at the beginning of the meeting.   
 
Bearing in mind, that was with the benefit of having 
looked at the minutes and you know, acquainted myself at 
the time of parliament with that.   
 
When asked the question by the Commission to go and 
20 
look at the suspensions more specifically because in 
parliament I was not really focussed on the Commission, 
only on the suspensions.  It was more about a whole range 
of other issues.   
 
I then went to go and listen to the recordings and it is at 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 28 of 285 
 
that point that I became aware... not became aware.  I 
started realising that what was in the minutes, which were all 
for with Mr Tsotsi, which by the way, I remember specifically 
Mr Tsotsi telling her that the financial director was involved 
with some form of tender tampering.  That stuck in my mind.   
 
But when I listened to the recording, it becomes clear 
that we would have heard it somewhere that she was 
involved with tender tampering but at that stage, at the end 
of the meeting which now ends at half-past twelve...  
 
Sorry.  We start at twelve.  The recording starts at 12:23 
10 
but end at half-past one.  The board took a decision that it 
was only three.   
 
But to answer you Chairperson.  Her name would have 
gone back onto the list which it originally was, according to 
me in the People and Governance Meeting which took place 
between, from what I can tell, from half-past one to 14:48 
which is when the next meeting starts where the chairperson 
there opens up with the fourth person’s name is on the list.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is... I think when I read the 
transcript to which I referred earlier, there were things that 
20 
seemed to be confusing to me with regards to Mr Tsotsi 
because I think there is somewhere where he speaks on the 
basis that the financial director is included.   
 
But there definitely is a place, I think it towards the end, 
where somebody raises the issue whether the financial 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 29 of 285 
 
director is included/ 
 
And he specifically says:  No, the financial director is 
not included.  So it becomes confusing.  But maybe it is...  
 
That is the point where you say the board’s decision at 
the end of that meeting was that it was three ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and not the financial director.  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But then at the P&G meeting, I think that 
is what you are saying. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...her name was then included. 
MS KLEIN:   Included. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Included. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you do not have the recollection, or do 
you, as to who was the person who included her name for 
the first time at the P&G meeting? 
MS KLEIN:   Chair, it was very interesting because when I 
started listening to everything again, some things then did 
20 
crystallise because I was asked at this Commission the 
question before and I think I even raised it with you.   
 
I said there was a time when Dr Ben was running in and 
out of the meeting on the phone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 30 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   I think I even said to you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   And I know it is not my job to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   But I said, you know, I find it strange that Dr 
Ben was running in and out and coming back and forth.  And 
I think what Dr Ben said was, that he was on the phone with 
the minister.  That happened in that P&G meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   And I think it is at that point ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   ...when that name went back on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   What exactly the minister said to him or did not 
say, I cannot account for it.  You will have to ask Dr Ben. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But it was at that stage ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Remember, the minister in the earlier meeting 
said ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   ...people who are responsible for. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   So what exactly was said between Dr Ben and 
the minister, I do not know. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 31 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But that was the point in P&G where the CFO’s 
name went back onto the list. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that is quite interesting.  One, 
because as I recall, when the minister left the meeting she 
had with the board earlier on that day, she said she would be 
around if, as I understand the position, she meant, if board 
members want to clarify something with her.   
 
She is not going to go far.  She will be around or 
something like that.  I think that is what I saw.  That is one 
10 
point.  The second point.  It is interesting because Mr Tsotsi, 
if I recall correctly, testified that Dr Ngubane told him that it 
was the minister who said the finance director, the financial 
director must be included as well.   
 
Also, Mr Baloyi gave evidence yesterday and part of his 
evidence was that Dr Ngubane was frequently on the phone 
and he was phoning the presidency.   
 
And I think he said that, for example in relation to 
people who were going to act in the positions of the 
executives 
who 
were 
to 
be 
suspended, 
that 
his 
20 
understanding was that Dr Ngubane was getting the names 
from the presidency.   
 
Now, of course, it could be the presidency... he could 
have been phoning the presidency at some stage.  He could 
have been phoning the minister at some stage.  We do not 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 32 of 285 
 
know.   
 
But what you do say, what do you confirm is that Dr 
Ngubane during, I think the P&G meeting was coming in and 
out of the meeting, making calls as you understood it, to the 
minister.  Is that right? 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I cannot really talk to the presidency because I 
mean, I do not know who ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but the minister that is... that was 
10 
your understanding. 
MS KLEIN:   That was my understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   And I think for me, it would have lined up with 
what was said previously in our earlier meeting with the 
minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay alright.  Of course, maybe 
I could raise this with you which maybe I should have raised 
with other witnesses before.  Because you just touched on 
there having been allegation that the financial director had 
20 
tampered or interfered or met with some service providers or 
tenders or whatever and ever.  That in the meetings of the 
day, the 11t h, one finds in the minutes or the transcripts that 
somewhere there were discussions about alleged wrongdoing 
on the part of the executives who were sought to be 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 33 of 285 
 
suspended.   
 
And yet, at the Durban meeting which Mr Tsotsi 
attended, it was made clear that the suspension of the 
executive directors was not going to be based on any 
wrongdoing.  That is number one.   
 
Number two, at the meeting or the meetings of the 11t h 
of March, also ultimately, the board seems to have said:  We 
are 
not alleging any 
wrongdoing on the 
part of the 
executives.   
 
And yet, it seems that the basis, the reason that may 
10 
have been advanced as to why the financial director must be 
included was this allegation of wrongdoing about tenders and 
service providers.  You understand that?   
 
One would have thought that from the beginning, it 
would have been said:  Because we are not basing these 
suspensions on wrongdoing, please do not tell us about any 
wrongdoing.  That is irrelevant.   
 
Do you want to say anything? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I guess where I am struggling with 
the 
sequence 
of 
events, 
is 
that 
my 
recollection 
or 
20 
understanding, 
certainly 
of 
also 
now 
following 
the 
Commission with great interest on who is saying what, is that 
Mr Nick Linnell who was obviously briefed by whoever in 
Durban, actually had charges.   
 
So it was not a case of let us just ask them to step 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 34 of 285 
 
aside.  Nick Linnell came to the meeting which he testified to 
with actual charges of wrongdoing.   
 
So when you say that in Durban the decision was not to 
charge, that is not congruent with what Nic Linnell said.  
Nick Linnell said he came with the charges.   
 
And the questions would have to be.  Where did those 
charges come from?  I mean, that would be my question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  I understand the same.  My 
recollection is quite clear that at the Durban meeting, Mr 
Tsotsi has said.  And I suspect that Mr Linnell may have said 
10 
the same thing too but I am much more clearer about Mr 
Tsotsi’s evidence.   
 
That 
when 
the 
Durban 
meeting 
discussed 
the 
suspensions, Mr Tsotsi was opposed to the suspensions.  
But one of the, or the main reason that was advanced to 
address his concern was that:  No, no, no.  These 
suspensions should not be a problem.   
 
Because these executives will be told that there are no 
allegations of wrongdoing on their part.  That certainly was 
Mr Tsotsi’s evidence.   
20 
 
I think you are right in saying, at the meeting of the 
11t h of March, the documents that Mr Linnell may have 
prepared which we have here, some of them maybe including 
allegations of wrongdoing against some of the... against the 
executives.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 35 of 285 
 
 
But I do not remember that in his evidence about the 
Durban meeting, I do not remember that he said that at the 
Durban meeting there were... there was a discussion of 
allegations of wrongdoing.   
 
Maybe there were but what I think certainly Mr Tsotsi 
said was.  It was said that the executives should not have a 
problem with suspension because it is not going to be based 
on wrongdoing.   
 
But as I say, you know, that at the... at one or more of 
the meetings of the 11t h of March, there were discussions of 
10 
allegations of wrongdoing.   
 
And I think some of the documents prepared by Mr 
Linnell do refer to allegations of wrongdoing.  And of course, 
we know that ultimately, the board did say the suspensions 
would not be based on any allegations of wrongdoing.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, you might be able to 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, I wanted to assist 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   To throw light, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...the Chairperson.  In his affidavit, Mr 
Nick Linnell, refers to Jabu Maswanganyi who gives in 
documents but he says, these were mainly for unverified 
sources and so on.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 36 of 285 
 
 
But then specifically in regard to the executives, and I 
want that paragraph Chairperson, he says: 
“The information was unverified and there was not 
going to be allegations of wrongdoing against them.  
They were going to step aside in order not to 
interfere with the inquiry and they were going to be 
counselled about that.” 
 
But he does not know whether they were counselled 
about that.  So that is his ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But am I right about saying that some of 
10 
the documents that he prepared for the meeting of the 11t h, 
may be documents that... the memorandum maybe is one of 
them.  That it does include some of them do include 
allegations of wrongdoing? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He did refer to document that contains 
some allegations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  We just do not know why he would 
have included those allegations and circumstances where, to 
his knowledge, the suspensions were not supposed to be 
based on any wrongdoing. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, we might have to ask him 
even if he sends an affidavit to deal with that. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 37 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   And Chair, the other point is this.  Ms 
Klein... Mr Baloyi in his affidavit, in fact, says that you were 
the one who suggested that the FD be included on the list.  
He says: 
“During Mr Tsotsi’s presentation...” 
 
And I will go to that. 
“...the indication was that only three executives 
would be suspended, namely Mr Tshediso Matona, 
10 
Dan 
Marokane 
and 
Mr 
Matshela 
Koko. 
 
Ms 
Tsholofelo Molefe, the Finance Director, was not 
included from the start.   
However, during the People in Governance Meeting 
on 11 March 2015, Ms Venete Klein said that Ms 
Molefe 
should 
also be 
suspended.  
Ms 
Klein 
mentioned that there were many issues with the 
finance department and that there was enough 
reasons to suspend Ms Molefe.” 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I categorically deny that.  In fact, 
20 
to go to the... or for two reasons.  Norman Baloyi was a 
member of Audit and Risk.  He was not a member of People 
in Governance.  So I do not know how he would have heard 
me say that.  That is the first thing.  In the recordings of the 
debate on the whole thing around should the FD go or should 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 38 of 285 
 
the FD not be suspended.   
 
I am not the person who raises the issue about many 
problems in the finance department.  I have actually 
provided the Commission with the names of the peoples who 
were speaking there.   
 
The one thing I was consistent about and I said it here 
before.  The finance director had shared with us earlier on 
that morning that we were running a company of R 30 million 
an hour.   
 
So I was always very cognisant that whatever decisions 
10 
this board makes, we must do it and move on.  But that I 
said that the CFO must be included, I categorically deny. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  May I go to the 
transcript, Ms Klein? 
MS KLEIN:   Please do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because I know that you have the 
recordings.  Two things arise from what you are saying.  
Number one is that.  Mr Norman Baloyi was not a member of 
P&G. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Norman Baloyi says and the other 
witnesses have also said, he was present at the meeting of 
11 March 2015, P&G meeting.   
MS KLEIN:   Chair...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   He was a present.  He is not a member. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 39 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before you answer that.  I was 
going to say.  Either one of the witnesses or may have 
picked up in minutes or transcripts.   
 
Somewhere I think I read something along the lines that 
board 
members 
who 
may 
not 
necessarily 
have 
been 
members of the P&G were not allowed or were entitled to be 
present at this particular P&G meeting.   
 
Now, maybe it is not this particular.  It may be at any 
P&G meeting if they want to attend, they are free to attend.  
I do not know but I think I read somewhere or I heard one of 
10 
the witnesses say something along the lines at that board 
meeting, at that P&G meeting, members of the board who 
may not have been members of that committee were allowed 
or were entitled to go and sit there.   
 
I do not know whether that meant they could participate 
or they could be observers.  I do not know whether it meant 
they could vote.   
 
But I read something along those lines or I heard 
somebody say that.  You might be able to enlighten me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   May ...[intervenes]   
20 
MS KLEIN:   I totally agree Chair.  But I think let us Mr 
Seleka ask the question because then it is probably better to 
answer it then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, it is fine.  Do you say you agree with 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 40 of 285 
 
the Chairperson? 
MS KLEIN:   I agree with the Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 And 
I 
wanted 
to 
add 
to 
the 
Chairperson’s, 
that 
the 
minute 
of 
the 
P&G 
of 
the 
11t h of March, does reflect as Mr Baloyi as present.  It is Mr 
Khoza, the chairman, Ms Carrim, Ms Mabude, Dr Naidoo, Ms 
Naidoo, Mr Baloyi, Mr Tsotsi and Ms Klein present at the 
P&G.   
10 
MS KLEIN:   Can I... may I ask a question Chair just for 
clarity? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [No audible reply]  
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, are we referring to the meeting 
that start at 14:48?  Is that what you are referring to there, 
Chairperson? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The minute of the People in Governance 
Committee, 11 March 2015 at 14:58. 
MS KLEIN:   Alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I can give you the page reference. 
20 
MS KLEIN:   No, no.  I want to... I think there are two 
versions here.  And please, I do not want to waste time.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   The first meeting, the first board meeting 
started at nine o’clock the morning.  The minister comes in.  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 41 of 285 
 
The rest of the board meeting starts at twelve o’clock and 
ends at 13:30.   
 
At that stage Chairperson, there were three people to be 
suspended.  The meeting of 14:48 Chairperson, even though 
it is called a People in Governance meeting.  If you read the 
first few lines, it is a full board meeting.  It is not a People in 
Governance meeting.   
 
The P&G, where this discussion was happening, and Dr 
Ngubane was running in and out, would have happened 
between 13:30 and the 14:48 meeting which is when Nick 
10 
Linnell gets introduced to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that at the P&G meeting? 
MS KLEIN:   That then becomes a full board meeting.  The 
P&G and the Audit and Risk meeting happened between 
13:30 and 14:48.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you eat lunch on that day?  [laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   Sorry, say that again, sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you not, the board members not eat 
lunch on that day? 
MS KLEIN:   We ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am simply asking because you are 
talking about finishing the board meeting at half-past one but 
then another meeting starting...? 
MS KLEIN:   At quarter to three. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I heard Mr Tsotsi also say after 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 42 of 285 
 
the board meeting that happened after the minister had left, 
and before the P&G meeting started, he went for lunch.  
When he came back from lunch, he said the P&G meeting 
had been running for about ten minutes.   
 
So he came in when it had been going for about ten 
minutes.  That is when he says, he found the meeting 
discussing names of people who were going to act in the 
positions of the executives.   
 
And raised the issue of how can you people discussing 
these names because you do not know these people. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what... 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am wondering whether in terms of the 
timing, there was not time allowed for the board members to 
go and half lunch and then come back? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I can only imagine that there 
would have been such a lunch-break and I am sure that 
others can give you more detail on it.   
 
But remember the questioning being asked is.  At half-
20 
past one there were three names.  At ten to three, you now 
have four names.  Something happened in between.   
 
And the something that happened, happened at the P&G 
meeting which was a breakaway session between those two 
meetings. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 43 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you locate the P&G meeting at half-
past meeting to something to three? 
MS KLEIN:   Somewhere in between that something 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Which is the meeting where Dr Ben runs in and 
out.  This meeting, the one that starts at 14:48, is not the 
one that Dr Ben runs in and out.  We would have picked that 
up in the transcripts.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   That Dr Ben is coming in with such a name or 
such a name.  Nowhere in the transcripts does that come 
through.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us just see.  So nine o’clock it is 
a board meeting. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Somewhere after that, while that board 
meeting is going on, the minister arrives. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then the minister has a meeting with 
20 
the board. 
MS KLEIN:   That is right, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And at a certain stage, the minister 
leaves. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 44 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then the board continues with its 
meeting. 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think that is about twelve o’clock. 
MS KLEIN:   From twelve to half-past one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From twelve to half-past one. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is a full board meeting. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what you are saying is that from half-
past one up to what time? 
MS KLEIN:   Twenty... I think it is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Something 43? 
MS KLEIN:   ...14:48 or 14:58. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay just before three. 
MS KLEIN:   Just before three. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was a P & G during that time. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that the only meeting that was 
going on at the time or could that meeting having been 
going on in parallel with another board meeting which 
would be without the P & G members? 
MS KLEIN:   Ja, Chairperson, my recollection is that there 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 45 of 285 
 
was a discussion that took place after that three o’clock – 
not the three o’clock, the half past one meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   That is where the three became four.  It was 
in that meeting that the three became four. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Because at the beginning of the meeting, 
which is known as the P & G meeting but when you go and 
you look at the actual – the Chairperson’s talking about, 
that the full board meeting at this stage. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Ja, what I am trying to understand 
is this.  You see, I – when I read some things somewhere 
suggesting that at the P & G meeting it was said that the 
Chairperson of the board must chair the P & G meeting. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You remember something like that? 
MS KLEIN:   I remember that as well, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  So I then asked the question 
was the P & G meeting chaired by the Chair of the board 
as opposed to by the Chair of the P & G meeting?  What is 
20 
your recollection? 
MS KLEIN:   I recollect that as well.  What I am suggesting 
is if you listen to the transcripts because somewhere at the 
beginning of the transcripts it starts talking about this 
being a full board meeting. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 46 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   And then towards the end of it when the 
executives get suspended, you know, basically get called 
in, that is where the aid memoire of Nicola Nel which is 
where, you know, Mr Tsotsi, you must now take over and 
run P & G yourself.  That is where that comes in? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, we might never be able to get 
all the details but I think we will just focus on the important 
issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   On Ms Klein’s evidence the names at the 
end of the board meeting that ended at half past one, on 
her version, at that stage the board was talking only about 
three executives being suspended and that that list did not 
include the financial director. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What she does say is that during the P & 
G meeting which she says started at half past one and 
went up to about two minutes to three, that is the meeting 
where 
the 
financial 
director ’s 
name 
was 
added 
and 
20 
ultimately the suspension involved all four executives and 
she says it was during that meeting which started at half 
past one and went up to five to three, it was during that 
meeting that Dr Ngubane was moving in and out of the 
meeting phoning, as she understood the Minister about 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 47 of 285 
 
certain matters. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chairperson.  And that 
version, Chair, has to be contrasted with what Mr Baloyi 
says and with what we see from the transcript because Mr 
Baloyi you headed or suggested the FD also be suspended. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay.  Are you going to take me to the 
transcript? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes and he says because you were 
10 
saying he is not a member of the P & G but I do not think 
he was saying he was not present at the P & G, the 
meeting. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja.  Chairperson, remember, we are talking 
about two different meetings here.  What you are referring 
to is the meeting of 14.48 where Mr Baloyi is present 
where Mr Baloyi is present.  What I am talking about is 
what happened in between. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From half past one to two minutes to 
three. 
20 
MS KLEIN:   That is what I am talking about.  Remember, 
the question was when was the FD’s name put on.  That 
was the question, Chairperson.  When we stopped the 
meeting at half past one her name was not on.  When we 
come back at 14.48 the first couple of minutes somebody 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 48 of 285 
 
asked the question about is it three or is it four?  And you 
could hear Mr Zola Tsotsi saying at that stage it is four. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  It will help, Ms Klein, if we stick to 
the documentation because that question was asked by Dr 
Ngubane 
and 
Mr 
Tsotsi 
said 
it 
is 
three 
should 
be 
suspended.  The reference bundle, Chairperson, deals with 
that and Ms Klein, I am expecting you to know this because 
you were in that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which one is that meeting because I 
think that is part of what she is emphasising. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to tell that is the meeting 
that started when? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am emphasising the point Ms Klein is 
saying – a question is asked how many are going to be 
suspended and that is the question here.  The question is: 
“Sorry, Chair…” 
Somebody is asking and that is Dr Ngubane, according to 
the transcript. 
“…I just want to know, just last minute in this 
20 
process…” 
Then it becomes indistinct.  The Chairperson then says: 
“The CE, the Head of Group Capital and the Head 
of Commercial are the three individuals we are 
going to ask to step aside.” 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 49 of 285 
 
Then Mr Baloyi says: 
“Oh, because I thought maybe then the CE and the 
CFO are excluded.” 
Mr Tsotsi says: 
“No, the CE is not excluded, the CFO is excluded, 
that is what we have decided.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now if you look at the top of those 
minutes what time do they say that meeting started? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This, Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because they normally write what time 
10 
the meeting was. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The timestamp on this – the transcript 
does not indicate …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, it is the transcript. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The timestamp – this is the transcript. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But it is the board in-committee 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Immediately after the meeting of the 
20 
Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is prior to the P & G meeting, Chair.  
Let me before the Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, well, if you say it is prior to the P & 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 50 of 285 
 
G meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That might be in line with my impression 
but I am not feeling very certain that I am right but I have 
an impression that at the end of the board meeting that 
started after the Minister had left that there is the – that 
issue arises and that Mr Tsotsi insists that the Financial 
Director is not involved.  I have that impression, I think 
…[intervenes] 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct.  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This is the one. 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Klein confirms. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, his is exactly where I am. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, then in that event what that 
transcript says is in line with what Ms Klein is saying 
because she does say at the end of the board meeting that 
ended at half past one, on her version, which is board 
meeting that started I think at twelve, after the Minister 
had left, she says the decision of the board was that it was 
20 
three executives.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is in line with what she says. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then what she does, she takes – she 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 51 of 285 
 
says then there was a meeting that started at half past one 
and ended at something to three and she says that was a P 
& G meeting and she says it is during that meeting, it is at 
that meeting that the Financial Director ’s name was added 
and she says she cannot – I think she cannot remember 
who add the Financial Director ’s name but she does say Dr 
Ngubane during that meeting was going in and out making 
phones calls to – on her understanding, the Minister, and 
when one looks at that one must remember what Mr Tsotsi 
said if my recollection is correct.  Mr Tsotsi’s evidence was 
10 
that Dr Ngubane told him when he was saying but the 
Financial Director should not be included, he says Dr 
Ngubane said the Minister said this name, the name of the 
Financial Director must be included. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you have a situation where on the 
transcript, which you have read... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …and on Ms Klein’s evidence… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the end of the board meeting that 
ended at half past one, only three names were agreed and 
they did not include the Financial Director and then you 
have this meeting where I think Mr Tsotsi says Dr Ngubane 
said it is the Minister who wanted the Financial Director to 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 52 of 285 
 
be included and you have Ms Klein saying during that 
meeting Dr Ngubane was in and out of the meeting 
phoning, on her understanding, the Minister. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think that part.  Of course you do have 
– you have put to Ms Klein Mr Baloyi evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That Ms Klein is the one who put up the 
Financial Director ’s name. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And, of course, she has categorically 
said no, that is not so but that is where we are. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And, Ms Klein, on that point because I 
was going to go to the point of the P & G but let me 
address that point because even in the board in-committee 
you are heard supporting, not even supporting, motivating 
for the suspension of the FD.  You motivate for the 
suspension of the FD along the lines which Mr Baloyi is 
20 
saying that you were involved in the finances with the 
subcommittees, 
you 
know 
there 
are 
problems 
with 
finances, the FD should also be part of it. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I am going to have to ask that 
you please point that out to me. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 53 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MS 
KLEIN: 
 
 
Because 
when 
I 
read 
the 
transcript 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fair enough. 
MS KLEIN:   When I read the transcripts that was not me, 
that was Viroshini Naidoo who said that and in fact I 
provided the Commission with the names of the different 
voices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fair enough, but this is what I 
want you to think about.  I mean, it may be that the 
10 
position is that as you categorically deny, that did not 
happen, okay?  But you said earlier on that during the 
board meeting – I do not know whether it was the one 
before the Minister came, the names were not mentioned. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:    But the areas were discussed, it seems 
to me that what you were saying was, a principle was 
established. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the principle was if your area – your 
20 
portfolio is going to be investigated you should step aside. 
MS KLEIN:   That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now if that is so, if that is what – if that 
is true and if your understanding was that the finance 
portfolio was one of the areas to be investigated one could 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 54 of 285 
 
understand if later on you would say but why leave out the 
FD because her area is included, would be affected.  You 
understand what I mean?  But maybe that did not happen 
and if it did not happen, it did not happen. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So but I was just saying to the extent 
that a principle was established you may have understood 
the finance department to be affected and therefore in 
terms of that principle you may have expected that she 
would be suspended as well but let us deal with it.  Are you 
10 
able to refer her to the …[intervenes] 
MS KLEIN:   The exact wording.  Because I remember on 
listening to it and sending through the names to the 
Commission, the person who said that I have worked very – 
on numerous committees and the finances were not in 
order was Ms Viroshini Naidoo.  That was not me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   What I did say, Chairperson, and I said is 
before is what the finance person or …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The FD, ja. 
20 
MS KLEIN:   The FD had said, she gave us the numbers, 
she said they were running short, so I was not there 
defending her, like for example – I think it was Mark 
Pamensky who was very vocal about, you know?  But you 
cannot let the FD go because – he spoke stuff about, I 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 55 of 285 
 
think …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the markets. 
MS KLEIN:   Downgrading, all of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   But the piece about me saying that I sit on 
various committees and the financials were not in order, 
the committee or the Commission asked me to re-listen to 
it and give them the names and I gave them the names and 
that comment came from Viroshini Naidoo, not me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, maybe …[intervenes] 
10 
MS KLEIN:   But maybe Mr Seleka could give it to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …it is time for a short break. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That might help to find the place. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if when we come back you have not 
found it, this has not been resolved, we can continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With other questions while your junior is 
20 
looking. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then we can revisit it later. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we will take the tea adjournment 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 56 of 285 
 
and resume at twenty five to twelve. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We have spent quite some time on some 
of these matters but I think it was important to deal with 
certain issues. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think if you have been able to find 
the relevant parts of the transcript that Ms Klein wanted to 
be pointed out to her do that.  If not, let us continue while 
your junior is looking for those parts of the transcript and 
then we can go back to that issue later. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Klein, I give you reference.  
Chairperson, on this specific issue because Ms Klein refers 
to one incident where Ms Naidoo is talking and there is one 
aspect where you are also talking. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has she had a chance to look at that 
one or not yet? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have looked at both of them, the 
transcript. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, I mean has she, Ms Klein, had a 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 57 of 285 
 
chance to refresh her memory on that part there where you 
say she is talking? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, not yet, I did not show it to 
…[intervenes] 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, maybe if you can just read and 
then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, if you can read it to her, ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Then we will see if I need to maybe 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  But if it is in the bundle before her 
10 
you can tell her what page. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   While you read she can look at what 
…[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is in the reference bundle. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay, maybe it is better. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, Ms Klein, Ms Mabude talks about 
20 
what the Minister said, just to give you context. 
“Thanks, Chair, I think the Minister has indicated a 
whole of issues that needs to be looked at and in 
her speech, if you noted what she was saying, it 
was – it is the basis for the terms of reference, so if 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 58 of 285 
 
we can use that speech as a way of putting the 
terms of reference from that speech.” 
Then she carries on. 
MS KLEIN:   Sorry, is that Ms Mabude, Chair, or is that 
me? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, no, Ms Mabude. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am just giving you the pretext. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay, alright, right, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   To get to the context. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but let us have Ms Klein have the 
reference bundle in front of her as well. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The reference bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That will give her the advantage 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MS KLEIN:   Thank you.  Thank you, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank Chair, I beg your pardon, 
Ms Klein.  That is on page 356.  Page 356.  Against line 20 
on that page, I was reading from there, Ms Klein. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, sir. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   “...and from that speech it was  
indicated to me.  Indicated the critical sections that 
needs to be looked at and in looking at this critical 
sections, just keep the leader in its section from 
what she was saying...” 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 59 of 285 
 
And so forth.  Then you turn the page to 358, the 
Chairperson speaks: 
“Okay …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are referring to the red numbers 
now on this bundle as well? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Black numbers. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The black numbers, Chairperson, thank 
you for reminding me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so what page? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 358. 
CHAIRPERSON:   358? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   358, Chair.  I am now automatically 
used to the black when I see them, Chair. 
MS KLEIN:   Sorry, Chairperson, mine has all the red 
numbers, hey?  At the top. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, the black one in this one.  In this 
reference at the top, top left.  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Alright, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, 358, black numbers, yes, I have 
20 
got that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, then the Chairperson after Ms 
Mabude has spoken says: 
“Okay, I think based on what you are saying 
Chwayita…” 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 60 of 285 
 
That is Ms Mabude. 
“…there are four areas that the Minister has spoken 
about.  She spoke about maintenance and that is 
engineering, maintenance is driven by engineering.  
She 
spoke 
about 
procurement 
and 
that 
is 
commercial 
and 
she 
spoke 
about 
new 
build 
programme, that is capital and technology and she 
spoke about finance.” 
So Mr Tsotsi indicates that the Minister already has 
referred to four areas. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And then Ms Naidoo speaks, at the 
bottom of – after the Chairperson has spoken. 
“Mr Chair…” 
She also spoke about the fact - that the load shedding. 
Mr Tsotsi then says: 
“No, no, that is once again – do not forget load 
shedding is a consequence of maintenance and lack 
thereof 
so 
it 
is 
still 
engineering, 
it 
is 
not 
generations.” 
20 
Says “Okay.”  Then you come in, Ms Klein: 
“Chairperson, look, I think as the board we have 
been grappling with a whole lot of issues which, as 
she has correctly pointed out…” 
Now, Ms Klein, bear in mind, what I am saying is, it is the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 61 of 285 
 
motivation you are making for the FD. 
“She was concerned we are worrying ourselves 
about the rats and mice and burning platforms not 
being attacked(?) but I think as a board this is 
going to be one time when we must step up the 
plate and must make hard calls because we are 
being saying we have been disengaged, now we are 
engaged.  Now the real question becomes do we 
now 
want 
to 
now 
delay 
this 
by 
going 
into 
subcommittee work before we make hard calls?  
10 
Sitting here today and knowing - and just not have 
to be proven or evidential proof, the fact that our 
Chairman tell us, unless we believe he is lying, we 
cannot ignore what is being on the table.  I think 
this is where we need to make hard calls with a 
parallel process of finding the evidence on what has 
been - you know, what is happening but I get a bit 
scared, 
if 
we 
want 
to 
now 
palm 
off 
the 
subcommittees, number one, and number two, you 
know, people are going to be treated like criminals.  
20 
You know what, guys, today in the business world, 
public and private sector, people are being set 
aside which is why that word is quite good.  It is not 
suspended but it is set aside while something 
bigger happens.     This is not about you or me, this 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 62 of 285 
 
is about the entire country and I think this is the 
watershed for us as a board but for the country.  So 
if somebody can make the hard call to show we will 
leave no stone unturned to see if we can turn this 
things around and we can make a mistake – we are 
going to make some mistakes as we go but do not 
forget the board has been seen or – I certainly feel 
like a sitting duck from the 10 or 12 December.  I 
have said it a number of times.  Now this is one 
thing I have got myself – I have got to challenge 
10 
myself and say given what I now know, I am still 
going to do that.” 
So 
that 
is 
the 
one 
part 
of 
the 
motivation 
for 
the 
suspensions, Ms Klein. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, Chairperson …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will then specifically refer you to 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what you read, Mr Seleka… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Unless I am missing something, might 
20 
what you read which you said is attributed to Ms Klein, 
might not necessarily relate to the Financial Director, it 
might be a call upon members of the board or P & G, 
whoever we are dealing with here, to say look, we have got 
to make hard decisions here and we must step up and 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 63 of 285 
 
make those decisions without necessarily – and I may have 
missed some things without necessarily saying I am 
motivating for the inclusion of the Financial Director.  I 
may have missed something. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am just saying that is the impression I 
got. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, correct, Chair, specifically 
here it is the motivation for what the Chairperson has said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Mabude, what I understand you to 
be saying, is that the Minister has identified four areas for 
suspension and Ms Klein in this regarding is saying yes, 
let us do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She is saying let us go along.  Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Klein, what do you say about that 
interpretation? 
MS KLEIN:   I absolutely support that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
20 
MS KLEIN:   I absolutely support. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That that is what – yes. 
MS KLEIN:   That is what exactly what I was saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS KLEIN:   You cannot be busy with rats and mice there 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 64 of 285 
 
is bigger issue here, we have not had information before, 
now we do, now can we please just get on with the job of 
doing it.  But I thought – but maybe, Chairperson, there is 
another reference because some – if you can just show me 
that other one where we talking about I have dealt with the 
FD before and she has not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the one that you could not 
remember. 
MS KLEIN:   That is one that I remember was… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   But if you could take us to there it would help 
us please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but I think just to make sure we are 
on the same page.  Your response, your reaction to what 
Mr Seleka has read as attributed to you is yes, that is what 
you said. 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct, sir, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Number one.  Number two, yes you were 
supporting the suspensions that were being discussed. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And those suspensions included the FD. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MS KLEIN:   At that stage that is what I was saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 65 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:    I have not checked the one, Ms Klein, 
you want now. 
MS KLEIN:   No, no, but we can do that later. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But we can do that later. 
MS KLEIN:   We can do that, I am comfortable with that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  Can I move on, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes please, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Klein, the …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course – maybe I should not say of 
course.  This does not affect the answer you gave earlier 
on of categorically denying Mr Baloyi’s evidence that you 
came up with the name of the FD. 
MS KLEIN:   No, that does not address it at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That answer stands. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, absolutely, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because it seems from what Ms 
Mabude is saying, which Mr Tsotsi then reiterates, that the 
Minister was the one who indicated four areas. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, is it also your recollection, Ms 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 66 of 285 
 
Klein, that the Minister indicated four areas or portfolios? 
MS KLEIN:   I remember the Minister ’s words being – I 
remember with the last time we spoke about it, I could not 
recollect it clearly but I went back and rethought a whole 
lot of things.  The Minister said the people heading the 
areas considered to be the problem areas, it would be best 
to get them to step aside. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Those were – that is how I remember it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   That is why when we got into the board 
meeting of the – after the in-committee meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   It was the to-ing and fro-ing, is the FD in, is 
she not?  But the Minister I do not think said four.  If I 
remember correctly she said the people responsible for the 
areas that the board considered to be problematic areas.   
If I remember it correctly.  I speak under correction there, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, it may be that this is what 
20 
happened.  We certainly know that at the Durban meeting 
the Financial Director was not included. 
MS KLEIN:   Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the finance portfolio I think was not 
included.  That we know.  We also know that ultimately four 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 67 of 285 
 
and 
not 
three 
executives 
were 
suspended 
and 
they 
included the Financial Director.  So it is a question of at 
what stage the Financial Director was included and part of 
what you have said this morning is when the Minister was 
speaking to the board on the 11 t h, she laid down a 
principle. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the principle was that she thought 
that executives who were leading portfolios that would be 
investigated should step aside or should be suspended or 
10 
she would leave it to the board but she would understand if 
they were suspended or something like that.   
Now if that is so and if her speech or what she said 
to the board at that time included the finance department, 
it would be logical if at the P & G meeting the question 
arose whether the FD should be included among the 
executives to be suspended, it would be logical or 
understandable if someone from within the committee, and 
this time maybe Dr Ngubane, called the Minister to say, 
you know, Minister, there is an issue about whether the FD 
20 
should be included or not, you know, and you said that 
portfolios 
that 
are 
affected, 
people 
who 
lead 
them, 
executives who lead them, maybe should be suspended, 
did you mean that the FD should also be suspended and 
therefore if Dr Ngubane came back to the meeting and said 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 68 of 285 
 
no, we must include the FD, one would understand if Mr 
Tsotsi asked him but where are you coming with this name 
from because we only spoke about three?  Then he would 
answer the Minister said she must be included.  So it would 
fall in place logically if that – that that because she seems 
to have laid a principle and if later on she was asked in 
terms of this principle you laid when you talked to us, 
should the FD be included?  And it seems that logically she 
would say apply that principle and if you apply it, the FD 
gets included. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   I agree, Chairperson, and I think the only 
people who can answer that would be Dr Ngubane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Or Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Because like I said, you know, that was the 
level of deliberations.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   The meeting closed with three and the next 
one opened with four.  So somewhere in between there. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Maybe the calls – maybe, like you correctly 
point out, Minister was in the building.  I do not quite know 
how that worked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 69 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   But I remember a meeting where Dr Ngubane 
was running in and out and then looking at the transcripts 
of the 14.48 meeting I could not find where he was running 
in and out and coming with names.  So that is what led me 
to believe, Advocate Seleka, that must have happened in 
between those two… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   In fact, on the – in the transcript of the 12 – 
of the meeting that ends at one, it is actually, Advocate, 
when you look at it – sorry, Chairperson, when you look at 
10 
– we say there we are now going to break into the meeting 
which I would assume would have been that smaller 
meeting where this was going on but I think that needs to 
be verified with the likes of Dr Ngubane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   And the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   I cannot say anything more than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, your summation seems to bear 
20 
concurrence with the documentation because Dr Ngubane 
says: 
“When the Minister arrives, although the Minister 
did not direct the board to suspend the four 
executives…” 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 70 of 285 
 
Now he specifically says the four.  And we have read the 
transcript saying the Minister has identified four areas. 
“She raises concerns of her own against them, the 
executives.  The concerns related to the war room 
which 
she 
suggested, 
complained 
it 
was 
not 
received consistent information from management 
and therefore it could not develop strategies to turn 
around 
Eskom 
and 
stop 
load 
shedding. 
 The 
Minister 
felt 
that 
the 
presence 
of 
the 
four 
executives might hinder the investigation.” 
10 
Now that is Dr Ngubane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so based on what Dr Ngubane says, 
the Minister spoke about four executives. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So then you find that latter part you 
referred to, Chair, in Mr Tsotsi’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Where he says about the FD. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That the FD was not to be included but 
then Dr Ngubane phoned the Minister and when he came 
back he said yes, the FD – the Minister says the FD must 
be included. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 71 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that is at a P & G meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because when you look at the P & G 
meeting Mr Tsotsi introduces Mr Linnell and he says to 
him: 
“Now 
the 
board 
has 
made 
some 
significant 
decisions and the decisions the board has made in 
respect of the investigation are that: 
1. The 
investigation 
will 
proceed 
as 
soon 
as 
possible. 
10 
2. Those executives who are directly involved with 
the areas where the investigation will focus will 
be suspended.” 
And he says: 
“And these are four areas.  This is first and 
foremost, chief executive, then it is the executives 
for Group Capital, the Executive for Commercial 
and the Executive for Finance and the reason for 
that is because it is important that the ability to 
carry out the investigation is not compromised.” 
20 
Then somebody asks: 
“Sorry, Chair, is the Executive Finance included as 
well?” 
Mr Chair then: 
“Oh, yes.  Four.  And that the work that needs to be 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 72 of 285 
 
done in respect of the investigation must not be 
compromised.” 
He carries on: 
“…must not be comprised by the presence of these 
particular executives.  One of the two that from the 
work you have done, the committee would like to 
know and needs to be updated in terms of the 
operational charges that are on the table in respect 
of the executives and probably excludes the FD 
because you were not briefed on the FD…” 
10 
Now he is addressing Mr Linnell. 
“…as far as I know but certainly on the other three 
executives maybe you want to take the committee 
through that and also the processes that need to 
come into play for this to be different, to be 
effected, which include managing the media, the 
public perceptions and all of this.  Nick, should we 
just talk about these issues then, how you see the 
process going forward?” 
And so what the Chair is saying, the instruction to the – or 
20 
the request to him specifically was - from Durban – was in 
regard to the three executives and that seems to have 
turned after the Minister arrived or as, Ms Klein, in 
between the meetings. 
MS KLEIN:   Can I just add, Chairperson, that voice that 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 73 of 285 
 
you heard is Malesela. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is this – oh, okay. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja, so you know what, I would actually like us 
– I think, Chairperson, you asked me to put names next to 
and identify voices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can we do that exercise? 
MS KLEIN:   If you can because it was sent – I hope my 
counsel has sent it through to you because it took me a lot 
of time to work through it. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   So that was Malesela.  So once again, I think 
what that then also shows is Malesela was part of the first 
meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Which ended at a certain time.  Here we go 
into a second meeting, whether we call it now P & G, we 
can have a difference of opinion of what it is called based 
on a different thing, but here is the company secretary 
20 
asking: 
“So now it has gone from three to four now.” 
So something happened in between that time and I think 
you should ask the people concerned how that happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  But also, it is 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 74 of 285 
 
important to make sure that we know exactly who is 
speaking in the different parts of the transcript. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that we do not wrongly attribute 
something to somebody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who did not say those things. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, we made that arrangement with 
10 
one of the witnesses to identify who is speaking at any 
given point.  Chair before – you will see the lunchtime 
being referred to but your recollection is correct because 
they do take a break and Ms Mabude says: 
“Audit and risk will meet before lunch.” 
Mr Tsotsi says: 
“Well, we will meet after lunch.” 
And Mr Baloyi says: 
“Sorry, Chair, let risk meet first…” 
That is before lunch. 
20 
“And then we will meet up with risk once we get 
their input.” 
And this is the debate about we meet before lunch and 
after lunch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 75 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Klein, let us move on quickly 
because we spent too much time there.  The suspension of 
the FD and especially the three other executives was then 
done – well, we can include Mr Koko, but the other two 
executives write to the board and they engage with the 
board.  They are seeking answers from the board about the 
actual reasons why they are suspended because they see 
in the public media different reasons are advanced as to 
10 
opposed to what they were given.   
 
We have gone through that and we came to the 
meeting where there was meeting, you attended, where 
they talked about letters from the executives.  You can 
recall that? 
MS KLEIN:   Just help me, Chair, please.  Which – what 
are we talking about? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remember, Mr Seleka, not to bother 
to go over the same thing that we went over. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us focus on things that were not 
covered but obviously if there is something we covered 
where you have remembered some issue that you need to 
raise, you may raise it. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 76 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  They will find the minutes of that 
meeting. 
MS KLEIN:   No problem, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I remember referring you to it. 
MS KLEIN:   No problem, that is okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  But, Ms Tsholofelo Molefe has 
indicated 
that 
you 
were 
actively 
involved 
in 
the 
discussions, settlement discussions or exit negotiations 
with her. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. Because in your affidavit you 
appeared not to be knowing how her situation was handled. 
MS KLEIN:   I am sorry if that was the indication that I 
gave, Chairperson, but as Chairperson of P & G I can 
actually go take you to a minute where, as the board we 
kept on getting requests, my understanding, from different 
executives wanting to exit.  That was my understanding.  In 
a board meeting in April, if my memory serves me well. It 
then says: 
“Romeo Kumalo can continue to engage with the 
20 
CEO…” 
Who was at that stage – I think he had already been to the 
Labour Court. 
“…and any further settlements or any people who 
want to still leave must contact Dr Ben directly.” 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 77 of 285 
 
It then – it is interesting what the last sentence says: 
“Mrs Klein may also be part of a delegation.” 
What was left out of that was that – and I am not trying to 
say I was not part of it because I was part of it, but 
Chairperson, I had to fight as Chairperson of People in 
Governance, which I was at that stage, to be part of the 
discussions with the people very simply because I needed 
to make sure that people were fairly handled and treated. 
 
So to go back to that point, I am not sure if that is 
the point you were making, Chairperson, but I just wanted 
10 
to indicate I definitely was part.  So if I – if I omitted to 
answer it that way, then that was an oversight but that I 
was part of it, I definitely was part of the exit discussions 
with Tsholofelo as well as for Koko, which I am sure we will 
get to later, as well as for Mr Matona.  Dan Marokane I 
think had already preceded that so I was not part of that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, no problem on that.  Let me tell 
you because Ms Tsholofelo has testified that when she was 
met by you and the delegation on the 4 May… 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You did – the delegation said to her 
she has been writing letters to the board asking to exit and 
she says she categorically denied that.  She said my 
letters were not about me wishing to exit, it was about me 
seeking information from the board.  Do you recall that? 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 78 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Let me just go back, sorry, Chairperson.  Let 
me just understand.  Are you saying that I said? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No. 
MS KLEIN:   Oh, sorry, I did not get the question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The delegation… 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   …said to her you have been writing 
letters to the board seeking to exit. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   She said – she denied that, her letters 
10 
were not about her wishing to exit, it was about her 
seeking information from the board about the terms of 
reference and the actual reasons for her suspension and 
there was an issue about insurance of directors. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I have got to agree with her, Chairperson, 
because after the last time that I was here …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe, maybe, I am sorry …[intervenes] 
MS KLEIN:   I have to agree with her. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think there is a part which Mr Seleka 
left, maybe he was going to deal with later on and I hope I 
am not confusing the different executives but I thought she 
– ja, I think she said Mr Romeo Kumalo was the one 
speaking. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 79 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In that meeting and she says despite the 
fact that she told the delegation and told Mr Kumalo that 
she had not written to the board wanting to leave.  Mr 
Kumalo followed up with a suggestion along the lines that 
the investigation or the inquiry may still take quite long, 
maybe we should talk about a separation package anyway.  
That’s what Mr – Ms Molefe said, the gist of it and that is 
what she added, does that ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:    That does sound correct Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s your recollection as well? 
MS KLEIN:   That is my recollection of what – of certainly 
what she said because I have read through her letters as 
well so I have to agree with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and do you have a recollection of 
Mr Kumalo having responded along the same lines that she 
says or do you have no recollection of that? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I can’t remember exactly what 
was said but I do know that Mr Kumalo, you see my 
understanding was prior to that meeting there had been 
20 
engagements between people, people talking to people, 
which is why the Board had ultimately then agreed that Mr 
Kumalo continues to talk to I think it was Tshediso Matona, 
and that then there was a sub-committee formed because 
people were getting – apparently calls were coming in.   I 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 80 of 285 
 
was led to believe that people were calling in because they 
were wanting to go, that was my understanding, so – but 
when I went back to re-read particular to Tsholofela’s 
affidavit, not affidavit, her – the letters that she had been 
writing it was more questioning around process, about one 
letter about you know she is part of CICA, how this would 
affect her in the long run, I remember reading all of that. 
 
So I have to agree with it, the exact wording I 
cannot account for, but definitely you know that is – it is as 
she says. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  So nothing much I 
need to pursue there but safe to ask you Dr Ngubane has 
said here that the Boards actually wanted them back, the 
executives back.  What is your comment on that? 
MS KLEIN:   My understanding right from the start 
Chairperson is that people were asked to step aside to not 
interfere, that is what my understanding was, and that 
ultimately they would come back.   Obviously what has now 
happened and in listening to different people testify you 
20 
kind of try and now rethink some of it, my understanding at 
the time was people were saying there is so much 
confusion, we have got professional integrity that is being 
questioned, you as a Board are not coming back to us, we 
want to leave.  That is what I understood then. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 81 of 285 
 
 
Going back and rereading some of it now I must 
admit rereading Tsholofela’s letter by the way was the one 
where I could she was rather asking questions than saying 
I want to leave.   So that is on Tsholofela.   If I can just 
add something else, I went back to go and reread Dan 
Marokane, because the last time I was in the chair here 
Chairperson, and I know we want to speed this along, but I 
think it is important that we clarify this, a letter was put to 
me that was written by Dan, correctly so, two days after his 
suspension, I think it was the 14 t h or something. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No it was on the 18 t h. 
MS KLEIN:   Oh, the 18 t h okay, and Chairperson it was 
presented to me but it came to P & G and it came to 
company secretary and to ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was addressed to Mr Tsotsi. 
MS KLEIN:   Mr Tsotsi.   I went to go and look through all 
my 
mail 
to 
satisfy 
myself 
that 
I 
did 
not 
miss 
it.  
Chairperson I could find no record, number one, of when it 
ever came to me as P&G, remember I wasn’t chairing 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No sorry Ms Klein, can I clarify that? 
MS KLEIN:   Okay, please do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, it wasn’t said that the letter came 
to you as P&G, the minutes of the meeting I am referring 
to, which I will find, the Board said there, and it is minuted, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 82 of 285 
 
it acknowledged, it accepted that there are these letters 
from the Executives and to Ms Phukubje, the Company 
Secretary to reply to those letters.  
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And that is the minute which I referred 
to, but not that you received the letter, no.  
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson thank you, that is clarified, I am 
so sorry sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is alright.  Yes, thank you.  But 
my question was Dr Ngubane said the Board wanted them 
10 
back, is that what you understood as well? 
MS KLEIN:   From the start Chairperson that was always 
going to be the position.   My personal view I have given 
you on the CE, not on everybody, on the CE, I gave you a 
particular view on the CE, that was my view. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Which remember I gave you the example of 
R500 000, but that was my view and it was based on a 
perspective from outside of Eskom.  But my understanding 
always was that these people would step aside for three 
20 
months and come back into their roles after three months.   
Not after three months, after the investigation had been 
completed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now isn’t it that you would have known 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 83 of 285 
 
at the meeting with Ms Molefe ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Sorry Chair? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Isn’t it that you would have known at 
the meeting with Ms Molefe already that it was not the 
position that she did not want to come back.  On the 4 t h of 
May when Romeo Kumalo says to her you have been 
writing letters which we understand wishing to exit from 
Eskom, she says no, and you were in that meeting.  So you 
would have known then that it is not her intention to leave. 
MS KLEIN:   I am not sure how to answer that Chairperson, 
10 
simply because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think there is a part which I think Mr 
Seleka doesn’t articulate but I may be wrong, that is why 
didn’t you say to Mr Romeo ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   I was going to ask that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the Board has no problem with these 
people why should we talk about Ms Molefe leaving when 
she makes it clear she is not asking for an exit, I think 
that’s what he is putting to you, why didn’t you say that, 
because you on your evidence you knew the Board to 
20 
expect them to come back, and therefore if a particular 
executive says I have not asked for a separation and your 
colleague Mr Kumalo says no even though you haven’t 
asked for it I think we should talk about your leaving one 
would expect you to say why are you saying that. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 84 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think he is asking you why didn’t 
you say that? 
MS KLEIN:   Very simply Chairperson because we went to 
that meeting with already prepared numbers to talk about 
separation, remember I have indicated to you that we had 
been getting feedback in the Board itself that people are 
wanting to disengage, so I would have had no reason to 
think that she still wanted to stay.  I attended a meeting 
alongside of Romeo to talk about how to use – I think it 
10 
was his words or her words, no, his words, how to amicably 
resolve this, but at that stage, and remember we are 
talking about from the 13 t h or the 11 t h of March, right now 
to either the 4 t h or the 5 t h of May thereabouts. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   4 May. 
MS KLEIN:   4 May, we’re talking about almost two months 
later, I consistently had been hearing people are wanting 
to leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but the point is you may have come 
to that meeting with Ms Molefe on the understanding that 
20 
she also wanted to leave but the moment she clarified the 
position that she had not written requesting to be allowed 
to leave, one would then expect you to say oh that changes 
the picture then, at least as far as Ms Molefe is concerned.  
We came here under the impression that all the executives 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 85 of 285 
 
want to leave, she doesn’t want to leave so Mr Kumalo why 
are you pursuing this issue of leaving, that’s the point. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja, Chairperson quite frankly I cannot tell you 
why I didn’t ask. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine. 
MS KLEIN:   That I cannot answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, no, no, that’s fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Baloyi yesterday testified about his 
view that the laptops should not be taken away from them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Seleka let’s just go back 
10 
to this. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course the question that Mr Seleka 
puts to you about why you didn’t raise this would arise with 
regard to Mr Kumalo’s and would arise even with more 
force, to say Mr Kumalo here is an executive telling you I 
didn’t write to you wanting us to talk about my leaving, why 
did you then say we must talk about her leaving you know, 
and it raises another question Ms Klein, namely whether 
we might not hear we’re dealing with a situation where the 
20 
Board as a body might not have ever taken a decision to 
say we don’t want them back, but there may have been 
some individuals within the Board who may have been 
working on the basis that these executives must leave, you 
understand what I am saying? 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 86 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  I hear you Chairperson and what you’re saying 
is highly – it is possible but like I said you know the 
question to me was that I can’t answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine, yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I can’t answer that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, we have a situation where Mr 
Matona gave evidence and said after my suspension I was 
so aggrieved that I used my own money to pay lawyers to 
go to the Labour Court to get the suspension set aside so I 
could go back to my job at Eskom, the Labour Court said 
10 
there was some unfairness in my suspension but referred 
the matter to the CCMA.  At the CCMA the Board 
delegation asked for a postponement and they said they 
wanted to get a mandate from the shareholder Minister, 
and we had two meetings.  At the first meeting with the 
delegation of the  Board, and I think Mr Romeo Kumalo was 
one of them if I am not mistaken, Mr Matona says one of 
the members of the Board who was in that delegation when 
I said I want to go back to my job said that is off the table. 
 
So you have that situation, and then you now have 
20 
a situation with Ms Molefe, a delegation of the Board is 
meeting with her on the understanding from what you have 
said that apparently the executives have been writing 
wanting to talk about separation.  She makes it clear that I 
have not written to – want to talk about separation, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 87 of 285 
 
nevertheless 
your 
colleague 
Mr 
Kumalo 
wants 
the 
discussion to be – to focus on exactly that, and that is 
what happens. 
 
So it may well be that it was the Board, it may well 
be that the Board as a body had – didn’t have a problem 
but there were certain individuals within the Board who 
might 
have 
wanted 
the 
executives 
or 
some 
of 
the 
executives out. 
MS KLEIN:   That’s possible Chair, I am sure you will ask 
the appropriate people the same question. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that’s fine.  We will hear all 
the evidence and see at the end what picture emerges. 
MS KLEIN:   Of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair, and just to 
strengthen the point further Ms Klein, you see that part 
about Mr Kumalo saying the investigation will take a while, 
kind of motivating, separating with the company because 
we are going to take a while with the investigation.   Now 
this is in May and you will recall that Dentons was 
20 
appointed in April and the say in their affidavit which we 
have provided you with that they commenced their work on 
the 20 t h of April 2015.   They detail what they did in the 
first week which is essentially meetings and clients who 
understand the terms of reference and the mandate and 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 88 of 285 
 
that’s April, May, and then on the 11 t h of June they say 
they are told please provide us with a draft report, so in 
their estimation they say we will – they are appointed for 
three months and about seven weeks into the job we were 
told give us a report.   
 
Now that is on the 11 t h of June 2015. 
MS KLEIN:   July. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
No 
June 
2015, 
you 
could 
...[intervenes]     
MS KLEIN:   No that’s okay Chair. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But what I am testing with you is this 
proposition given to Ms Molefe that we are going to take a 
while with the investigation, but in fact because that 
contract is only signed on the 25 t h of June 2015, a 
settlement agreement, I beg your pardon. 
MS KLEIN:   With Dentons? 
CHAIRPERSON:   With Ms Molefe. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   With Ms Molefe yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Oh with Ms Molefe, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   A settlement agreement is signed on 
20 
the 25 t h, so what I am saying to you is the statement made 
to her when you look at it on the facts it could not have 
been that the investigation was going to take long and 
therefore you are advised to settle and separate with the 
company.   Do you appreciate that? 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 89 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, in other words if Ms Molefe’s 
evidence that Mr Romeo Kumalo said to her after she had 
clarified that she had not written to the Board to talk about 
leaving Eskom if her evidence that he then said you know 
the inquiry or the investigation is still going to take long so 
maybe we should talk about a separation package, that 
statement by Mr Kumalo could not have been true because 
Dentons was about to complete its investigation and the 
three months that the Board had even Dentons had not 
been extended by the Board, so he would have known that 
10 
the Dentons investigation was about to be completed, so 
one wonders why he would have said to somebody who 
says I haven’t asked that we discuss my departure from 
Eskom why he would have said you know the investigation 
may still take quite long, maybe we should talk about your 
separation, one wonders why that statement would have 
been made.   
Of course he will come here, he will give evidence, we 
don’t know if he will admit that he made that statement but 
as I understand your position you say you recall Ms Molefe 
20 
clarifying that she had not written to the Board wanting to 
talk about leaving, is that right?  
MS KLEIN:   That is correct Chair and I am also, like you 
correctly say, Mr Khumalo will come here and he will 
probably or for sure be asked that.    
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 90 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I was just thinking from my own perspective 
would I have known at the time, remember not being a 
member of Audit & Risk I wouldn’t have known at that time 
how long that would have proceeded, but I would have 
known, you are correct, it was supposed to be for three 
months. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that part you would have known. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja, so I think – I think you have cleared that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that part you would have known. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The other part you would have known is 
that the Board had not extended the three months. 
MS KLEIN:   Exactly, that had not come, the Dentons 
things I think started coming to the Board sometime in July, 
if memory serves me correctly, 25 t h of June.  25 t h of June 
was the first time Dentons did a presentation, but I think 
the members of Audit & Risk may have been more 
knowledgeable at the time as to exactly you know what the 
position was. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, Ms Klein the presentation was 
made on the 27 t h of May 2015. 
MS KLEIN:   To Audit & Risk. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that’s the first presentation. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 91 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And – but after that Dentons 
specifically says, and we have seen its report, they say in 
this affidavit they were told to give a draft report on the 
11 t h of June they are told that, and that’s when they 
stopped the investigation work.    You have read Mr Kapdi’s 
affidavit. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I don’t mean to be difficult but I 
mean I was given a document yesterday to read with 
highlights, I was trying to browse as quickly as possible.   
10 
Just the two areas that affected me, so if Ms Kapdi is 
saying about dates I am sure he is correct, I obviously 
couldn’t cross-reference that with my own was I a member, 
would I have known it, would I not have known it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s fair enough. 
MS KLEIN:   That is all I’m saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s fair enough. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But Ms Kapdi is not saying anything 
that is not in the reports, the report itself documents that, 
that we were told by Eskom on the 11 t h of June 2015 that 
20 
we should provide them with a draft report, that is in the 
report itself which as the Board member he would have had 
it at the time, so but as you say you cannot quarrel with 
that, we can find the report for you but what the 
significance of that is this Ms Klein, at that time, at that 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 92 of 285 
 
time, 11 June 2015 you, the delegation and in particular 
yourself at that time because it seems on Ms Tsholofela’s 
version the other members did not participate any further, 
Dr Ngubane, Mr Kumalo, but it was you and Mr Khosa who 
were corresponding with her regarding the settlement 
discussions.   You agree, I see you’re nodding. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, sorry Chairperson, yes I would have as 
Chairperson P&G I would have been at the centre of the 
discussions for the settlement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the proposal was sent to her and 
10 
so on, so the point ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Yes Dr Ngubane wasn’t part of it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes the point I am making then just to 
emphasize is just that if as Dr Ngubane says the Board 
wanted them back, if as you say the intention has always 
been they will come back, you wanted them back, then you 
know since there is a window period then between the 11 t h 
of June to the 25 t h of June that you say to her look let’s 
drop the settlement discussions you are welcome back. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairpersons sorry I don’t mean to be 
20 
difficult. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   I really don’t mean to be difficult, but the 
Board according to me, remember there is Audit & Risk 
who is dealing directly with the Dentons, giving them 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 93 of 285 
 
instructions and no instructions.  According to me the first 
time I become aware of the Dentons report and what it 
says is on the 25 t h of June, which is when it gets 
presented, so if you are telling me that there was a 
meeting where it was agreed on the 11 t h of June that they 
must cut their report short, you are going to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You were not part of that meeting? 
MS KLEIN:   Please can you show me because I thought I 
had read everything in connection with Dentons, Dentons I 
know met with us on the 11 t h, on the 9 t h of July, sorry 25 t h 
10 
of July, 25 t h of June apologies, I think it was the 2 n d of 
July, I think it was the 14 t h of July, these are all the Board 
meetings where Dentons gets discussed, so if you can just 
show me the meeting where it gets cut short.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I would appreciate that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, but I haven’t referred to a meeting 
Ms Klein, I said Dentons says in their report and in this 
affidavit they received instruction from Eskom that they 
should provide a draft report, and the ultimate report is 
20 
dated 2 July 2015, and now you are referring to meetings 
after the date of that report. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That doesn’t bear on the point I am 
raising with you. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 94 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   I apologise Chairperson, I misunderstood, I 
thought there’s a meeting where this is discussed, because 
I am being asked to comment on why I would have not with 
Tsholofela fought harder if we knew Dentons was going to 
stop already on the 11 t h of June, help me sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I am saying the Board, Dentons 
says the Board has asked me to stop, not to stop but to 
provide them with a draft report, and they say from that 
moment forward we concentrated on drafting the report and 
not the investigation and – this is Dentons saying it is a 
10 
mid-point report, you have made me not to complete my 
investigation, 
that’s 
the 
Board 
that 
has 
instructed 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let’s take it step by step.  Is your 
question based on an affidavit from Dentons. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And a report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And a report. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And the report of Dentons Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 And 
the 
question 
relates 
to 
the 
proposition that Ms Klein would have known at the time of 
20 
the meeting with Ms Molefe that the Dentons investigation 
was about to end. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is based on this fact Chair, between 
11 June 2015 and 25 June 2015, which is the settlement 
period there’s a window period.  If the Board says to 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 95 of 285 
 
Dentons stop, give us a report you have said you are 
suspending these people until the end of the inquiry, so 
here you have a shortcut, you have cut it short.  It is the 
time then you say to her okay well the inquiry has been 
stopped, we are now awaiting a report, let’s stop these 
settlement discussions ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes I think the starting point is do you 
remember such a meeting of the Board on the – or was 
there a meeting of the Board ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, no reference to a meeting Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no, ja but Dentons says on the 
11 t h they were told by Eskom, they don’t say who exactly at 
Eskom told them. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay do you know whether by the 11 t h of 
June the Board had taken the position that Dentons should 
submit their report? 
MS KLEIN:   No I don’t recall that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t recall? 
MS KLEIN:   I don’t recall it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay thank you Chair but that is the 
position.  Dentons said on the 11 t h June 2015 the firm was 
requested to prepare a detailed presentation to the Board 
in 
addition 
to 
a 
draft 
report 
detailing 
the 
state 
of 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 96 of 285 
 
investigation to date.   You will find it in Mr Kapdi’s 
affidavit and in the report itself.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, certainly from the mere fact that 
Dentons had been give three months from sometime in 
April, is it 20 April, or sometime in April had been given 
three months to complete its investigation, three months 
from around 28 February, I believe that is the date, I don’t 
know where I get that date from, it would be May, June, oh, 
it would be May, June, July, it would be about, so three 
months would be about July. 
10 
 
Now the first meeting with Ms Molefe would have 
been what date, do you remember, it was end of May? 
MS KLEIN:   No I think you said 4 t h of May. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   4 May. 
CHAIRPERSON:   4 May or in May okay so that would have 
meant that there were still about two months to go but that 
period would be the same period that the executives would 
have known at the time of their suspension, because they 
were told that the investigation had been given three 
months. 
20 
MS KLEIN:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s what they would have known. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if Mr Romeo Kumalo did indeed say 
the investigation might take longer that could only have 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 97 of 285 
 
been understood to mean longer than the three months I 
would imagine?   
MS KLEIN:    Correct chair, I would imagine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But from your own knowledge as far as – 
at board level there was no basis for any member of the 
Board to say the investigation, the Dentons investigation 
would take longer than three months.   
MS KLEIN:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, because the Board had never 
changed from its stipulation that three months was the 
10 
period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Chair I do remember a discussion I think at 
ARC, and we just need to have a look at Audit & Risk 
Committee where apparently there was a request for 
additional I think if I remember correctly I think Dentons 
did come and say they wanted an additional three months 
or something, the actual date of that Audit & Risk 
Committee meeting I don’t have, but there was such a 
discussion from what I learnt afterwards, with the higher 
20 
budget etcetera, which is why I almost think in my affidavit 
I address the fact that I know it was three months because 
of that having been the agreed timeframe, but also 
because of budgetary constraints.  That’s how I remember 
it.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 98 of 285 
 
 
So I know that I heard about another meeting where 
there was requests for an extension but I don’t remember 
that having ever been approved or who had decided that 
this is where it ends.   We need to go and look at minutes 
and things, I would also need to just – because it is not 
something I went to go and look at chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Of course I think it would 
be fair to say to you Ms Klein apart from the fact that one 
would have expected you, which we have dealt with, to say 
to Mr Kumalo why must we talk to Ms Molefe about 
10 
separation when she is making it clear that that is not what 
she wanted to talk about and we as the Board actually 
want them or expect that they would come back, once he 
also said the investigation would take longer one would 
expect you to say but where from, it is not my information 
that kind of thing.  You understand that? 
MS KLEIN:  I hear you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  But like I said the one thing that as I am sitting 
here now grappling with the – what do I remember and what 
20 
do I not remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  The one thing that was always very big at 
Eskom is all the noise and people talking to people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 99 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  And you know then you come into a meeting and 
now you have heard something so the noise of the 
investigation taking longer I had heard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  But did I ever see it; was I part of a meeting 
where it was said that you have got – I cannot remember 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
MS KLEIN:  And I can only talk to what I knew.  Unless of 
course I am given the chance to go back and reconsider my 
10 
minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine.  That is fine.  Mr 
Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  By the way Ms Klein I 
see from Mr Kapdi’s affidavit that in fact the presentation on 
the 27 May 2015 was done to the board.  He says a 
presentation was made to the board on 27 May 2015 setting 
out some of the issues identified by investigation team at the 
point.  Obviously we received this affidavit yesterday and we 
were able to provide you with it only yesterday.  So that is 
20 
what he says there. 
MS KLEIN:  I cannot – I cannot argue that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot remember. 
MS KLEIN:  My recollection is – sorry did he say that he 
made a presentation?  Just help me again there Sir. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 100 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  A presentation was made to the board on 
27 May 2015 setting out some of the issues identified by 
investigation team at a time.  A presentation to the board. 
MS KLEIN:  And I am going to go as far as saying to you 
Chairperson without being difficult I want to have an 
opportunity to go and con – take the affidavit and compare it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is … 
MS KLEIN:  Because Chairperson the first presentation that 
I have got in the board in committee minutes made by – by 
… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: Dentons. 
MS KLEIN:  Sorry by Dentons was on the 25 June.  When I 
was asked by the committee to go and check.  He may very 
well have made that presentation to Audit and Risk and I 
think so . 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We can – we can verify that. 
MS KLEIN:  Ja you can clarify it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Because he says to the board we can 
verify that. 
20 
MS KLEIN:  Please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also minutes can be sought. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes absolutely chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To see whether … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Indeed. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 101 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  There was any meeting of the board on 
that date. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
And 
what 
was 
the 
content 
of 
the 
discussion. 
MS KLEIN:  Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or whether it might have been a meeting of 
committee of the board. 
MS KLEIN:  Audit and Risk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  And on the extension quickly 
because he does deal with it.  But this is what he says:  He 
says they came across a meeting – a minute of the board 
dated 31 March 2015 in which the board itself was saying 
there is a note there that the investigation could take up to 
twelve months.  And then he says:   
“In the firm’s view – Denton’s view it was 
pos... – it was not possible to exhaustively 
investigate the matters set out in the TOR 
and a task order within the three month 
20 
investigation period. The firm’s investigation 
team met at an early stage to discuss the 
planning 
of 
the 
investigation 
and 
the 
investigation methodology in order to satisfy 
the requirements of the TOR within the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 102 of 285 
 
applicable three month period.” 
So it seems to – from the reading of this that even though 
they see the board itself saying this investigation could take 
up to twelve months they endeavoured and planned their 
efforts to complete it within three months. 
MS KLEIN:  I remember reading exactly that Chair so I 
cannot state that is one hundred percent accurate.  I have 
read that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And then he does say: 
“As it would subsequently unfold the firm was 
not afforded the – the agreed three month 
period to complete the investigation.  The 
firm 
was 
instructed 
to 
seize 
further 
investigatory activities after a period of about 
seven weeks.  In the circumstances the firm 
was requested to prepare its report reflecting 
– what he says is a mid-point investigation 
20 
period.” 
But that is in the report already. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  So the – I think you get the 
point we were saying that that window period more so than 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 103 of 285 
 
when the investigation is cut short and shall I add that the 
investigation was not seeking to determine any wrongdoing 
on their part.  You recall that? 
MS KLEIN:  Correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  And quickly on that because then 
you will – you have seen what Mr Kapdi says about your 
averment that you approached him.  Let me see.  In regard 
to the return of Mr Koko.  Sorry Chair I am – I hope you will 
not lose me because I am cutting to the chase. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no I am hoping we can – we can finish 
10 
with her evidence by one o’clock but I might have forgotten 
some of the parts that need to be covered. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is important that we cover everything 
that is important that should be covered with her. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if we have to come – continue after 
lunch with her in order to do justice to the issues so be it. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us do the best we can to do as 
much as we can within the time available. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you very much Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 104 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you very much Chair.  Ms Klein as 
I was going there the Chair is talking reminds me something.  
And I want to draw the parallels between at least Ms Molefe 
and what you are going to tell us here regarding Mr Koko.  
On your version you say Mr Koko – it was only Mr Koko who 
wanted to come back and you went to find out from Dentons 
with regards to Mr Koko.   
He was the one executive who was not interested in 
leaving the employ of Eskom.  He indicated that he wanted 
to come back.  In this regard I contacted Mr Noor Kapdi of 
10 
Dentons who indicated that they had not found any evidence 
of wrongdoing by any of the suspended executives.   
Now you not saying when did you do this but we see 
that you had all the meetings with the suspended executives 
on the 4 May according to Ms Daniels because she was 
present.  So she says you have these meetings one after the 
other even a meeting with Mr Molefe on that day at the 
Protea Hotel.   
To me it seems and you will correct me Ms Molefe is 
in exactly the same position as Mr Koko.  She wants to come 
20 
back; she lets you know that March.  You know that there is 
no wrongdoing investigation to be done against her.   
How is it that that situation is different when it comes 
to her as opposed to when it comes to Mr Koko?  It justifies 
his return but it is not used for her return. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 105 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  Can I answer Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson the significant difference between 
the two was we went in and there were numbers prepared for 
everybody to discuss the possible separation.  Because my 
understanding was people wanted to leave.  Now fair enough 
Mr Koko’s name had never come up.  The name that I had 
heard – names I had heard come up was Dan Marokane and 
Tsholofelo. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  May I – sorry – sorry Chair.  May I 
10 
interrupt you Ms Klein?  And I beg your pardon.  Forget prior 
– the lead up to the meeting with Ms Tsholo gets cancelled 
by her at that meeting.  So whatever you heard prior to your 
meeting with her she is telling you that is not true.  Now take 
us from that moment onwards where you know as a matter of 
fact Tsholo says I do not want to leave.   
The reasons for my letters is not what you the 
delegation – I mean the delegation is not just Mr Khumalo.  
It is all of you there.  Forget about prior to that.  Now you 
have this situation; you have a fact the executive here he is 
20 
interested to get his job back.  There are not wrongdoings, 
findings against him.  This is exactly Ms Tsholofelo Molefe 
explain to the Chairperson how is it that she gets treated 
differently to Mr Koko? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson I do not believe that she was 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 106 of 285 
 
treated differently at all.  We had the sets of numbers there.  
Tsholofelo in her introductory mark said what she did and 
Romeo said what he did.   
I have explained I cannot tell you why I did not ask 
Romeo why he did not – why he is saying what he was 
saying.  But she looked at the numbers.  She took the 
numbers and she had a problem with various things on the 
numbers.  She took it and she looked at it.   
Mr Koko refused to even look at the numbers.  He sat 
in the chair which is what I said in my affidavit here and I 
10 
said it at Parliament.  He would not – when we started the 
discussion we said what we were there for.  Explained to him 
that we are here to have a look at how we can get to a 
common ground.   
He started off by saying to us my blood is blue and I 
am going nowhere.  I sat with the numbers.  I did not even 
have an opportunity like with – with Tsholofelo to even give 
him the numbers – he would not look at it.  He just said guys 
I have grown up in Eskom I want my job back.  I am not 
prepared to look at numbers I am going nowhere. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
But 
do 
you 
– 
do 
you 
dispute 
the 
proposition that on the understanding or maybe let me put it 
this way.  Do you dispute the proposition that  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If – if you knew the board’s position to be 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 107 of 285 
 
that it wanted Ms Tsholofelo Molefe like the other executives 
back after the investigation.  Once she said she was not 
asking to talk about her separation with – with you then you 
should not have pursued any separation discussions with 
her. Do you dispute that proposition?   
In other words if you were part of a board that you 
knew wanted her back or at least had no problem with her 
coming back once she had indicated that she is not one of 
those who had written to say I want to talk a separation you 
should not have pursued with her any separation discussion. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson you would remember me saying to 
you that – and I know that I have been told do not go back.  
In my mind she was one of the people in fact her name was 
mentioned that she wanted a settlement.  So coming into the 
meeting I mean if I knew that she did not want to talk to 
discussion or talk settlement there would have no numbers 
on the table. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no.  I understand that prior to your 
meeting her your understanding based on what you had been 
told was that she also wanted to talk separation. 
20 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  But the proposition is once you 
were at the meeting with her and she clarified her position 
and her position was no I have not written to the board to 
talk about separation.  I am actually happy to continue at 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 108 of 285 
 
Eskom.  Maybe she did not put it expressly like that but once 
she had made it clear that she was not one of those who 
may have written to say let us talk separation.  Then you had 
no business pursuing separation discussions with her as a 
delegation.  What do you say to that? 
MS KLEIN:  I totally agree with you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS KLEIN:  I totally agree with you.  And remember your 
question was, so why did we continue? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  And why did Romeo Khumalo say 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  I cannot answer that 
CHAIRPERSON:  No you did ja you said that. 
MS KLEIN:  I cannot answer that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  But to come back to Mr Koko.  And why you 
know why was – the man would not even take the paper.  He 
would not look at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see the difference on your evidence 
20 
the difference between Ms – the position adopted by Ms 
Molefe and the position adopted by Mr Koko – I mean the 
position may have been the same but the articulation of the 
position might have been different in that maybe Mr Koko 
was much more emphatic and maybe did not even want to 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 109 of 285 
 
look at the figures but the fact does remain it seems that 
they both contemplated that they should go back.  Maybe 
one was more emphatic than the other and then as I say one 
would have expected that representatives of a board which 
wanted these executives back would have said: oh then that 
is fine so there is no need for us to talk separation.  You 
accept that? 
MS KLEIN:  I accept that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Klein you saying to the Chairperson 
Mr Tsotsi would not even want to look at the figures. 
MS KLEIN:  Mr… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Koko. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh Mr Koko. I beg your pardon.   
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson that is how I remember it.  He came 
in… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No that is alright.  Okay you want to 
carry on speaking. 
20 
MS KLEIN:  No, no.  The one thing that stood out for me was 
that I do not even think that much of a chance to speak you 
know he came in and went for my blood is blue, I grew up in 
this organisation, I am not going to go anywhere.  And I even 
remember then I say asking him the question about but do 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 110 of 285 
 
you trust this board?  Because I remember with the 
suspensions he was the one executive who was the most – 
almost 
not 
aggressive 
maybe 
but 
annoyed 
with 
the 
suspensions.  So now I am saying to him, okay your blood is 
blue, you want to come back do you even trust – I mean this 
is the same board you going to work with.  Can – will you be 
able to work with this board?  Something to that effect is my 
recollection Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Klein Mr Koko has submitted an 
affidavit to this commission he has told in his affidavit how – 
10 
what happened in the meeting and in addition to that he has 
attached what he says was a document signed by yourself 
titled Proposed Terms for Settlement and it shows the 
amount.  The document is dated 11 May 2015.  And I can 
show you the document.  So he did it seems look at the 
document, was in fact provided with it, did go away with it 
and he has attached it to his affidavit.   
MS KLEIN:  I cannot argue with that Chairperson.  What I am 
saying to you is where with everybody else you would have 
had a discussion with it.  Mr Koko was adamant he is coming 
20 
back he wants his job.  I do not remember him taking it but if 
he has got it then he must have been given the document 
like everybody else.  That is all I can say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The proposition obviously that Mr Seleka is 
making to you is what Mr Koko says in his affidavit seems to 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 111 of 285 
 
be in conflict with what you said earlier on.  You remember 
you said you did not even get a chance to show him the 
figures.  But he seems to suggest that you actually did and 
he took the document away bla, bla, bla.  That was one of 
the – that was the reason you advanced to say the manner in 
which he responded to your approach as the delegation of 
the board was different from the manner in which Ms Molefe 
responded because you said Ms Molefe was prepared to look 
at the figures but Mr Koko was not.  But Mr Koko seems to 
say I was given the numbers, I looked at them as well. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  He did – like I explain to you Chairperson my 
recollection was before we could even talk he was not 
prepared to look at anything.  I may very well have given him 
the document to take with him for consideration afterwards.  
I cannot remember but that is the only way he would have 
had the actual document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Hm Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Daniels tells this 
commission in her affidavit and Ms Molefe herself says  
“At the beginning of the meeting the board 
20 
delegation 
tried 
to 
– 
tried 
a 
different 
strategy.  Mr Kumalo led the discussion and 
said that they understood that I had written 
numerous letters to the chairman Doctor 
Ngubane asking to part ways.  I denied this 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 112 of 285 
 
outright emphasising that the purpose of my 
letters which had not been responded to was 
to establish when the so called inquiry would 
commence and to get access to the Terms of 
Reference so that I could start preparing for 
the interviews with the investigation.” 
I will give you a chance to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that Ms Molefe? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is Ms Molefe Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Daniels who is present there says: 
“Ms Molefe highlighted to the board members 
present that there was a clear contradiction 
to what had been communicated to them and 
what was reported in the media.  She 
emphasised that in the eight weeks since her 
suspension 
she 
had 
not 
had 
any 
communication from the board or a response 
to correspondence. She had enquired as to 
what was the position of the board at that 
20 
point in time.” 
Then Mr Kumalo according to Ms Daniels says to her directly 
without prejudice and reserving the rights of Eskom the 
Terms of Reference for the review were developed by the 
Audit and Risk and this was a separate discussion. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 113 of 285 
 
“Can we find a way of amicably parting 
ways?” 
But she says herself: 
“I made it clear to them I am not asking to go 
away.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  And who is saying can we find a way of 
amicably parting ways. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is Mr Khumalo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Saying to Ms Molefe? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  To Ms Molefe. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  This is Ms Daniels writing in her affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  So you have that situation and 
maybe there is not much you might be able to say about it.  
You have a situation where the executive concerned Ms 
Molefe says, I did not write to talk about a separation.  But it 
is a member of the board who says; let us talk amicably 
parting ways.   
So the question is, why was he adopting that attitude 
if the board to his knowledge had no problem with these 
20 
executives coming back?  Was the position he was adopting 
reflective of the position of the board as a body or is the 
position that he was adopting a position that did not reflect 
the position of the board but reflected the position of either 
himself or of himself and a few other members of the board.  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 114 of 285 
 
That is the question.   
And if so what was the underlying basis for this in 
circumstances where when these executives were suspended 
they were told it is not on the basis of any wrongdoing.  And 
they were told you would come back after three months when 
the investigation is finished.  When did this change?  Those 
are the issues. 
MS KLEIN:  And – and ja Chair and I said to you you know 
for the benefit of hindsight I should have questioned it at 
that stage I cannot answer you at this stage. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  But I am sure Mr Khumalo will give you 
additional information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Of course with regard to Ms 
Molefe it – the matter goes further. She has testified that she 
even threatened to go to court against Eskom.  Now I cannot 
remember whether she said she made that threat at a 
meeting that she had only with Mr Khumalo because she said 
there was a meeting that she had with Mr Khumalo where Mr 
Khumalo had said to her he was there in his personal 
20 
capacity.   
And of course one has got to ask why – why he 
needed to go and see her in his personal capacity because 
he was supposed to deal with her as a representative of the 
board.  But she says at some stage in her interactions either 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 115 of 285 
 
with Mr Khumalo alone or in a meeting with Mr Khumalo and 
other members of the board who were delegated to talk to 
her she threatened to go to court and she says Mr Khumalo 
said something like, you do not want to take on the state or 
you do not want to litigate against the state.   
In the end what we see is that her settlement, the 
payment is actually much more than the limit that had been 
put by the board.  As I understand the position the board had 
said the executives should not be paid more than twelve 
months salary. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But she – she said here that no ultimately 
she was paid I think something like one year six months or 
something like that.  But certainly more than twelve months 
you know.  And then one asks the question which of course 
you and I dealt with last time.  But more with her now to say 
why must the board go over even the limit they had put to 
pay her so much if they want her back? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson if I may?  Firstly I do not remember 
in the meeting when we were in that she spoke about 
20 
litigating so I think it must have been. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  Maybe in another meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS KLEIN:  Regarding the settlement for Ms Molefe I think I 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 116 of 285 
 
heard Counsel asking earlier that it was between myself and 
Mr Khoza.  I was not a party to Ms Molefe’s settlement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were – 
MS KLEIN:   I was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had nothing to do with the figure? 
MS KLEIN:  With the – the actual settlement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the whole settlement. 
MS KLEIN:  The settlement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS KLEIN:  So – so I was not a party to that.  That was 
10 
concluded between I think you will probably get that in her 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS KLEIN:  Between herself and I think Mr Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Klein. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I am not – I am not referring to the 
signing of the agreement.  Ms Molefe has presented 
evidence that shows that you were involved throughout up 
20 
until when she signed somebody else would have signed not 
you personally but the build up to that conclusion that you 
were part of it. 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson I am going to – I am going to 
disagree. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 117 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not recall. 
MS KLEIN:  I – no not do not recall I was the Chairperson of 
People In Governance and that was the one her and Dan 
Morakane where I was not a party to the actual signing off of 
the figure.  So when you tell me that it is eighteen months I 
must say I am a little bit surprised because I was of the view 
twelve months was the maximum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the settlement – her settlement 
agreement is in one of the bundles.  It was produced when 
she gave evidence.  But the point I think Mr Seleka is 
10 
making and I just want to make sure whether you take issue 
with that is that his understanding of the evidence is that you 
were part of the first meeting with Ms Molefe. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And to the extent that there may have been 
further meetings you were part of that.  Obviously you may 
not have been part of the meeting that she had separately 
with Mr Khumalo where Mr Khumalo said he was – he came 
in his personal capacity.  But the point he is making is you 
might not have signed but it would appear like you were part 
20 
of 
the 
people 
who 
were 
involved 
in 
negotiating 
the 
settlement. 
MS KLEIN:  No that I agree with Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you accept? 
MS KLEIN:  No I agree with I was part of the people but 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 118 of 285 
 
when you tell me it is eighteen months now I go okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So is the position that as far as you are 
concerned is your recollection that she had accepted twelve 
months or is your recollection that you do not remember 
what figures were discussed with her or you do recall that 
she did not want twelve months she wanted more but you 
ended up not knowing how much more she got. 
MS KLEIN:  I think it is the latter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the latter. 
MS KLEIN:  I saw communication you now regarding her 
10 
paying legal fees and something to do with the house and 
something like that but the rest – the actual figure whatever 
that became that I was not aware of. Because I was not part 
in that last discussion to conclude the final figures with her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course there would not have been 
any discussion of legal fees on her part because she had not 
gone to court, is it not? 
MS KLEIN:  No but I think she was seeking support for some 
legal – if memory serves me well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ja. 
20 
MS KLEIN:  There was some discussion about legal costs; 
there was some discussion about a home in security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS KLEIN:  Or something like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 119 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  So what I am saying to you I certainly saw – 
sorry Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:  I certainly saw communication around that but 
what that ultimately became I must say I was a little 
disappointed that I was not part of the ultimate sign-off of 
but I think we have – I am not sure whether we are saying 
the same thing.  There was a toing and froing so it was not a 
straight ja I am accepting this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What you are saying is that whereas you 
10 
were a member of the delegation representing the board that 
was mandated to negotiate with her ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...somehow you were excluded when it 
came to what amount was to be paid to her.  Is that what you 
are saying? 
MS KLEIN:   That is what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I was privy Chairperson to some of the 
communication. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But when it came to what it was... I mean, if 
you are to... when you told me the other day when we were 
here about it was R 18 million ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 120 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   ...I could... you know, the thing is.  As People in 
Governance, 
you must make sure that governance is 
followed.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   But if something happens outside of what I have 
actually seen ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS KLEIN:   ...I cannot attest to that.  That is something 
whoever was... whoever else was involved must come and 
give you the breakdown as to the why. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   I remember, like I say, that the proposal put to 
her the first time, she questions certain things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   About why certain things would not be included. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS KLEIN:   So that is where I am objecting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  We are six minutes past 
one.  You want to follow up ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...a few questions? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Very quickly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Klein, it is not being put to you that 
she was paid R 18 million. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 121 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   No, no.  Not her. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   No, I think Chairperson said all together 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Not eighteen months ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, it is 18-months the Chairperson was 
referring to. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, no, no.  Have we talked about 
R 18 million last time? 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, for all of them. 
MS KLEIN:   Oh, that is what I was referring to. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  But it cannot... sorry, let me say 
this ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It might have been a wrong figure 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So we would not know because we do 
not have her ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   A breakdown. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   An annual.  Ja, the breakdown. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Klein, you would have requested the 
figures from Anton Nienaar. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is what he says in his affidavit. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 122 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Absolutely. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You requested the settlement figures 
from Anton Nienaar. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have sent an email to Ms Molefe on 
the 11t h of June 2015. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You say: 
“Hi, Tsholofelo.  Herewith our settlement agreement.  
Having taken your mail of earlier today into account, 
10 
kindly revert to me with your input or questions.” 
 
You asked for that.  And I remember, I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What date is that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is 11 June 2015, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So the first meeting is the 4t h of May. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then they have a meeting on the 
8t h of May.  And you sent her a proposal Mr Klein.  Is it on 
the 8t h or the 11t h of May, where... are your second meeting? 
20 
MS KLEIN:   I am not... No, I think I would have given her a 
proposal ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   ...at the first meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 123 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   And then... are you saying there was a 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have it.  I have it.   
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is the 8t h of May. 
MS KLEIN:   Alright? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is exactly like... the tabulation is 
exactly like Matshela Koko’s one with your signature at the 
end of it. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And a provision for the executive to sign. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It has an amount.  An amount is 
reflected in there. 
MS KLEIN:   Alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The 11t h... 8t h of May.  But that gets 
overtaken by events. 
MS KLEIN:   Alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because we can see your email on the 
20 
11t h of June 2015. 
MS KLEIN:   Alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   More than a month later. 
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The 8t h, the 11t h of June.  And you are 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 124 of 285 
 
saying: 
“Herewith our settlement agreement having taken 
your mail of earlier today into account.  Kindly revert 
to me with your input or questions.” 
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And she writes back to you.  So you 
would have known about the inputs or questions that she 
had.  You would have been involved in the negotiations of 
the terms and the figures.   
MS KLEIN:   But I did not argue that I was.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MS KLEIN:   I indicated ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, she... I think she accepts that 
she ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
...that 
she 
was 
involved 
in 
the 
negotiations.  But all she is saying is.  When the amount was 
offered or agreed, she was not part of that. 
MS KLEIN:   The actual signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The actual amount. 
20 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or the final amount that was agreed. 
MS KLEIN:   But it would be interesting Chairperson. I would 
like to, maybe just for clarity?  Was that number, that one 
that was on the final proposal, is that the same number that 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 125 of 285 
 
was ultimately paid?  Because that I do not know.  And I 
guess, that is what I am saying.  I took cognisance of all of 
her... the input she made which was security and various 
other things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   What I am not sure of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, there is a reference where you were 
reading. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Her email to where Ms Molefe said.  It 
10 
says: Here the proposal after taking into account your 
...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC:   Yes. 
 
She 
says 
here 
where 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So let us go back to her...  Ms Molefe has 
made and see what she has said there if we have it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, she did not attach a response to this 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   And Chairperson, if I may?  Is that... do you 
have a list of what she was ultimately paid out?  Does that 
proposal give you an amount?  And is ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 126 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   I am not sure if it bears any relevance.  I am 
just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  You ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   I must say, I felt left out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just let him to make him to check. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, I will let you know. 
MS KLEIN:   Please. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I can let you know what I see from the 
documentation. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
10 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC:   What 
Eskom 
ultimately 
paid 
...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Was ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...I do not know. 
MS KLEIN:   Oh, okay. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
So 
the 
settlement 
proposal 
...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...which he has given to us along with 
this email ...[intervenes]  
20 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...has an amount. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that amount ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   But let me just check it....  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 127 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...that amount... 
MS KLEIN:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That amount, it is said to... the total 
separation payment... should I mention the amount Chair? 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The amount is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you can mention it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  It is a little over R 4 million.  
R 4 032 945,00. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Your proposal, however, on the 11t h... 
MS KLEIN:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   On the 8 t h of May, had other items to 
this. 
MS KLEIN:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And the total amount was a little over 
R 5 million. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I can read it to you. 
MS KLEIN:   So I offered more than what was originally... I 
20 
am trying to just get my ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, no.  It is not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What we can do.  Let us take the lunch 
break.  During the lunch break ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Ja, please Chair. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 128 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...look at those things. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When we come back, there may be a 
resolution. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it may be that somebody in your team 
could even phone Ms Molefe.  She might be available.  She 
might not be available.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She might clarify some of the things that 
10 
we talked about. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say, you know ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   The actual amount paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, that is... if anything turns on that, Ms 
Klein. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja.  I am not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, in the end, what remains is that, 
certainly on her evidence, she was paid as part of the 
20 
settlement more than the 12-months’ salary that the board 
apparently had set as a maximum.   
 
And Ms Klein confirms that at the first meeting with her, 
she did make it clear that she had not written to the board to 
invite discussions about separation.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 129 of 285 
 
 
And 
of 
course, 
she 
testified 
here 
that 
she 
even 
threatened litigation at some stage.  And I asked:  What 
would you have achieved with litigation?   
 
And she said:  Well, the suspension would be set aside 
and I could go back.  You know.  That is what she said.  
 
So let us take the adjournment.  And let us come back at 
quarter past two. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay we adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Ms Klein, 
thank you.  You are still under oath. 
VENETE KLEIN:  (s.u.o.) 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson, we managed to... Is it 
resolved or clarified?  Rather, more clarified.  The issue 
about the payment.  In fact, the settlement agreement gives 
you a breakdown of the amounts.   
20 
 
So you have the main amount, which is what has been 
mentioned, the six point something.  Then you have the 
other small amounts, which I think when Ms Molefe testified, 
said the main amount excluded certain items relative to her. 
 
So those items are broken down with the specific 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 130 of 285 
 
amounts.  So she was paid more than the figure we have 
been referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that is... 
MS KLEIN:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  You confirm it got it right? 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
10 
MS KLEIN:   Got it right. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Ms Klein, so 
there is this correspondence leading up to the settlement 
and we accept you were not part.  You were not the person 
who signed this settlement agreement.  Mr Dan Marokane 
also has shared emails with the Commission where you were 
sending the settlement agreement to him.   
MS KLEIN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just speak to the microphone. 
MS KLEIN:   Sorry.  Yes, Chairperson. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So we know that the agreement 
with him was signed by doctor... Mr Zethembe Khoza, I think. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, Chairperson.  If I remember correctly.  I 
think Mr Zethembe Khoza or Dr Ngubane ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Or Dr Ngubane. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 131 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   ...would have signed all of this.  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  At this stage, you were the 
Chairperson of P&G? 
MS KLEIN:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   People in Governance. 
MS KLEIN:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Would this settlement agreement not 
have come back to the People in Governance before they go 
to the board? 
MS KLEIN:   Not necessarily Chairperson.  What would 
10 
technically happen is.  You would get all the information from 
your 
executive 
remuneration 
department 
being 
Anton 
Minnaar.   
 
And when it was then signed off, if the agreement was 
reached, it would then be signed off by the chairman who 
was the head of the board and that would have been 
acceptable.  It did not necessarily have to come back to 
People in Governance. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  I want to read from the affidavit, 
your affidavit.  It talks about, you know, the mandate given to 
20 
the... you talk about yourself, Dr Ngubane, Mr Romeo 
Khumalo who were mandated to negotiate the settlement and 
the terms on which you were to negotiate.  Do I have your 
affidavit here? 
MS KLEIN:   [No audible reply]  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 132 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And there is a further item in that 
mandate that the chairperson of the P&G... Why do I not 
have it?  Oh, yes here it is.   
“That the chairperson of the P&G Committee be 
authorised with the power to delegate further.  To 
take all the necessary and all immediate steps to 
give effect to the above including the signing of any 
agreements or either documentation necessary or 
related thereto.” 
 
Now that is page, here in your bundle, that is page 15 
10 
but it starts on the page 14, paragraph 51.  The red 
numbering, this time around Chairperson. 
MS KLEIN:   Sorry.  Are we talking about the red page 51 of 
my ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, 14. 
MS KLEIN:   14. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, it is paragraph 51. 
MS KLEIN:   Paragraph 51. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 51, page 14. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay I have got on page 14, I have got 
20 
paragraph ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you still on Eskom Bundle 02? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Eskom Bundle 02, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that is the letter from the minister at 
page 51, red 51? 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 133 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not the page, paragraph 51.  Page 14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page one, four? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page one, four. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   P14.  
MS KLEIN:   Yes, I have got that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 51 by me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you... that is where you deal with 
what the board had authorised.   
10 
“The authorisation provided for the acting chairman, 
Dr Ngubane myself and Mr Khumalo to enter into 
exit negotiations with each of the executives, Mr 
Matona, Molefe, Koko and Marokane.”   
 
And then you detailed what was the mandate to you.  
Then the next page, settlement agreement shall set out the 
terms. 
 
And then paragraph C says that: 
“The chairperson of the P&G commit the authorise 
with the power to delegate further to take all the 
20 
necessary and all immediate steps to give effect to 
the above including the signing of any agreements 
or 
other 
documentation 
necessary 
all 
related 
thereto.” 
 
So that power was invested in you. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 134 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   How did you deal with this now that we 
see it 
was 
your fellow 
colleagues 
who 
signed these 
agreements? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, what I can say to you is that, this 
was what was given to me to be done but as I have indicated 
earlier.   
 
There was just so much going on all around us that if 
you say to me know, was it wrong for Dr Ngubane not to 
have signed it?   
10 
 
Or let him because whoever and it was for me to 
delegate it to them.  I am going to have to say to you, you 
are correct.  Because that did happen.   
 
It was for to have delegated it but I have said to you in 
front of Chairperson, what was happening all around us.  
Remember, at that stage also, we were quite new.   
 
I was still quite new as well.  So a lot of what I felt 
happening, I now today know is not what ought to have 
happened.  But then ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
MS KLEIN:   ...I would have thought that, you know... 
because remember, we also have an executive remuneration 
team who would have guided.  Or a secretariat who would 
have guide.  So. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 135 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   I can just... all I can say to you is.  I need to 
take accountability that that was not according to mandate 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   ...which was mine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So the settlement agreement may have 
been signed by persons who were unauthorised.  Thus the 
authority was explicitly in terms of your affidavit vested in 
you.   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I would go as far as saying to you, 
10 
the point is valid.  But I would argue that the people who find 
it, were senior people in Eskom.  Both Mr Khoza, as well as 
Dr Ben .   
 
And I am not trying to... I said to you, I except that 
because I was new because there were other what should 
have been almost catch-nets to make sure that it came 
through the right delegated power.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   But the fact that it was Dr Khoza... ag, Dr 
Ngubane and Mr Khoza who signed it and not somebody 
20 
outside.  I had no reason at the time to go and object to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know, and maybe Mr Seleka was 
still going to come to this.  Do you know whether the board 
either before the signing of the settlement agreement 
involving Mr Molefe or after was alerted to the fact that her 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 136 of 285 
 
amount was higher than the amount specified in the 
authorisation?   
 
In other words, was the full board ever told:  We are 
going to give Ms Molefe more than what you specified?  We 
are going to go outside the mandate.   
 
Do... are you happy for us to do that.  Or if they did not 
do it before the signing.   
 
Do you know whether after the settlement agreement 
had been signed with Ms Molefe, the board was ever told:  
Actually, we exceeded our mandate in regard to Ms Molefe 
10 
and maybe these are the reasons.  And the board said:  No, 
it is fine.   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I would have to say I do not 
recollect that because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not recall it.  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Because if it did happen, I would have been a 
little more vigilant on the amount having been increased. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m, h’m. 
MS KLEIN:   I am not aware.  It may very well be that it can 
turn out that it was somewhere but I do not remember that.  
20 
It is not my recollection, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Do you have any recollection 
whether after the settlement agreements have been signed 
with these three executives, there was a time when these 
settlement agreements were circulated among all board 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 137 of 285 
 
members to say:  Here are the settlement agreements that 
we signed because you, the board, mandated us to go out 
and settle with them within certain parameters.  Here is what 
we have done. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I do not remember that ever 
having been done.  I remember feedback being given to the 
board to say settlement has been reached with individuals.  
But the actual distribution of the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The terms. 
MS KLEIN:   ...the terms.  I do not think that that did ever go 
10 
to the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, it is... it may be quite significant 
if the position is that one, at least in regard to Ms Molefe, 
the delegated authority of the board was exceeded in terms 
of the settlement and the board was never told even after. 
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because that was a very material issue to 
bring to the attention of the board.  One would have 
expected that if the board had said the maximum is 12-
months as it did say and the delegation that was mandated 
20 
to negotiate felt that there would be no settlement with Ms 
Molefe if that maximum was not exceeded.   
 
One would have expected that the delegation would go 
back to the board and say:  We are reporting back.  We have 
reached settlement with the following two, Mr Matona and Mr 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 138 of 285 
 
Dan Marokane.   
 
But we have not reached a settlement with Ms Molefe 
because she wants much more and we do not have a 
mandate to give her more.   
 
You must decide whether we should allow this to be the 
end of the negotiations or whether you are giving us a 
mandate to go beyond the 12-months.   
 
That is what one would have expected.  And you accept 
that, is it not? 
MS KLEIN:   I accept that, Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now, if for some reason maybe there 
was a good reason or some explanation why things were not 
done that way.  One would have expected that at least after 
the settlement agreement with Ms Molefe had been signed 
and the person who signed it knew that that exceeded their 
mandate.   
 
One would have expected that they would take the first 
opportunity to go back to the board and say:  Board, I 
exceeded my mandate but these were the reasons.  I ask 
you to ratify what I have done.   
20 
 
And if that person did not do that, it may well be that he 
intended or she intended to conceal these fact from the 
board.   
 
And the question would arise:  Why did that person 
exceeded clear mandate of the board authority?  And why 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 139 of 285 
 
having done so he or she decided not to disclose this very 
material fact to the board?   
 
Is it possible that this person was so keen that Ms 
Molefe should go that he or she decided to exceed the 
mandate of the board and conceal that fact from the board 
as long as Ms Molefe left Eskom.   
 
Those 
are 
the 
questions 
that 
would 
arise. 
 
You 
understand? 
MS KLEIN:   I do understand what you are asking to, Mr 
Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   And may I add to that, Ms Klein?  Chair, 
it is not only exceeding the amount in terms of this, the 
mandate but it is also going beyond the authority given into 
the person.  Because the authority was given to you as the 
chairperson of P&G but we see that it is somebody 
else...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes.  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...that signed this document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  And then, if your evidence is 
20 
correct that you did not know the final amount that was 
agreed with Ms Molefe, then it is very strange because one 
ask oneself the question.   
 
Why did another member of the delegation of the board 
authorised to negotiate with these executives?  Who knew 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 140 of 285 
 
that the person authorised by the board to sign settlement 
agreements was you.   
 
Why did he sign those... that settlement agreement 
instead of asking you to sign it because you were the person 
who had the authority?  And why did he not tell you about 
the amount?   
 
Of course, it does raise the question also from your side 
to say, when you knew that you were the person authorised 
by the board to sign settlement agreements.   
 
How did you allow somebody else to sign the settlement 
10 
agreement in regard to Ms Molefe?   
 
And if you did allow, how did it come about that you did 
not want to see the settlement agreement after when you 
know it was signed by somebody other than you as the 
authorised person?  Do you understand that? 
MS KLEIN:   I hear you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But Chairperson, there is one point that I also 
want to raise and maybe Mr Seleka can help us with the date 
but... it is in my affidavit.   
20 
 
I did not remain the chairperson of P&G right through 
the process.  In fact, on the 2 nd of July’s meeting, I was not 
the chairperson of P&G.   
 
Everything was moving all the time.  So I want us to 
please just go and check that on that date when... 25 June 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 141 of 285 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether you were still the chairperson? 
MS KLEIN:   ...whether I was the chairperson of P&G.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Can we please just have a look at that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...it might have to be checked.  But if you 
cannot get it now ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   We can do it afterwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Please check for me. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No.  We will do so Ms Klein. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because from your proposals, those 
proposals you presented to them. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You were still designated us the acting 
chairperson of P&G? 
MS KLEIN:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct.  But like I said, you know, in that time.  
20 
One month you were P&G.  The next month you were not.  I 
remember specifically on the meeting of the 2 nd of July, I 
was not the chairperson of P&G any longer.  It was Chwayita 
Mabude.  So. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   By that time, the settlement... the last 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 142 of 285 
 
one was Ms Molefe’s. 
MS KLEIN:   Which was ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   The other ones had already been signed  
Done and dusted.   
MS KLEIN:   It happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I think the point she is making is.  
She is not sure whether on the 25t h of June when the 
settlement agreement with Ms Molefe was signed, she was 
still the chairperson of P&G.  What she says she is clear 
about is that on the 2 nd of July, she was no longer 
10 
chairperson of P&G.   
 
She wonders whether there is a chance that she might 
have seized to be chairperson of P&G before the 25t h.  I am 
sure from your side, there is some checking that you can do. 
MS KLEIN:   Absolute, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so do your own checking as well 
...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   I will do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...with Eskom. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if you were still chairperson, it 
has a certain significance. 
MS KLEIN:   I hear you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you were not, then it also takes a 
certain perspective.  Because it may be that... and if you are 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 143 of 285 
 
no longer chairperson, then the issue does arise as to how 
you allowed somebody else to sign because you were not the 
person who authorised anymore. 
MS KLEIN:   I agree, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, just one last point.  On the 
14t h of July, I know that I get reappointed as the chairperson 
of P&G.  So when I was the last... I am just saying, in 
reference to Ms Tsholofelo Molefe’s signing of documents, it 
10 
may 
very 
well 
be 
that 
that 
was 
discussed 
with 
the 
chairperson if I was not the chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But say I was the chairperson, I have got to 
take full accountability. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   That I was squarely in the feet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   And it was my accountability. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You being moved from being chairperson 
of P&G, is that something that would have been discussed at 
a board meeting?  Because then it is a question of checking 
board minutes.  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 144 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I know the one thing that I did see 
was on the 14 t h of July, if we can check that, I become the 
chairperson of P&G again.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But when I was taken off, I have not got that 
date because you know, one month you were... and I actually 
allude to it in my affidavit that things were moving all the 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay. 
MS KLEIN:   So if we can just please check that. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, we will do so. 
MS KLEIN:   Thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see from Ms Klein’s affidavit that she 
says: 
“I am not certain of the exact date of my appointment 
as chairperson of P&G but believes it was on or 
about 15 March 2015. 
Later, in about June 2015, I was replaced as 
chairperson of the P&G Committee by Chwayita 
Mabude, only to later be reinstated as chairperson.” 
20 
 
Here it said in and or about August. 
MS KLEIN:   No. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But you are saying 14 July. 
MS KLEIN:   No, on the 14t h, I was reinstated as chairperson 
of P&G. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 145 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Is that what that is? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, that is what ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It says that but it just gives a different 
month.  But you say, in or about? 
MS KLEIN:   When I was taking out. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   August. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think what she is saying is 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But it is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In March, from what we are reading.  In 
March, she was made chairperson of P&G. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sometime in June, she believes, she was 
taken off as chairperson of P&G but on the 14t h of July, she 
was reinstated as chairperson of P&G. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the question what she does not know 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what we do not know at this stage 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With effect from when ...[intervenes]  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 146 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...in June. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...did she seize to be chairperson of P&G 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair.  Because we see on the 
11t h of June, you are still writing to Ms Molefe. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In that capacity.  
10 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And in her affidavit, she gets replaced, 
not by Mr Zethembe Khoza or Dr Ngubane by Ms Chwayita 
Mabude.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who also still, did not sign the 
settlement agreement. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but that might... your point might be 
20 
addressing the question of whoever signed ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
...does 
not 
appear 
to 
have 
been 
authorised to sign.  But she is addressing the point of 
...[intervenes]  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 147 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I accept, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   while she is still the chairperson of P&G 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   I accept. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...on the 25 t h of June. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Of June.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I accept, Chair.  Ms Klein, then the 
version in regard to Mr Koko because we have dealt with Ms 
Tsholofelo Molefe.   
10 
 
And I have drawn the parallels between the two with Mr 
Koko.  Ms Daniels who was again present, talks about how 
the exchange or negotiations with Mr Koko was different.  
And she says in her affidavit: 
“Unlike the previous two meetings, Mr Koko was 
given time to express his sentiments on the issue of 
his suspension quite in length.  He works lyrical.  I 
do not understand.  And shocked and surprised.  
Permeated his speech.  And the new legendary 
Eskom is my veins was part of his rendition of his 
20 
position at that moment. 
He also portrayed his relationship with the previous 
chairperson, Mr Zola Tsotsi, as acrimonious and he 
had attributed this acrimonious relationship as the 
reason for him finding himself on suspension. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 148 of 285 
 
Mr Khoza thanked him for his submission and Ms 
Klein started her conversation with an opening 
question of:  Could you truly trust this board again? 
Once again, Koko emphasised that he believed that 
the 
reason 
for 
his 
present 
situation 
was 
the 
acrimonious relationship he had with Mr Tsotsi which 
led to incriminate between him and the previous 
board.  
At this point, Ms Klein then asked:  Could you come 
back and work with this board?  Mr Koko...” 
10 
 
Now may I pause to say.  I mean, that is a language 
different from what we hear, at least from Ms Tsholofelo 
Molefe.  So far as I have read Ms Klein is that a correct 
reflection of what you would have told Mr Koko? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I am having a hard times with the 
words here.  I have got no recollection ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, okay. 
MS KLEIN:   ...of asking Mr Koko would he come back.   
CHAIRPERSON:   What I think you do recall because you 
said it earlier, is that you did ask him whether he could... he 
20 
still trusted this board or whether he could still trust this 
board.  Is that correct? 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, Chairperson.  You are a hundred percent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You remember that part? 
MS KLEIN:   And remember I had actually explained why I 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 149 of 285 
 
asked that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Because at the suspensions of the four, Mr 
Koko was the one who seemed the most hostile, if you were.  
So it was in the context of that that I asked the question.   
 
But I do not remember asking Mr Koko if he would come 
back.  That would not be congruent with me offering him the 
papers which we had discussed earlier.   
 
So I do not... I cannot remember but I would be 
surprised if those were my words.  That is all I am saying. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe you and Mr Seleka have a 
certain understanding of that sentence that he read as being 
attributed to you by Ms Daniels, namely, could you still come 
back or... because ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to my inclination is to see it as very 
much in line with the statement that you recall having made:  
Could you still trust this board?   
 
As I see it, and maybe I should see it differently.  As I 
see it, it is like:  Can you work with this board after what has 
20 
happened?   
 
Now, my immediate inclination is not to look at that as 
inviting him to come back but it is just to put the question 
given what has had happened.   
 
Maybe I should not look it this way but I do not see it as 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 150 of 285 
 
very different from what you admit you said.  Mr Seleka, do 
you ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair that part ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...which Ms Klein admits she said, is 
what Ms Suzanne Daniels says as the very first part.  She 
says: 
“Mr Khoza thanked him...” 
 
That is Mr Koko. 
“...for his submission and Ms Klein started her 
10 
conversation with and opening questioning:  Could 
you fully trust this board again?” 
 
That is the opening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Yes.  Now, what I am saying and I 
just want you to have the... both of you have the benefit of 
what is going on in my mind.   
 
Is that, my inclination is that, you asked that question 
when you do not expect the person to say:  Yes, I can trust 
this board again.   
 
It is like your expectation is that this person is going to 
20 
say:  I cannot trust this board anymore.  But of course, if the 
person says:  No, I can trust them.  That is it.  That is what 
is in my mind. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, may I put what is in my mind? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 151 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, I think what is my mouth(?).  What is 
in my mind is this, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If the question is:  Can you trust that I 
will give you what you want or that you can work with me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is an invitation on my part that I want 
you to work with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  And I think Ms Klein may be 
understanding it that way too and she agrees. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   No, no.  No, Chairperson, now I have got to 
be careful what I am agreeing with. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, it is two against one.  But I could 
take a chance and ask Ms Klein’s counsel, maybe he would 
be on my side.  [Laughter]  Okay, alright. 
MS KLEIN:   Chair, can I just clarify something?  I just 
want Mr Seleka, just remind me again. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   You said at the beginning of the meeting he 
20 
got given opportunity to wax lyrical? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No.  Ms Daniels, right: 
“Unlike the previous two meetings Mr Koko was 
given the time to express his sentiments on the 
issues of his suspension quite in length.” 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 152 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then she used her own words. 
MS KLEIN:   No, of course. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That he waxed lyrically and so on. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But the question is asked: 
“Could you fully trust this board again?” 
But, you know, he has already said I am not going 
anywhere, Eskom is in my veins, was part of the rendition, 
Ms Daniels says, of his submission to you.  Then you say: 
10 
“Could you fully trust the board?  You really want to 
come back?” 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am tempted to ask Ms Klein’s counsel.  
He might be wishing not to commit himself.  No, that is 
fine, we understand.  Let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If I was in his position, Chair, I will 
also keep quiet.  [Laughter] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You never know, it is still a long way 
before we come to – I come to writing the report.  Who 
knows, maybe by the time I write the report I will have 
20 
come around and… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Come to one position.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And she goes on to say: 
Could you come back and work with this board?” 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 153 of 285 
 
That is the question she says you asked.   
“Mr Koko retorted that he heard horror stories 
relating to Zola Tsotsi and not the current board.  
Ms Klein thanked him for his honesty and took note 
that he had said I will come back to Eskom.” 
And it is in that context that I understand your opening 
questioning to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I have that affidavit by Ms Daniels. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Daniels. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The disadvantage of not having it and 
10 
relying on you, Mr Seleka, is that there if there was 
something else I could pick up then I cannot pick it up 
because I do not see – I do not have it.  And Ms Klein 
should actually have her own as well so that she can see 
where you are reading.  She might pick up something on 
the next line which you do not read because you have 
stopped somewhere. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair, I appreciate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So everything that will be referred to we 
should all have, hey?  You were reading from page – oh, 
20 
from paragraph 69. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, has…? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will …[intervenes] 
MS KLEIN:   I do not have a copy in front of me. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 154 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you not have a copy for Ms Klein. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We want to provide a copy for Ms 
Klein. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, please.  Just make sure that we all 
have the same thing. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Klein, do you remember – do you 
remember that Mr Koko was given quite some time to 
express his sentiments on the issue of his suspension 
because Ms Daniels says he was given a lot of time to do 
10 
that, the other two had not been given that time. 
MS KLEIN:   I do not remember just him being given time, 
Chairperson.  I remember the man starting to talk about his 
career at Eskom and how he was  - his blood is blue, he is 
going nowhere but if you ask me did he get more time than 
anybody else, it did not occur to me at the time that I was 
giving him more time.  It was part of a discussion with the 
person.  So I am not sure that I would agree that he got 
given more but if it was more because somebody was 
timing it, I cannot argue with that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you found something for her? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   They are still looking, Chair.  Sorry, 
they are still looking for it.  Yes, we may be able to… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, according to Ms Daniels, Mr 
Koko went to great lengths imparting to the board members 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 155 of 285 
 
that they had been misled and that he would not make it 
difficult for the board if the board says you do not fit, he 
would accede and leave Eskom.  Now that does not seem 
to be consistent with your evidence that he was adamant 
that he was not going anywhere.  That is at paragraph 70 
on page 16 of Ms Daniels’ bundle. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair, she will – she has a 
different bundle but the same affidavit so the paragraph 
numbers – you see “Unlike…” there at the top of the page? 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you see it? 
MS KLEIN:   Are we talking about the same page?  I think 
we are on the same page. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, my only comment on this would 
be, I went into that meeting in the same way that I went 
into the meeting with Tsholofelo.  Tsholofelo said she did 
not want to leave and then the discussions carried on 
about various other things. 
 
This gentleman literally came in, sat himself down 
20 
and started telling me about – was not telling me, started 
telling the committee about how his blood blue, about how 
he was going nowhere and he used somebody else’s term, 
waxing lyrical about it.   
At the end of it, in spite of how I may have felt 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 156 of 285 
 
personally about the person, I just knew that this is 
somebody who did not go anywhere.  So if you are saying 
to me that he said he would not make it difficult for the 
board decides he must go, I cannot remember that 
comment.  He may very well have said it but if you are 
asking me today, I cannot remember him saying those 
words.  I cannot remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it may – ja, this is Ms Daniels who 
says he said he would not – and she puts this in quotations 
“would not make it difficult for the board” if the board says 
10 
“you do not fit”, then she says he said he would accede 
and leave Eskom.   
 
So that part, if it is true, gives me the impression of 
somebody who says I do not want to go but if the board 
says I do not fit into their plans, I will not fight, I will not 
make it difficult for them, I will accede and leave Eskom.  
That is what – that the impression I get from what Ms 
Daniels says Mr Koko said.  Does that seem inconsistent 
with your impression of the position Mr Koko took in the 
meeting? 
20 
MS KLEIN:   That certainly does not sound like what I 
heard, Chairperson, I would have remembered that.  I 
would have remembered if Mr Koko I would not make it 
difficult for you because I had my own views on Mr Koko, 
which I shared publicly before.  I would have grabbed at 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 157 of 285 
 
that opportunity to say to the guys, hold on, this person –
sorry, 
Chairperson, 
I 
would 
have 
grabbed 
at 
the 
opportunity to say this person is ready to leave, let us talk 
about leaving, so I do not remember that.  That is the one 
part of this thing.  The fact that he was talking a lot, the 
fact that he says his blood is blue, the fact that I knew he 
was very – I do not know if the word is aggressive but 
when he left the night when he was suspended he was very 
angry with the board.  I remember all of that.  So I just 
cannot remember him saying if the board says that, you 
10 
know, I am not required, I will not make it hard.  I do not 
remember that, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think there is something interesting 
in what you have just said.  If he said I do not want to go 
but if the board wants me to go, I will not make it difficult 
for them, I will leave, why would your reaction to that have 
been to say this person wants to go, let us talk about him 
leaving because you were representing a board which I am 
told wanted these people back, why would your attitude, 
your reaction not have been no, no, no, the board wants 
20 
every executive who is happy to continue to continue?  
Why would you have grabbed that and say okay, let us talk 
your departure? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I have been on oath in 
parliament as well stating that of the executives, when I 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 158 of 285 
 
became People in Governance Chair, Mr Koko seemed to 
have had difficulty with a lot of the members of Eskom and 
there were many complaints about it.  I did not know Mr 
Koko from a bar of soap but one of the things that I 
learned was that he had difficulty with a lot of relationships 
with some of the people there.   
 
So if there was any one person who was asking to 
go, I would probably have encouraged it.  I would have 
encouraged it.  That is why I cannot believe that I would 
have – that that was said because I did not hear that.  I 
10 
would have remembered that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  What does Mr Koko say about his 
meeting, does he – in his affidavit, Mr Seleka, does he say 
whether – does what he say reflect what Ms Daniels says 
here? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, Chair.  He says he rejected 
outright the proposal that was given to him.  Now I need to 
find what he – essentially, it is a rejection of what was 
being presented to him and he would not accept it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no indication in his affidavit 
20 
that if the board insisted that he should go he would not 
make it difficult for them? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, he does not go into the details. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not – it is more consistent with 
what Ms Klein says in terms of his attitude? 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 159 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In terms of the first part with what Ms 
Daniels also says there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is consistent with that, I do not want 
a proposal, I am rejecting it out of hand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   But then he does not go into 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Into more details. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Even that his blood is blue, I want to 
come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He does not say those things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Okay.  Well, I think Mr 
Seleka probably was still going to put this to you, if he has 
not already done so. I see that Ms Daniels at paragraph 73 
of her affidavit says: 
“The board delegation met on 19 May 2015 and I 
20 
was 
in 
attendance. 
 
Mrs 
Klein 
opened 
the 
discussion 
by 
emphasising 
the 
need 
to 
find 
settlement with the parties and clear the decks.  
She 
also 
confirmed 
that 
the 
shareholder 
has 
approved to get rid of the people and make the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 160 of 285 
 
necessary concessions if it sorts out the problem.  
She stressed that the priorities to get the people off 
and away.  The meeting further discussed the 
various settlement arrangements as the Minister 
had a ceiling of R12 million to negotiate and the 
guiding principles were full cost to the company up 
to 12 months, payment of tranche 8 iii, payment of 
tranche 
9 
iv, 
contribution 
to 
legal 
cost 
and 
communication 
plan 
around 
the 
suspended 
executives, the settlements with Mr Marokane and 
10 
Ms Molefe were mentioned as those that needed to 
be finalised.” 
Do you want to comment on what Ms Daniels says in that 
paragraph? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I have no idea what Ms Daniels 
is talking about, very simply because the Minister had 
never spoken to me about any ceiling on any settlement.  
The Minister had never spoken to me about who has got to 
leave when.  I honestly do not know, unless I can see a 
minute which says that but I do not remember any of that.  
20 
What I will say is, and I think I have said this time and time 
again through the inquiry, is that I was always cognisant 
about a board making decisions to turn the company 
around. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 161 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   But clearing the decks, Minister talking about 
a 12 million [indistinct] 15.15 I do not know who the 
Minister would even have known what the people were 
earning.  So I have got no idea what Ms Daniels is talking 
about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Klein but we 
know from the evidence of both Dr Ngubane and Mr Matona 
that when they met at the CCMA Mr Matona was told let us 
adjourn the proceedings, see whether we cannot reach an 
10 
amicable separation and he was told that they need to get 
the mandate from the shareholder so the proceedings were 
adjourned so that they could engage with the shareholder 
and that seems to be in line with what Ms Daniels is saying 
there, that your mandate, as the board, ultimately came 
from the shareholder. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think Dr Ngubane did not dispute 
that part. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of Mr Matona’s evidence. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
MS KLEIN:   Chair, I am not disputing any of what 
Advocate Seleka has just said.  What I am disputing is that 
the minutes that told – or unless I am reading it wrong 
again, because I tend to do that – the 12 million 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 162 of 285 
 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think one of the things you said a few 
minutes ago seemed to suggest that you were wondering 
how the Minister could come into these types of matters, 
into this settlement, talking about amounts and so on and I 
think what Mr Seleka is saying but that should not be 
surprising 
because 
Mr 
Matona 
said 
Dr 
Ngubane 
or 
somebody from the board at the CCMA said please, let us 
postpone your matter because we need to get a mandate 
from the shareholder Minister so – and if that is factually 
10 
true, and Dr Ngubane did not dispute it, it may well be 
therefore that the Minister did get involved into amounts 
and so on. 
MS KLEIN:   That is very possible, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Very possible but I guess I read that what Ms 
Daniels was saying is that I said those things.  So maybe I 
was reading it incorrectly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Daniels (sic) do 
20 
I understand you to be saying that paragraph 71 where you 
are quoted for the second time: 
“At this point Ms Klein then asked could you come 
back and work with this board?” 
That you did not say that? 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 163 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   No, Chairperson, I have already said that I 
have – I have explained that I actually did ask that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, you did. 
MS KLEIN:   No, I actually have already acknowledged that 
I said it, right at the very beginning. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, sorry.  Ja, I understood it 
differently.  Okay.  But that one was not asked of Ms 
Tsholofelo, could you come back and work with this board? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, as I have said earlier, the 
reason for asking that question of Mr Koko was because of 
10 
what happened the day of his suspension.  He was very 
angry with the board.  He walked out there, he was so 
cross with us, hence my question.  That was the only 
reason I asked him that question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Can I go back to that paragraph 
73.  Oh, you know, if I conclude – sorry, Ms Klein, if I 
conclude in regard to your explanation to the Chairperson 
why you asked that question, the reasons would similarly 
have applied to Ms Molefe who had indicated she wants to 
come back and I appreciate you were not in Mr Dan 
20 
Marokane’s negotiations, he also had expressed interest o 
come back.  This meeting which Ms Suzanne refers to in 
paragraph 73, did it take place?  
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I have no idea.  I do not know 
what meeting we are referring to here and as I am saying, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 164 of 285 
 
you know, if I had minutes of it or some indication but I do 
not know what meeting they are referring to here.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   But we also do not have minutes of 
your settlement discussions with these executives and you 
have agreed that Ms Daniels correctly reflects what you 
have even said in these meetings. 
MS KLEIN:   I have acknowledged that some of what she 
said is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Not all of it.  So if you asked me if this 
10 
happened, it may have happened.  Did I say those things?  
I do not know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, just the meeting itself, no what you 
said. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay, I have no recollection of that meeting, 
Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because she does say in paragraph 74 
that she was then asked to prepare a brief to the Minister 
from the Chairman on the status of the suspended 
executives and then she attaches a copy and she links that 
20 
to the meeting the delegation had on the 19 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe the -  one could ask the question 
this way.  When you see that – a brief – that document 
which she says was document she was asked to prepare 
for the Minister, do you recall it as a document that your 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 165 of 285 
 
committee or you and your colleagues had asked her to 
do? 
MS KLEIN:   Very definitely, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You recall that? 
MS KLEIN:   I do recall that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MS KLEIN:   I do recall that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And is it possible that it was at 
the meeting that Mr Seleka refers to where she was asked 
to prepare that document?  It is possible? 
10 
MS KLEIN:   It is possible, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Then, Ms Klein, we 
can put aside that file.  I wish to go back to the reference 
file, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  There is then correspondence that 
seems to confirm what you say was your statement to Mr 
Koko, could you come back, and it seems as if – and you 
will correct is in that regard, that the board or maybe the P 
& G committee, I would not know, if fact did decide to have 
20 
Mr Koko back. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And in paragraph 57 page 16 you talk 
about – paragraph 57 you talk about your meeting with Mr 
Koko, he was the one executive who was not interested in 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 166 of 285 
 
leaving the employment of Eskom and you then say you 
enquire 
from 
Dentons 
whether 
they 
have 
made 
any 
evidence – whether they have found any evidence of 
wrongdoing by any of the suspended executives. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now before I go to my point let me 
deal with this quickly because you have seen Mr Kapdi’s 
affidavit again. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He says he has no recollection of you 
10 
asking him this. 
MS KLEIN:   Right [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, you can comment. 
MS KLEIN:   To respond? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, please. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I do not know if Mr Kapdi is 
confusing me with Miriam who was the Chairperson of audit 
and risk.  I spoke to Mr Kapdi myself.  In fact I want to go 
a step further.  In the discussion with Mr Kapdi he told me 
categorically that there was no evidence of wrongdoing. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course the question arises, why was 
it an issue for you or for you and the board whether 
Dentons had found any wrongdoing on the part of Mr Koko 
because Mr Koko, together with the other executives, had 
been 
suspended 
on 
the 
basis 
that 
there 
were 
no 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 167 of 285 
 
allegations of wrongdoing on their part, number one. 
 
Number two, the brief given to Dentons excluded 
them looking into any wrongdoing on the part of the 
executives.  So why was this an issue?  Why had this to be 
checked when you and your board knew that you never 
asked Dentons to investigate any wrongdoing on the part 
of Mr Koko or any of the executives?  Why now when there 
was a discussion about any one of them coming back or Mr 
Koko coming back was there an issue to say let us check if 
there is any wrong wrongdoing on – found by Dentons? 
10 
MS KLEIN:   Can I respond, Chair?  May I respond? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Chair, early in the Dentons’ inquiry I got a call 
from Dr Ben Ngubane who told me that Suzanne Daniels 
had been interrogated, I think was the word used, by the 
Dentons’ investigators and they were very hostile towards 
her.  So hostile she was apparently in tears and Dr Ben, 
because I was Acting People in Governance, asked me 
please would you meet with Ms Daniels to find out what is 
happening. 
20 
 
I met with Ms Daniels and she told me that the 
Dentons investigator had told her that they had found 
enough evidence on her to have her dismissed, whatever 
the word, but she was very, very, very distressed by this.  
Based on that, Dr Ngubane at one of the meetings that 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 168 of 285 
 
followed and I cannot quite – I know that I found the 
minutes a week or so ago but I could not find it last night, 
would not even allow Ms Daniels into the meeting because 
of what supposedly Dentons had found and it was with that 
in mind, Chairperson, bearing in mind that Ms Daniels, at 
the time, worked for Matshela Koko.   
So in my heart of hearts when I was told that – and 
we can listen to the recording of the 2 July where there is 
such a motivation to bring Mr Koko because somebody had 
died in his department and the acting people were not 
10 
coping, so it would be great to bring Mr Koko.  I said only 
on condition that I can make a call to Dentons because of 
what had happened to Ms Daniels.  I needed to satisfy 
myself that in the inquiry, whilst it was not focusing on the 
executives, if anybody could be this rough on Ms Daniels, 
surely she was not working alone, she was working for 
Matshela Koko.  That was the reason that I made the call 
to Dentons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  If they said they had found 
something – some wrongdoing, would that have made you 
20 
to take the position that Mr Koko should not be allowed 
back or what – how would that have affected your 
judgment? 
MS KLEIN:   It would absolutely have meant that Mr Koko 
could not be allowed because – and I am sure we are going 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 169 of 285 
 
to deal with Dentons’ reports in a while, but Dentons was 
going to continue – not Dentons, but there was going to be 
another process afterwards for a lot of allegations that 
were made.  I wanted to make very sure in my heart of 
hearts that what had happened to Ms Daniels had nothing 
to do with Mr Koko before allowing him back in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Daniels, do you 
recall – Ms Klein, I beg your pardon.  Ja, the – obviously 
the Chairperson does not have and the Commission does 
10 
not have that information in your affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Seleka, did you address you as 
Ms Daniels …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I changed it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And asked her whether she recalls Ms 
Klein.  It has been a long day. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It has been a long… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  What was my question now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You confused her with Ms Daniels, that 
20 
was your question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, I was saying, Ms Klein, that the 
Commission does not have the benefit of that information 
in your affidavit, we also get the version of Ms Daniels and 
Dr Ngubane because you say it was Dr Ngubane who said 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 170 of 285 
 
that.   So would you – would you provide us with an 
affidavit? 
MS KLEIN:    Absolutely. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We will liaise with you after this. 
MS KLEIN:   Absolutely Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, because let me read what Dentons 
is saying, Mr Kapdi says: 
“I have no recollection of being contacted by Ms ...” 
And you have read this. 
“...by Ms Klein to enquire whether findings of 
10 
wrongdoing had been made against Mr Koko.  I do 
however recall being contacted by Ms Carrim.” 
This is one of the board members. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, she was the Chairperson of audit and 
risk. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   She was the Chairperson of audit and 
risk being contacted by Ms – is it Cassiem or Carrim?   
“To enquire whether the firm had made any findings 
of wrongdoing against the suspended executives.  I 
was not involved in the drafting of the firms report 
20 
and referred this query to Mr Sulaiman[?].  Mr 
Sulaiman[?] has informed me as follows.” 
Now that first part does not impress on me as a person 
who is confusing you as somebody else.  He seems to be 
clear about who he is talking about.  The distinction 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 171 of 285 
 
between you and Ms Carrim.      
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson all I can say to you is I spoke to 
Mr Kapdi, Mr Kapdi did not refer me to Mr Sulaiman[?].  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well Chair it carries on: 
“Mr Carrim asked Mr Sulaiman[?] to confirm whether 
any findings of wrongdoing about the suspended 
executives were made in the firm’s report.”   
Mr Sulaiman[?] responded: 
“That the investigation was not into wrongdoing 
about the suspended executives and therefore no 
10 
findings were made in respect of wrongdoing by any 
specific persons.” 
Which is what the Chairperson is saying to you, that Mr 
Sulaiman[?] also responds by saying: 
“But that is not in our mandate.”       
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I stick to my version which is I 
would have had absolutely no reason to go back to the 
board and say that I have spoken to Dentons if in fact I did 
not and if on reading - and if I look at what because in 
fairness the investigators and the advocate did give me a 
20 
copy of it yesterday.  He says he has no recollection he 
does not say he did not speak to me.  He says he cannot, 
because I mean it is five years ago.  One thing I will say is 
when I spoke to him he did not say to me that he is 
referring me to Mr Sulaiman[?], that he never did that.     
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 172 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Klein there is in fact letters 
addressed to Ms Carrim on this issue.  So he is clear he 
does not recall you calling but he does recall being called 
by Ms Carrim but your version is your version we can leave 
it at that.  
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I do want to ask the letter 
because remember I did not have the benefit of the 
response from Mr Sulaiman[?] to Ms Carrim.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  
MS KLEIN:   May I have a look at that? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, please, yes certainly.  
MS KLEIN:   Because that would help me.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, they were emailed after the 
affidavit had been sent.  
MS KLEIN:   And I just want to just be clear because I 
have had no interaction with Mr Sulaiman[?].   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson may I beg leave to hand it 
up? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   They are – this are annexures 
20 
specifically referred to in those two paragraphs Annexure 
N12 and N13 which is referred to in the next paragraph.  
The affidavit Chairperson has been inserted at the end of 
the reference bundle, right at the end of the reference 
bundle.      
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 173 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   It only came in yesterday.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do we not have Mr Romeo Kumalo’s 
affidavit by now? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair should I place it on record 
Chair?  He was given a deadline of last week Friday, 2 
October 2020. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   He did not meet the deadline and I 
reminded him by email he subsequently responded and in 
10 
his 
email 
it 
is 
a 
message 
to 
the 
effect 
that 
his 
attorney…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your voice has gone down.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Has it gone down oh sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, raise it ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   His attorney is on holiday, school 
holidays and upon his return they will engage and attend to 
the drafting of the affidavit.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But we cannot wait for somebody who is 
on holiday.  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have indicated that myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And so I have not received a 
subsequent response but I will follow up with him.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 174 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.   
MS KLEIN:   Thanks very much Chair I have noted that but 
I stand by my version…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  
MS KLEIN:   Where Mr Sulaiman[?] did not write to me and 
I got the answer from Noor Kapdi and it was on the basis 
of the affidavit that I will provide about Ms Daniels.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So Chair let me just place on record 
10 
because the letters that are annexed to Mr Kapdi’s affidavit 
are respectively dated 13 July 2015 and 14 July 2015.  It is 
a letter from Dentons under the author is Mr Shahied 
Sulaiman[?], the attention Ms Mariam Carrim, Eskom 
Holdings and the letter reads: 
“Dear Ms Carrim investigation into the affairs of 
Eskom Holdings SOE Limited.  I refer to the above I 
know that the terms of reference in respect of the 
investigation do not require that misconduct by any 
specific individual be investigated.  Accordingly, as 
20 
you will have seen from our draft preliminary report 
you 
have 
seen 
it 
already 
we 
make 
no 
recommendations 
in 
relation 
to 
any 
specific 
individual.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.        
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 175 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just to place that on record.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I do not think the issue can be taken 
further.  
MS KLEIN:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay let us proceed.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then Ms Daniels you say after you 
made the Ms – oh my word sorry Ms Klein.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think next time he makes this mistake 
he must pay Ms Klein. 
MS KLEIN:   Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you know counsel can afford you 
know so he will understand if you demand quite a high 
amount.  Yes, let us continue.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Ms Klein then related to that 
paragraph of your allegation that you approached to Mr 
Kapdi is there a subsequent paragraph: 
“In order to address my discomforts, I decided to 
engage with Mr Gerry Kapou[?].” 
But what was your discomfort?  
MS KLEIN:   My discomfort was twofold here you have got 
20 
three people who you settling with in the three-month 
period that they were supposedly being given to get 
everything you know for the investigation to be done and 
here is a possibility that one person comes back, that was 
the first discomfort that I had.  Legally you know am I 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 176 of 285 
 
exposing, are we the board exposing the company to any 
kind of legal for litigation.  Secondly if there then is no 
wrongdoing because remember I stick to my version which 
is I spoke to Noor Kapdi based on what I had experienced 
with Ms Daniels and Noor Kapdi tells me there is no 
wrongdoing.  I wanted to make sure what would happen if I 
as the board member said to the other board members I am 
not going to allow Mr Koko to come back.  I needed to 
understand what the consequences of that would be for the 
organisation.      
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Sulaiman[?]’s letter says: 
“As we have already indicated in our draft report 
there 
are 
no 
findings 
of 
wrongdoing 
against 
anybody.” 
Why is it your concern and not the boards concern? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson that is a very interesting 
question because you are going to have other board 
members who’s going to come here and I hope that you are 
going to put this question to them.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   No I am putting it to you.  
20 
MS KLEIN:   No, no and I am going to answer you.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   No listen let me it says you saying in 
your affidavit which nobody had said...[intervene]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe Mr Seleka maybe please do 
not, do not take your eyes away from what you are looking 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 177 of 285 
 
at but maybe let us ask this question which related to the 
question that Mr Seleka is asking.  Do you know whether 
your concern was shared by the other members of the 
board?  
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson to a large degree it was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was not to a large degree. 
MS KLEIN:   It was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay do you know why you would 
have this concern but the other members of the board or 
some of them would not have that concern or is that 
10 
something you do not know?  
MS KLEIN:   I cannot explain it Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS KLEIN:   All I know is that in more than one meeting I 
indicated guys we cannot do this there is one or two things 
coming out that is of concern to me and I think that was 
part of the reason I was asked to go and get an opinion 
from Noor Kapdi as well as go and get a legal opinion 
because of my reservations which I was raising. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.     
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   My discomfort not the boards 
discomfort but anyway.  So Ms Klein what was your 
discomfort? 
MS KLEIN:   As I have explained earlier my discomfort was 
based on what happened to Ms Daniels and I was afraid 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 178 of 285 
 
that there may be something underlying which could come 
at us afterwards.  Sorry are we still talking about the same 
thing Chairperson?  Just help me quickly I maybe off the 
point.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, in order to address my discomfort 
so you say you have received a response from Mr Noor 
Kapdi he says he does not recall you contacting him but 
you further say: 
“In order to address my discomfort I decided to 
engage with Mr Gerry Kapou[?].” 
10 
And 
my 
question 
was 
what 
did 
you 
say 
was 
your 
discomfort?   
MS KLEIN:   My discomfort at that stage was now that 
Gerry Kapou[?] has said not Gerry Kapou[?], sorry Noor 
Kapdi.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   His going to make you pay.  
MS KLEIN:   Noor Kapdi, now that Noor Kapdi has told me 
there is no – all these things that I have been worried 
about with Ms Daniels is it out of the way.  Then I was 
concerned that here you have got three executives literally 
20 
who’s according to me by now accepted that they are going 
to be leaving.  What does bringing a fourth one back do to 
the company.  Do we not open the company to litigation 
was the first concern?  Secondly if like I am saying to you I 
was told by Mr Kapdi there was nothing else there.  What 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 179 of 285 
 
would be, what would we be exposed to if we kept him out, 
so it was twofold.  So that was my discomfort the litigation 
which could possibly open ourselves to by this other three 
now that his coming back and the second thing was 
keeping him out after supposedly there is nothing which 
was confirmed by Noor Kapdi.  What does that mean?  
Those were the opinions that I was asking Gerry Kapou[?] 
for.        
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes: 
“So my discomfort I decided to engage with Gerry 
10 
Kapou[?]who decided that Eskom could not keep 
someone on suspension if the enquiry did not find 
any evidence of wrongdoing.” 
So you have had the benefit obviously of looking at the 
reference bundle and the letters that were exchanged 
between you and Mr Kapou[?], the advice you received 
from him. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   You further say Dentons also provided 
a letter confirming the above.   
20 
MS KLEIN:   That was picked up in one of the minutes I 
never personally saw the letter it was a minute of a 
meeting where Chwayita Mabude gives feedback and says 
there was a letter from Dentons I never physically saw the 
letter from Dentons myself.  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 180 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me while Mr Seleka prepares to ask 
you his next question let me go back to your – his comfort 
that relates to the fact that three of the executives had left 
or were leaving and you were looking at the possibility that 
the fourth one could be allowed back.  What do you say to 
the proposition that that discomfort – you said your 
discomfort was twofold 1, are related to Ms Daniels the 
other one related to the fact that three of the executives 
were leaving but you were faced with the possibility of 
10 
allowing back the fourth.  What do you say to the 
proposition that that discomfort you had is not consistent 
with somebody who knows that with regard to the three 
executives who were leaving they were leaving because 
that was there choice that discomfort is more consistent 
with somebody who knows that in regard to this three we 
may be accused of having pushed them out of not having 
wanted them back.  What do you say to that proposition?  
In 
other 
words, 
if 
having 
negotiated 
with 
the 
three 
executives and you are clear in your mind that you wanted 
20 
them back and they know that but they chose that they 
wanted to leave you would have no discomfort when you 
come to the fourth executive you adopt the same attitude.  
The fourth executive say I want to come back because you 
would know that we have been consistent with all of them 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 181 of 285 
 
we are saying from our side we are happy for to come back 
but if you choose to go it is fine as well.   
We are adopting the same attitude to Mr Koko if he 
chooses to come back we cannot be accused of anything 
because we are consistent but if the position is that with 
regard to the other three you think you may have acted 
inconsistently.  You may have not wanted them back or 
acted in a manner that seems to suggest you wanted them 
out then that discomfort would be there when you are faced 
with the possibility of allowing the fourth one back.  What 
10 
do you say to that proposition?                    
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I think what you saying is 
probable because you will remember Mr Matona saying that 
you know he felt like he was pushed out.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  
MS KLEIN:   You know so what you saying is probable but 
that is certainly not what was in mind at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  
MS KLEIN:   I wanted to make sure that legally bringing 
one out of four back is not going to create a problem for 
20 
the organisation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that was a mandate given to you 
by the board? 
MS KLEIN:   By people in governance on behalf of the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 182 of 285 
 
board.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that mandate for you to do this 
exercise of finding out was given to you by people in 
governance?  
MS KLEIN:   Correct on behalf of the board yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So your affidavit say: 
“I was mandated by the board.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   That might because the board mandated 
the P&G basically to do whatever the board had a mandate 
to do.    
10 
MS KLEIN:   Correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that fine, I am saying that maybe that, 
you might say no it is not but…[intervene] 
MS KLEIN:   But Chairperson but that is exactly the point 
the board had mandated people and governance and 
people and governance had instructed me because I think 
of various push backs for me to do certain things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   We will find out from the board.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you can pursue it does not mean you 
20 
must pursue your question Mr Seleka if you want but I do 
not know in the end whether it makes much difference 
whether it is P&G or the board.      
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is fine Chair what I wanted to – 
Ms Klein the letters that Dentons has provided they have 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 183 of 285 
 
not provided it any other in regard to the request.  You 
cannot dispute that this was the response given by 
Dentons to Ms Mariam Carrim?  
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I can only say to you I see it 
here, these are the letters that was sent to Ms Carrim, Ms 
Carrim would have to give you that assurance I never got 
the letter from Dentons at all.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka sorry I think we are at twenty 
to four.  I would like us to go beyond 4 o’clock with Ms 
10 
Klein if possible I would like us to finish with her.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you if there are important issues 
that you will not have covered by that you can tell me.    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But I would like us to try and wrap up 
with her by four.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  So Ms Klein I was 
going to refer you to the correspondence between you and 
Mr Gerry Kapou[?] which you have had sight of that is in 
20 
the reference bundle.  There is a letter there on page 21 
which is addressed to yourself by Mr Kapou[?] you have 
seen or read it and I am interested in the mandate given to 
Mr Kapou[?] the instructions.  So you had first gone to 
Dentons.    
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 184 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   The you go to Mr Kapou[?] and his 
writing on 2 July 2015 or the letter is dated 2 July 2015.  
Suspension of Mr Matshela Moses Koko and paragraph 1 
says: 
“In March 2015 Eskom suspended four of its 
executives. 
 
Eskom 
has 
since 
entered 
into 
settlement agreements with three of these four 
executives in terms of which the parties agreed to 
mutually terminate.  From Eskom is now considering 
10 
uplifting the suspension of the fourth executive Mr 
Koko.  Eskom has therefore requested that we 
advise it on whether the uplifting of Mr Koko 
suspension 
will 
impact 
on 
the 
settlement 
agreements 
entered 
into 
with 
the 
other 
three 
executives.” 
So you confirm that you are being with the instruction to 
Mr…[intervene]  
MS KLEIN:   I agree, yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   And so he gave his advice about the 
20 
impact of your decision to return Mr Koko with the 
agreements.  
MS KLEIN:   Of course.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   You said there will be no impact.  
MS KLEIN:   Yes.  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 185 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And you wrote back to him on 2 July 
the same date 2015 and you say: 
“Gerry can you please include a para on the 
consequences of not bringing Koko back.  Can I 
please have this before 13h00 – you are writing at 
10:25 – before 13h00 as I need it for the board 
meeting which starts then, regards.”  
So 
you 
wanted 
a 
paragraph 
included 
regarding 
the 
consequences whether there are consequences of not 
bringing him back, what are they.     
10 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, correct Chairperson.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So by this time the board has resolved 
to bring him back.  
MS KLEIN:   Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, now the curious note here to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That one yes.  
MS KLEIN:   Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The answer was yes? 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay I just wanted it to be captured.   
20 
MS KLEIN:   So P&G had agreed to bring him back, ja not 
the board P&G – there was going to be a P&G meeting 
later on, on the 2 n d I think there is a problem with the date 
because I think the date of the P&G meeting that we have 
got there is on the 1 s t.  The P&G meeting happened later 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 186 of 285 
 
the day on the 2 n d where I gave feedback in terms of what 
both Mr Kapou[?] and Mr Kapdi had said.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well going back to the mandate of the 
board to the delegation of three yourself, Dr Ngubane and 
Mr Khumalo you were the people who were authorised to 
negotiate settlements.  Now I seem to remember that the 
board had said something to the effect that we understand 
that these executives who have been suspended want to 
leave we are mandating you to negotiate settlements and 
they set out the parameters of that settlement and that that 
10 
mandate did not include having anybody come back.  Is 
that correct?     
MS KLEIN:   That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so did your committee this group of 
three or the P&G but the mandate was given to the group 
of three.  Did this group of three go back to the board or to 
P&G at some stage and say in regard to Mr Koko the 
mandate you gave us cannot be effected because he wants 
to come back we have the authority to bring him back.  Did 
that happen?  
20 
MS KLEIN:   That did Chairperson after P&G which is 
dated the 2 n d which we sent you the clip of as well where I 
give feedback to P&G as to what happened with my 
discussion with Mr Kapou[?] and with Mr Kapdi.  After that 
it then went back to the board to say to the board look this 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 187 of 285 
 
is our proposal and the board then based on in the 
information they then received were comfortable that this 
could happen bearing in mind we have now checked it off 
with the enquiry, with Kapdi as well as with the legal 
people.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine just as a matter of 
interest do you know whether the board was ever told that 
Ms Molefe at the first meeting with the representatives of 
the board had made it clear that she wanted to come back?      
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I…[intervene] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even though ultimately a settlement was 
reached.  Do you know whether the board was ever told of 
that situation?   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I am not aware of that I do not 
think so.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
MS KLEIN:   I do not think so.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe to get this out of the way Mr – 
both Mr Dan Marokane and Ms Molefe if I remember 
correctly testified that they felt unwanted by the board.  Do 
20 
you have any comment on that they felt unwanted?  You 
know Mr Marokane said he wrote I think a letter on the 18 t h 
of March after the suspension had begun and raised a 
number of issues and indicated his preparedness to 
contribute to solutions and so on and set out what he had 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 188 of 285 
 
done and he told me that actually around the 6 t h of March 
his portfolio had reached a milestone that had not been 
reached in 20 years or something.   
I have even said so unbeknown to you in two days’ 
time your name would be among those who have been 
discussed for suspension in a Durban meeting.  So he said 
in that letter of the 18 t h he talked about what he had done 
and so on but there was no response from the board.  I 
think he sent another letter about himself or through his 
attorneys so he was not getting a response.  At a certain 
10 
stage he thought you know I am not wanted and he 
reached out to Dr Ngubane to say it looks like there is no 
trust here anymore can we talk parting of the ways 
separation and from what he said Dr Ngubane did not make 
any attempt to say no, no actually the board wants you 
back or anything like that but he maybe thought that is Mr 
Marokane that interestingly whereas when he had been 
sending these letters over this period to the board there 
was no response, there was no acknowledgment of receipt 
of the letters.  Once he talked about separation there was 
20 
an immediate response in a day or two.   
Dr Ngubane made sure that he could you know he went 
back to him or whatever.  So they said they felt unwanted, 
I don’t know if you want – if you are able to make any 
comment. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 189 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:    Chairperson I can’t make a comment other 
than to say that I can understand why they would have felt 
that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Ms Klein, just to 
complete on this, Mr Koko you had said earlier that if there 
was one person you wouldn’t want to take back it would 
have been him because of the issues that were raised 
against him.  At this time, when you were asking for this 
legal opinions when the Dentons making it clear that we – 
10 
you haven’t given us a mandate to investigate any 
wrongdoing, why didn’t you commission an investigation 
into his – these allegations about Suzanne Daniels, issues 
you alluded to earlier about Mr Koko himself? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, let me answer that this way, the 
man was not back yet, let me say this to you, should the 
four have come back on my watch there would have been 
an investigation into all of the allegations that had been 
made prior to them leaving because me we’ve dealt fairly 
with various allegations and things like that, so when 
20 
people did come back we would have had to have them 
looked at various things.  The difficulty that I had, or I 
think that the Board faced, Chairperson, was we were on a 
burning platform with so much going on.  We had load 
shedding, going concern problems and all of the rest of it, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 190 of 285 
 
so, if you say to me why didn’t I then institute an 
investigation against Mr Koko, that just wasn’t a top 
priority for me at the time.  We were wanting to get this 
business stabilized, that was my perspective.   
I wanted to make sure that we had dealt with the 
four Executives in a way that the Board would not be 
exposed, legally and I had done what I thought were the 
checks and balances required. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Daniels’ version in regard to the 
Dentons report, and you know the draft which you refer to 
10 
in your affidavit as a draft which was destroyed, he says, 
in fact – and we’ve seen the minutes of the meeting where 
the Board resolves that copies be collected and that you 
be the one to destroy them and that, that decision was 
made in because there were allegations in the report 
regarding how Mr Koko had concluded certain transactions 
which was not above board. 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson, when it comes to the Dentons, as 
I hope I’m not going to go too wide, you must just help me 
here Mr Seleka because remember because we’re talking 
20 
about various versions but I think they’re all…[intervenes]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let’s talk the first. 
MS KLEIN:   First one? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   First one, the first version of the Dentons 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 191 of 285 
 
report was given, presentation was made to the Board on 
the 25 t h of June, that version had no – according to my 
recollection, 
no 
names 
of 
individuals 
but 
names 
of 
companies.  I remember the Board asking the question, 
how much of this has been verified and how much of this 
are just allegations because we were very cognisance – 
certainly I was, of the fact that we had three months for 
this thing to run.  They gave us, this was verified, and 
these were allegations.  The Board decided that the 
allegations could be looked at afterwards but in order to 
10 
get a base line which is what I thought we were needing to 
do, that we would work with the version which was verified, 
that was the first version.  The Board then, asked Dentons 
to go away and take out the names of companies, once 
again, Ms Daniels – let me not talk about Ms Daniels, I do 
not recall any names of individuals in that report.  So, 
when the report, the second report came on the 14 t h of 
August, that was the report that the Board accepted and 
signed off.  Regarding the question about me, collecting 
them and shredding them…[intervenes]. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not you collecting, there’s a minute in 
the Board meeting saying, the company secretary should  
collect copies give them to you and that you will destroy 
the copies. 
MS KLEIN:   Can I just go back? 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 192 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Right, so the first presentation was made on 
the 25 t h of June, the meeting of the 2 n d or the 3 r d of July, 
the Board gets given this first draft which is with all the 
names of the different companies in it.  On the meeting or 
at the meeting of the 14 t h of July the company secretary is 
asked to get all of those versions back from Board 
members because Board members are now walking around 
with documents which the Board agreed it would rather not 
have because we could be sued because there wasn’t 
10 
proper investigations done on it.  So, at the meeting of the 
14 t h of July the company secretary asked, please can we 
have all the documents back, that’s the first version, with 
all of the names in it.  On the 14 t h of August, Chairperson, 
when we get the final draft, the one where the Board is 
now happy, we’ve taken out the names of people, we can’t 
get sued, by this time quite a few of the Board members 
had still not given back the documents in spite of having 
been asked for it a month before.  It is at that point, that 
I’m asked as Chair of People and Governance, please can 
20 
you help us to collect these documents from the Board 
members so that they can do shredding and, Chairperson, I 
certainly did not shred any documents myself.  I would 
have worked with company secretary where people had not 
brought their copies in, to maybe make a call to say, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 193 of 285 
 
please can we have your cooperation because it was an 
entire month later that Board members had still not 
complied with the request from the secretary. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Two things, Ms Klein, one is that in 
your affidavit you say, the report, the first one included, 
allegations against individuals and companies.  I hear you 
now tell the Chairperson, it was only the names of the 
companies that were mentioned. 
MS KLEIN:   And if I said that it’s individuals and 
companies then I’m wrong here because as far as I 
10 
remember it was against companies and I was afraid that 
we would be sued. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But then, Ms Daniels is consistent with 
your 
affidavit, 
says 
the 
names 
were 
mentioned, 
of 
individuals and it was shredded for that reason, not only 
companies but individuals. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, as I sit here today, my concern 
at the time was about companies.  I can’t remember 
individual 
names 
even 
being 
mentioned 
in 
that 
first 
document. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, and I don’t want to be difficult with 
you but how would it get into your affidavit?  It’s page 22 
paragraph 84. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, despite what I said about 
finishing with Ms Klein at four, the bottom of line is the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 194 of 285 
 
issues – we must do justice to the issues.  So, if you feel 
that there is still a few issues that are important to be 
dealt with, it’s fine but we might have to take a short break 
at four and then come back and continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, can I pursue a little more, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Klein, the question was, then how 
did it get into your affidavit which is a sworn statement? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, all I can say to you is, with the 
benefit of looking at it now, I really believe it was 
10 
companies, I cannot believe that there were individual.  
Sitting here now, if that’s what I wrote there, then I can – 
then I have to say to you, hand on heart, then it was a 
mistake because it was definitely companies and I cannot 
remember seeing individual names on it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You have seen, again, the affidavit of 
Dentons, and this is the second point, Dentons says, 
you’re saying you gave the request, you requested them to 
remove the names of the companies and the – well you say 
the companies.  Dentons says there was no request from 
20 
Eskom 
to 
effect 
any 
specific 
changes 
to 
that 
draft 
preliminary 
report. 
 
The 
amendments 
to 
the 
draft 
preliminary report were made for the reasons set out in the 
abovementioned email to Ms Carrim.  The sequence of 
events in relation to the preparation of the final report is 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 195 of 285 
 
set out above.   
“We have furthermore provided to the commission a 
compared copy of the firms report so that the 
changes can be readily identified. 
 
So, I may not show you – I may not do the exercise 
now but perhaps for the benefit of the Chairperson, but let 
me deal with the first part, which is, there was no request 
from Eskom to make any specific changes to the draft 
preliminary report. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, that is news to me.  My 
10 
understanding, and there’s a letter which we have, I’m not 
sure, I think was given in my pack the last pack to the 
Commission, was where Ms Carrim actually wants to 
understand what’s the difference between the first and the 
second report and they actually then say, the corroborated 
version 
was, 
what 
was 
then, 
the 
final 
version, 
the 
uncorroborated or the allegations was all removed.  So, I 
must say I’m not sure, I mean, obviously not having had 
sight to what it is that you’re referring to, I can only go on 
what the Chairperson of ARC told us, which was to say, 
20 
this was the first version, this is the second version, so 
what is the difference and the difference – one of the first 
things, point number one, on the letter which she got from 
Dentons was to say that all uncorroborated names of 
companies had been removed.  I think that’s something, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 196 of 285 
 
Chairperson, that we’d need to then ask Ms Carrim 
because I can’t really respond to that any further. My 
version is, there were names of companies in there and I 
was – my personal concern was that they could sue us 
which is why they were asked to be removed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s take the short adjournment, during 
the adjournment, maybe Mr Seleka, you could let Ms Klein 
see what you are reading from it might assist her.  So, 
when we come back then we will continue.  We will resume 
at quarter past four. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Klein the – the 
paragraph we read just before the adjournment is 8.6 in that 
affidavit.  Chairperson the – the disadvantage is that the 
affidavit was received yesterday. What I think I would like to 
arrange with Ms Klein is to look at some of these annexures 
20 
where Ms Kapdi says:   
The explanation for making amendments to the draft 
preliminary report was mentioned in the email to Ms Carrim.  
The email is here but the report itself runs up to over 100 
pages and she will need to do a comparison of where there 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 197 of 285 
 
are names and how it evolved from the first draft to the next 
and the next.  We can do that exercise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what is the point about the presence or 
absence of names of individuals in the report?  Whether 
there were names or there were no names? What is the point 
about it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes the – it was – we were putting to Ms 
Klein the version which we see in her affidavits visa vie what 
we see in Ms Daniels’ affidavit that the report was destroyed 
because it had certain allegations made against Mr Matshelo 
10 
Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So I think she needs to have the 
opportunity to look at it Ms Klein.  We also need to have an 
opportunity to look at that because… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We only received them yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no then I understand. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair.   
MS KLEIN:  Chair just to be clear am I going to get a copy of 
that first report from you so that I can look at it because I do 
not have? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes that is what I am saying. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 198 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  Oh alright thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair that – Ms Klein 
you may want to answer this question and I want to make my 
concluding remarks.  Because what we see is the – of the 
four executives only one comes back in circumstances that 
would have allowed all four executives to come back.   
And when he comes back Mr Koko he is alleged to 
10 
have then engaged in certain transactions that facilitated the 
awarding of contracts to Tegeta to McKinsey, Trillian and that 
that was the purpose for him coming back.  What is your 
comment to that? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson that is certainly is not how I 
understood it at the time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  That certainly is not how I understood it and why 
I understood him coming back. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No that is fine.  On the one hand on the 
20 
other hand is that this is the very person who was in fact 
behind the suspensions.  Ms Daniels says she met with him 
at Melrose Arch in fact having been called by him.  Ms 
Nonkuleleko Dlamini testified yesterday as well that Mr Koko 
had called her said provide me with your CV.  This is before 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 199 of 285 
 
the day of the suspension and they meet … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry to interrupt you Mr Seleka.  I 
think – I think you did not complete the first part relating to 
Ms Daniels with the part that is really important. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Daniels testified that she was called by 
Mr Koko to meet with him at Melrose Arch and she says they 
met I think at a certain restaurant but from there Mr Koko 
took her to certain offices where the two of them met Mr 
Salim Essa who said to Ms Daniels something along the lines 
10 
what does one do if one wants to suspend an executive at – 
at Eskom?  Or what is the procedure for suspending 
executives at Eskom?   
And actually went on to tell both Ms Daniels and Mr 
Koko that there were certain executives who were going to 
be suspended the following day at Eskom.  Because I think 
they were meeting on the 10t h if I am not – the 10t h March 
and that I think the names may have been mentioned or their 
portfolios but one of the things that Ms Daniels … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The names were mentioned Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Daniels said is that Mr Koko’s name 
was mentioned by Mr Salim Essa as also one of the people 
to be suspended.  And she says she looked at Mr Koko and 
Mr Koko did not show any reaction of being concerned or 
surprised or anything. And then Ms Dlamini gave evidence 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 200 of 285 
 
and said on the 10t h March she got a call from Mr Koko who 
wanted him or her to go to meet with him I think at Melrose 
Arch as well if I am not mistaken. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes at Melrose Arch and she was not 
available to go there because she was occupied in a certain 
session but he then asked her to give him her CV.  And then 
later in the evening the two of them did meet and because 
Mr Koko had not received her CV he asked her to send it to 
a certain email address and he did say to her that there were 
10 
certain executives who would be suspended and she that is 
Ms Dlamini could be asked to act in one of the positions.   
So the person that on the 11t h meets with you that is 
Mr Koko who seems very surprised and angry at the news 
that he may be suspended is not exactly accordingly to this 
evidence the same person that is not the same reaction that 
he seemed to have shown the day before when he and Ms 
Daniels met with Mr Salim Essa and Mr Salim Essa said he 
would be suspended.   
So have that scenario.  So when Mr Seleka puts this 
20 
to you that you end up allowing Mr Koko back whereas the 
other executives go it is against that background.  Okay. 
MS KLEIN:  I completely understand Chair and I completely 
understand and all I can say is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 201 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  I think somebody is going to write a book about 
us one day. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Hm. 
 
Hm. 
 
Well 
Ms 
Molefe 
also 
corroborates in a certain way Ms Dlamini’s evidence about 
her having received a call from Mr Koko because she says 
they were in the same session that day on the 10 March and 
at some stage I think around about lunch time Ms Dlamini 
approached her and told her that Mr Koko had phoned her 
asking that she should go to a meeting at Melrose Arch and 
she said that is Ms Molefe no you cannot go because we are 
10 
busy tell Mr Koko to phone me if he wants to talk to me 
about it.  Or something to that effect.  You understand. 
MS KLEIN:  I hear Chairperson and ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay Mr Seleka I might not have put 
your question the way you wanted to – the angle so feel free 
to put in – put it to her in the angle you wanted. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Well I think the Chair has done it 
and Ms Klein confronted with these facts and the commission 
having been established because of some of these facts.  
You look at that and as I said the circumstances that lead to 
20 
him coming back are no different from Tsholofelo Molefe’s 
circumstances.  Dan Marokane circumstances.  Mr Matona 
who actually is taking it to court says I want a relief to 
reinstate me.  But none of that shakes the board to do what 
it does in regard to Mr Koko.  Do you have any comment to 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 202 of 285 
 
the Chairperson on that? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson all I want to say is and I am sure 
you are going to have other people coming I am not sure on 
the same topic but I would like you to test please with the 
other board members who pushed the hardest for Mr Koko 
not to come back.  I would like you to please test them going 
forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You remember I said to you earlier on 
it is possible that we may – I mean Eskom may have had a 
board which as a body wanted the executives back or had no 
10 
problem if the executives came back but had had individuals 
within the board who did not want the executives to come 
back.  That is one scenario.   
 
Another scenario could be that the entire board or the 
majority of the board at least did not want them back.  So 
there are those possible scenarios. 
MS KLEIN:  Agree.  Agree Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS KLEIN:  Agree. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  And ja and one really 
20 
needs to understand the fiduciary duties of the board.  What 
role does the board play in this regard?  Because we see 
yourself in your affidavit saying to the Chairperson I was 
mandated to get these opinions.   
But you say it was your personal discomfort so it is a 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 203 of 285 
 
little 
bit 
confusing 
there. 
But 
that 
is 
what 
you 
do 
nonetheless.  But you do so only in respect of Mr Koko.  And 
the question is, exactly what was going on in your mind when 
you go out of your way in your discomfort to have this man 
accommodated 
and 
ensure 
that 
there 
are 
no 
legal 
repercussions to Eskom visa vie the other members? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson at the time when the calls were 
made when I was asked because of my discomfort which I 
am sure you will navigate or interrogate with other witnesses 
at that time there had already been conclusions reached with 
10 
every one of the other three. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know Ms Klein on the evidence that I 
have heard and on some of the things that I am reading 
affidavits and so on one gets the impression maybe it is not 
it is more than an impression that actually probably it is not 
an impression.  The decision or the idea that there should be 
an inquiry at Eskom and that certain executives must be 
suspended came from outside of Eskom.  It seems quite 
clear.  You know. 
MS KLEIN:  I agree with that Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Now the question that arises is with 
whom did it originally originate?  Who came up with this idea 
and to whom did he or she sell this idea until it came to the 
Durban meeting – until it came to the board on the 9t h and on 
the 11t h?  Who outside of Eskom originally came up with this 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 204 of 285 
 
idea and what was his or her agenda?   
 
It is possible that some of the members of the board 
knew quite well by the meeting of the 11t h where the idea 
came from and who was really behind this idea but they had 
no problem pursuing that idea.   
 
It is possible that among the board members there 
were some who did not know these things.  Who did not 
know where this idea really came from.  Who only knew what 
was said at the meeting and what they were told by Mr Tsotsi 
and by Mr Nick Linnell.   
10 
 
And it is possible that among the board members 
there may have been some who were misled.  There may 
have been some who may have genuinely thought that – that 
there was no other agenda other than trying to fix problems 
at Eskom.   
 
But the moment you hear that on the 10 t h Mr Koko 
called Ms Daniels and took her to a meeting with Mr Salim 
Essa.  Now if that part of Ms Daniels’ evidence is true then it 
paints a different picture.  And if the evidence that – her 
evidence that Mr Salim Essa told her that there were some 
20 
executives who would be suspended then he seems to have 
known the names already and was asking what procedure 
should be followed at Eskom if they wanted to suspend – if 
you want to suspend an executive. 
 
All this is very worrying.  And of course you have if 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 205 of 285 
 
Ms Dlamini’s evidence is correct then you have Mr Koko 
approaching Ms Dlamini and asking her to go to meet him at 
Melrose Arch. 
 
And of course I think Mr Seleka read Mr Koko’s 
affidavit where he denies I think having called Ms Dlamini on 
the 10t h as alleged by Ms Dlamini.   But the investigators 
have found cell phone records from which it would appear 
that – or that day alone Mr Koko tried numerous times to 
reach Ms Dlamini and ultimately reached her only twice.  But 
the other times he seems to have tried and not succeeded.  
10 
If that – is those cell phone records are correct. 
 
And 
then 
I 
have 
heard 
evidence 
when 
Doctor 
Ngubane was giving evidence here that when he was acting 
Chairperson or Chairperson at some stage he received from 
Mr Salim – I do not know whether it was Mr Salim Essa or Mr 
Howa – Howa who sent a document to Doctor Ngubane at 
Eskom in which they were – if he was effectively saying the 
board should make the following resolutions.   
And the resolutions were about how the board should 
– what position the board should take with regard to certain 
20 
newspapers which had written certain articles.  And Doctor 
Ngubane admitted that he put that to the board and the 
board went along. 
 
So you may well have heard a board here which was 
being controlled from outside and was not acting in the best 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 206 of 285 
 
interest of Eskom.  And in that context it may be that there 
were some members of the board who were – who knew 
exactly what was happening – who knew the agenda and 
there may well have been other members who were not privy 
to all of those agendas but who went along for whatever 
reason. 
 
So that – that is a picture that seems to be emerging.  
Did you want to say anything about it? 
MS KLEIN:  No Chairperson I cannot add to that.  I think 
everything that we have heard so far I cannot add – I cannot 
10 
disagree with anything that you have said. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairperson Mr Koko in fact admits: 
“I called her on the day and we met for 
dinner in the evening at Midrand.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  He seems to admit the call that led to the 
meeting but my recollection is that he did not seem to admit 
the earlier call during the day or does he? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   
“I deny that I called her to Midrand – to 
Melrose Arch.” 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh he – but on his version does it look like 
he only admits one call to her? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You could say that from here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 207 of 285 
 
“I called her on the day and we met for 
dinner in the evening at Midrand.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   
“I deny that I called her to come to Melrose 
Arch.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it may be that what he is saying is I 
called her once but the purpose of the call was to invite her 
10 
for dinner.  It could mean that I am not saying I called her 
once I am saying whatever times I called her it was not for 
asking her to go to Melrose Arch but it was for dinner. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course Ms Dlamini has said that he 
never called her for dinner and they did not have dinner. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They met for about twenty minutes at KFC 
20 
or McDonalds and that was all. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  May I add to that Ms Klein because in 
regard to the acting appointments. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 208 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The board itself you will recall the minute 
it makes that the acting appointment seemed to have been – 
seemed to have had a meeting beforehand with the acting 
CE which at the time is Mr Zethembe Khoza I believe before 
the suspensions were made.  Before they could be appointed 
to act.  You recall that night? 
MS KLEIN:  Are you asking me if I recall that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja recall the minute – what is recorded in 
that minute.  I think it is the 19 March. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  Just help me Chairperson? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I will help you. 
MS KLEIN:  Ja please. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I will help you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you asking whether she recalls having 
seen something along those lines in the minutes or are you 
asking her whether she recalls that that is what is happened 
or are you asking her whether she recalls both? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I am asking in fact for both and the 
question – obviously you could answer on a step by step 
20 
basis.  The first thing is you recall there had been minuted 
by the board in a board meeting and secondly that you recall 
that that is said to have happened. 
MS KLEIN:  No I do not recall.  So if you can just read it to 
me please because I went through quite a lot of the minutes 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 209 of 285 
 
but I do not recall a meeting – if I understood it correctly 
where people met prior to – is that in what you say is in a 
board minute? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay let us see whether you can answer 
the second question. 
MS KLEIN:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Do you know that that had happened? 
MS KLEIN:  No I am not aware that there was a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Which is that… 
10 
MS KLEIN:  Prior meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That the people who were subsequently 
appointed to act had had a meeting beforehand with the 
acting CE. 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With who? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  With the acting CEO Chairperson I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was the acting CE again? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That was Mr Zethembe Khoza. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what date would that have been when 
20 
they met with her – with him? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought they were supposed to have met 
with somebody at Melrose Arch on the 10t h March. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh correct Chairperson that – that is the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 210 of 285 
 
allegation made. 
MS KLEIN:    Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Do you know… 
MS KLEIN:  No Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of anything along those lines? 
MS KLEIN:  No I do not.  That is why I am saying just read 
to me the minute because I do not remember being at a 
meeting where that was discussed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  No Ms Klein you were there again the 19 
10 
March 2015.  That is where the board decides to take 
disciplinary action Mr Tsotsi. 
MS KLEIN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  There in that meeting it is noted the 
people 
who 
were 
acting 
in 
place 
of 
the 
suspended 
executives were allegedly called into a meeting and knew 
beforehand that they would be acting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that does not say with – with whom 
20 
they allegedly met.  Does it say? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja, no I can carry on Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is the first line. 
“The board needed to find out how this 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 211 of 285 
 
happened.  They were apparently called into 
a meeting and the acting CE met with them.” 
So we put this to you Ms Klein. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that would be – that would certainly be 
different from what I understood to have happened on the 
10t h.  I understood that the people who were going to act in 
the positions of the executives were called to a meeting at 
Melrose Arch.  
I am under the impression maybe wrongly that they 
would have met with Mr Salim Essa there maybe with Mr 
10 
Koko as well but that might not necessarily be so.  But I do 
not remember having heard or noted that they had had a 
meeting with the acting CE.   
But if – but if people are going to be appointed to act 
in a position it is – it is not unusual that they would be 
informed ahead of other people. 
 
If Mr Seleka I think I am going to fire you tomorrow.  I 
would need to know whether I will have somebody to take 
your position and therefore I might talk to that person before 
I tell you about firing you.  Because I do not want to be in a 
20 
situation where I fire you and then I cannot find somebody to 
act in your position.   
 
So on the face of it if they were – if they were 
meeting with the CE let us say for example the day before 
their acting appointments were to be announced that would 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 212 of 285 
 
not – that would not be of concern to me because I would 
take it that the board asked the CE to – to tell them. 
 
But if they were meeting with people from outside of 
Eskom – outside of Eskom with outside people that is 
different. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair.  Chair I would have allowed 
Ms Klein to explain to you who is the acting CE. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Because Ms Klein explain to the Chair as 
at 11 March 2015 before the suspensions who is the CEO? 
10 
MS KLEIN:  Before the suspensions it is Tshediso Matona 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   ...it was suspension, it became Zethembe 
Khoza. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He became acting CE? 
MS KLEIN:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So Chair, when they are saying there 
was a meeting, now they are now on the 19t h of March.  They 
are talking, looking backward and said people who were 
20 
earmarked to that, meet beforehand.   
 
And when they were meeting, they were meeting with the 
person who is now the acting CE.  At that time, he was also 
earmarked to act in the position of Mr Matona.   
 
So this meeting is taking place and the board wants to 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 213 of 285 
 
know but how does this happen that these people meet 
beforehand and they are told, which is not explicitly spelt out 
here.  Ms Klein, if you could assist the Chairperson. 
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And the chairperson, there might have 
been that meeting, which is the chairperson referring to, at 
Melrose Arch.  The Chairperson will recall Mr Baloyi 
yesterday, referred to Mr Zethembe Khoza saying he meet 
with officials of the DPE.   
 
And now, somebody has to explain to the Commission 
10 
what were the facts before the board at this stage, when this 
minute was recorded.   
 
It may be a shorthand minute but you had more 
information that could be minute here.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me first say.  If Mr Zethembe 
Khoza met with the people earmarked for appointment to act 
in positions, if he met with them before he was told that he 
would be acting CE, that gives a different picture.   
 
But if he met with them after he had been told that he 
would be acting CE and after he had been told that maybe 
20 
these are the other people who would act in the different 
positions, then I would not have any problem with that.   
 
But from what you say and from the reaction of the 
board, it looks like the board had not told him that he would 
be acting CE at the time he met with them.  Is that right?  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 214 of 285 
 
From what you read in the emails. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Yes, from the impression from the 
minute Ms Klein, because this seems to be a concern of the 
board.  It seems to be that Chairperson that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   They were surprised. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That the board itself is surprised. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Did you remember anything like that 
in the meeting? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, on the 19t h...  I must admit, the 
one thing that stands out for me on the 19t h were... it is a 
10 
couple of things.   
 
Remember, this is now not a normal situation.  There is 
noise.  There is all kinds of stuff you are dealing with.  So I 
must admit Chairperson that for me was not something that 
stuck in my mind.   
 
The one thing that stuck in my... there are two things.  In 
my mind in that meeting, was the one that Mr Tsotsi was 
going to be talking to me about something that I as a board 
member refused to sign on the 19t h.   
 
And the other thing is, was the whole issue around the 
20 
leakage of the information in the media that was coming at 
us.   
 
So if it was something that I ought to have paid more 
attention to, I did not.  I mean, we are talking about five 
years ago now.  So I cannot remember...   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 215 of 285 
 
 
Look, if I am in the meeting.  But remember, Eskom at 
that stage, there were allegations flying all over the place.  
You did not know what to deal with first.   
 
So maybe if I had, you know, a recording of that 
particular meeting it would maybe make it a little bit easier 
for me to responds to.  A little bit more conclusively to what 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So you cannot deny that that was said but 
you simply say, you cannot remember hearing that being 
said. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   I cannot remember what to react to something 
like that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   ...at that particular time.  That is what I am 
saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS KLEIN:   I am not saying it was not because if it is in the 
minute, it clearly was there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   But how it got there, who said it, what the 
20 
reaction was, how much time was spent.  That is the part I 
am struggling to be able to answer at this stage Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  Ja, this is by the way, the same 
meeting where the board referred to the letters of the 
suspended 
executives 
including 
the 
CE 
and 
that 
the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 216 of 285 
 
company secretary should prepare responses to those 
letters.  It was the same meeting. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But this is what we were saying to you.  
It is... the documentary evidence, the evidence of the 
witnesses who say:  I was called.  I went there.  The board 
minutes this.  Ms Dlamini is told beforehand by Mr Koko:    
 
There is a possibility that you will act.  I, possibly, going 
to be suspended along with other executives.  This is before 
the board meets on the 11t h of March.   
10 
 
This is before the board meets with the minister.  This is 
before the board makes it decisions after the meeting with 
the minister.   
 
The board engages after making these resolutions with 
Mr Nick Linnell to draft the media release, to draft the terms 
of reference.   
 
He is invited by Dr Naidoo to the Build Programme.  He 
meets with Ms Mabude in regard to the terms of reference.  
He is said to... he is asked to assist P&G and...  
 
Well, shortly thereafter, of course, he gets terminated.  
20 
And it is said to be, he is going to coordinate an inquiry on 
the 11 t h, on the 12 t h, on the 13t h, 14t h.   
 
On the 17t h, Ms Klein he refers to the Chairperson to an 
email he received that says to him:  We no longer need you 
to come to this meeting.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 217 of 285 
 
 
Now that terms of reference he had prepared, he says 
he is being rejected.  This is in March.  20 April, you have 
appointed Dentons as the board to conduct, again what you 
say, it is an inquiry.   
 
It has nothing to do with the conduct of the executives.  
The inquiry is set to, it will run for three months.   
 
However, Dentons says:  We have stopped about seven 
weeks into the job.  And we get a letter from the board 
saying:  We are satisfied with your report.  Give us... this 
will be accepted as the final report.   
10 
 
They say their report is a mid-point report.  You cannot 
rely on these things because they have not finalised their 
findings.   
 
You bring back Mr Koko despite you, on your version, 
the Dentons’ report finds nothing, no wrongdoing.  You say 
you go ahead, you take a step further to confirm with 
Dentons. 
 
And they say no wrongdoings against any of the 
executives but it is a fact you knew beforehand.  Only one 
person comes back.   
20 
 
The three are separated from Eskom despite their 
requests to come back.  One is even fighting legally.  
Litigation to come back.   
 
How is that the board could not have realised that 
something must be amiss in this whole thing?  How is that 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 218 of 285 
 
you did not realise something is amiss?   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, when you are in a situation where 
you have got bombs going off all around you.  You have got 
load-shedding, you have got no money. You have been told 
by your shareholder representative that you got to move 
things along because things cannot continue as they are.   
 
You have got the media shouting at you about stuff 
that... decision that you have made which are wrong.  It is 
very difficult to look at anything outside of what you are 
sitting with in front of you.   
10 
 
So to ask me if there was anything that was obviously 
wrong, I would say:  Yes, there were a lot that were 
obviously wrong.  For myself.  I cannot talk for the board 
members, for myself. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Are you saying, this was wrong? 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This what I have narrated to you, are 
you saying that was wrong? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe, let her continue. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will see at the end whether she is 
talking about that.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She says:  Yes, there was a lot that was 
...[intervenes]  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 219 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   There was a lot that was wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At some stage, she will tell us whether it 
includes what you have said. 
MS KLEIN:   We have to then make decisions based on what 
you have got in front of us.  Remember, there are all kinds of 
things that have now come out of the woodwork about who 
knew what and who spoke to who and who did what.   
 
At that stage, for those of us who were keeping our 
heads down and trying to solve the problem, that is what we 
thought.  That... not, we.  Let me talk for myself.  That is 
10 
what I thought we were doing.   
 
Obviously, with everything that I have heard up to now, 
affidavits and what has come out of the reports and what has 
come out of the parliamentary inquiry.   
 
Maybe I could have been a little bit more vigilant.  But 
let me say this to you Chairperson.  My family hardly ever 
saw me.  It is not indicated in the minutes.  But I most nights 
went home at twelve o’clock.  Because you became so 
involved in operational, trying to solve different problems.   
 
So should we have been more vigilant Chairperson?  I 
20 
suppose the answer is today, absolutely yes.  Should we 
have seen more?  Yes.   
 
Did we know that there were strings being pulled from 
maybe one agenda, two agenda?  I do not know.  All I can 
say to you is.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 220 of 285 
 
 
I believe that with what I had at that stage, I believe we 
were... I thought we were busy with the right thing.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, having heard some of the evidence 
that has come out here, some of it came out in the Portfolio 
Committee in parliament and maybe based on whatever else 
you may have read.   
 
Looking back, do you not believe that there probably 
were 
people 
outside 
of 
Eskom 
who 
were 
influencing 
decisions that were being taken by the Board of Eskom? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I have no doubt of that based on 
10 
what I know today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Based on what I know today, I have no doubt of 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  The report, the Dentons’ 
report... Mr Seleka was reading from somewhere that 
Dentons say they were told they had three months to 
investigate.   
 
I guess it probably means investigate and submit their 
report.  But they say seven weeks into that three months, 
20 
they were told to stop and prepare a report.   
 
Now, do you know what justification the board had for 
asking Dentons to stop their investigation after only seven 
months(sic) of investigation when the investigation...  
 
When the same board had thought the investigation 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 221 of 285 
 
warranted three months?  Do you know what justification the 
board had for stopping them so early into their investigation? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I can only tell you what I have 
heard from Arc(?) at the time because I was not a member of 
Arc at that stage.  What I was told or what the board was 
told is that whatever was coming out of the inquiry, the...  
 
You know, the investigations at the time, were not 
matters that were unknown to Eskom.  These were matters 
that were known to Eskom.   
 
My understanding is that that is when the board said and 
10 
the board, I believe was Arc, but we can confirm that.  That 
then take out the uncorroborated pieces because if we were 
to come out with a report which was not fully ventilated and 
fully investigated, we could find ourselves being sued by 
those people mentioned based on just an allegation.  That is 
my understanding from Arc.   
 
So if you ask me why were they stopped within seven 
weeks, I can only tell you what the board was told and the 
board was told that there was nothing coming out from the 
investigation other than the stuff the board already knew.  
20 
That is why it was cut short. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, that is worrying to me because 
one of the executives who were suspended, it may have 
been Mr Dan Marokane. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 222 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   He says, I think in one of the letters he 
wrote to the board or to the chairperson of the board or 
maybe he said so in his evidence but I think he said so in 
one of his letters.   
 
He says but there have been a lot of investigations 
before.  Maybe it is not him but one of the executives said:  
When I heard about this thing that we are going to be 
suspended because there was to be an inquiry or an 
investigation, my reaction was but there had been lots of 
investigations at Eskom.  We know, you know.   
10 
 
So you have a situation where one, this new board goes 
along with an idea which comes from outside of Eskom to 
have an inquiry.   
 
They do so at a time when one is tempted to say, they 
probably still need some time to understand exactly what is 
going on at Eskom because Eskom is quite, I think, a 
complexed, you know, entity.   
 
So this idea comes from outside of Eskom.  It gets sold 
to them.  They are still new.  They go along with it.  People 
who have worked at Eskom for a long time, people with 
20 
technical know-how of Eskom.   
 
These executives or at least one of them, thinks but:  
Hang on.  There have been... we have got reports.  There 
have been investigations before.  But this board goes on and 
it says, we will need three months for this investigation.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 223 of 285 
 
 
But seven weeks into the three months they say stop.  
That is strange.  But here is another angle.  And I have not 
looked.   
 
Mr Seleka might have looked how in terms of the 
timeframes, the timing.  One wonders whether the idea that 
the investigation should be stopped seven months(sic) into 
the investigation, does not coincide with the fact that the 
board members know that the three executives are going.  
The three executives are going.   
 
And maybe this whole idea of an inquiry was an excuse 
10 
to get rid of these executives.  Pretend as if Mr Koko is also 
being suspended.   
 
He is being put in the same position as the three 
executives.  But actually, that is not the case because he 
knows about the whole plan if Ms Daniels’ evidence is true 
about that meeting on the 10t h.  If Ms Dlamini’s evidence is 
true.   
 
He knows about the whole plan and actually he seems to 
be part, if that evidence is true, of plans as to who should 
act, who should not act.   
20 
 
And the three executives are kicked out even when some 
of them say:  I actually, I am not wanting to talk about 
leaving Eskom.   
 
Somehow, they are told:  No, let us talk about you 
leaving.  They are get giving a lot of money.  Mr Koko 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 224 of 285 
 
remains.   
 
Then, after some time, maybe a month or so, after that 
Mr Brian Molefe from Transnet is brought to Eskom to be 
CEO, acting CEO.  And that is about April 2015. 
MS KLEIN:   H’m.  That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   October 2015...  October 123, 2015,  I 
have heard evidence from Mr Jonas that at that time when he 
had a meeting with somebody from the Gupta’s who seemed 
to have been Tony Gupta, that person told him, Mr Jonas, 
then Deputy Minister of Finance, that we have a number of 
10 
people who are working with us.   
 
And he mentioned some of them.  And Brian Molefe is 
one of them.  Ms Lynne Brown is another one.  I think he 
mentions one or two others.   
 
Mr Jonas says to me when he gave evidence here.  He 
says:  The Gupta brother who met with me in that meeting, 
he told me that these people are working with them.   
 
And he even said:  Mr Brian Molefe’s career is well-
taken care of or something to that effect.  Or words to that 
effect.  He is well-taken care of.   
20 
 
And then Mr Anoj Singh who was CFO at Transnet, gets 
also moved to Eskom after he follows Mr Brian Molefe.  Dr 
Ben Ngubane says in his affidavit before this Commission.   
 
He says he knows how Mr Brian Molefe got seconded to 
Eskom but he says he does not know how Mr Anoj Singh 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 225 of 285 
 
ended up at Eskom.   
 
So you have a situation where the chairperson at the 
time does not know how the CFO, somebody who was taken 
from Transnet to be CFO at Eskom, how he got there.   
 
So you have this situation that people seemed to be 
pushed out when there is no wrongdoing alleged against 
them.  They get given a lot of money.   
 
One person gets... remains behind.  And within a month 
or six weeks or whatever or two months, people are taken 
from another entity, SOD and brought in here who take 
10 
certain positions.   
 
Of course, I have heard evidence of some of the things 
that are alleged to have been done by them at Eskom.  They 
will still come and give evidence put their side of the story.  
Maybe when they have given their side of the story, one 
would get a different picture.   
 
But on the evidence that so far has been given, that is 
part of the picture that seems to emerge.  I know I have said 
too many... [laughing]  too much.   
 
But you might wish to say something.  But it just does 
20 
seem to say to one when one looks at this picture.  This 
whole issue about an inquiry may have been simply and 
excuse to get rid of certain executives so that they would 
make way for certain individuals to be brought in.    
 
And maybe once the board knew of those of the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 226 of 285 
 
members who knew what was... what the agenda was.  Once 
they knew that these executives were going, there was no 
point in continuing with the investigation.   
 
So it could be stopped before it could really finish its 
job.  
MS KLEIN:   Ja, Chairperson I think you have said a lot and 
one does not want to take anything away from who you view 
it at this point in time.   
 
Short of saying that, obviously, if one was not in the 
know and you were doing the best job that you could, that is 
10 
what you did.   
 
And load-shedding was a big thing for us at that stage.  
Everybody wanted load-shedding to end and...  
 
But I am sure...  I am not going to add to it.  You have 
given us where you, you know, where your thoughts are right 
now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, that reason for 
cancellation of Dentons’ investigation.  Ms Klein, it is a very 
significant one.   
20 
 
And 
the 
Chairperson 
is 
addressing 
this 
issue 
by 
reference to Mr Marokane.  It is, in fact, him who writes on 
the 18t h of March 2015 and specifically what the Chairperson 
recalls is that: 
“I implemented performance management to include 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 227 of 285 
 
lower levels to ensure that everyone is doing what is 
required and priorities where necessary.” 
 
Now the board had celebrated the first achievement of 
Medupi Power Plant.  What is it?  The Medupi achieved its 
first integrated project schedule since the project was 
started in 2007.   
 
He says he gets suspended, nonetheless.  There is a 
minute where the board says the minister would like to be 
invited to occasions like this so that they can celebrate with 
the board.  I am paraphrasing.   
10 
 
But this is the point the Chairperson is saying.  He says 
in the next paragraph: 
“All of the above elements were identified as crucial 
by a number of independent reviews conducted by 
external parties which reviews were done on behalf 
of the board. 
During my term as Group Capital Executive, I 
created meaningful and tangible progress in the 
execution of various projects which saw in particular 
the delivery of the first unit of Medupi achieved one 
20 
week prior to my suspension.” 
 
But the 
Chairperson 
was 
emphasising the 
recusal 
already done by external persons.  And then he says when 
he concludes: 
“If the board has an absolutely genuine desire to get 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 228 of 285 
 
to the heart of all of Eskom’s problems, understand 
how those programmes came about and how they 
were over time handled and mishandled and what 
Eskom needs to do in order to overcome the 
challenges, 
I 
am 
willing 
to 
cooperate 
with 
independent investigation.” 
 
When he is here, he says to the Chairperson but the 
board did not know the issues.  I knew the issues.  I have 
been here.  There was nothing new.   
 
Mr Matona himself says that.  And it is so interesting 
10 
when you say Ms Klein, the basis for the board to stop the 
investigation is that the board said nothing new is coming 
out of it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And it goes back to a question that I 
raised both with you and I think with Mr Matona and Dr 
Ngubane if I am not mistaken earlier on, to say.  I do not 
understand the need for the suspension of the executives in 
circumstances where the board says the investigation is not 
into any allegations of wrongdoing on their part.   
 
And I was saying, if there is a genuine desire to find a 
20 
solution, how do you exclude the people who have... who 
worked with this all the time, who are the leaders?  How do 
you exclude them?  Of course, I was told:  Well, they would 
still be interviewed ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 229 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...even if they were outside but it goes 
back to that question.  So you then say, seven months(sic) 
into the investigation, it is stopped by the board.  It is 
stopped because it is said what is coming out is nothing new.   
 
And one of the executives seems to have thought exactly 
that, that really there are reports.  There have been 
investigations.  We know what you are going to find.   
 
But because they were pushed out in the way in which 
they have simply been pushed out, this is what happened.  
And then the board realises, really there is nothing new.   
10 
 
So we should stop.  But maybe the board realised or 
some of those members of the board who may have known 
what the agenda was ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...realised:  Look, the whole point of the 
inquiry was so that we could suspend these and get them 
out. They are out now.  Why should we waste time with 
this... with this?  So we can stop it.  It is not like that but 
one cannot resist the temptation to think along those lines. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I just want to add one thing.  I 
20 
mean, I cannot take any from anything that either you or 
Advocate Seleka said.  I cannot because, I mean, I cannot 
argue what is developing.  I want to, however, just add that 
the idea of the inquiry, not the suspension, the idea of the 
inquiry also came from the war room.  It think it has got to 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 230 of 285 
 
be – one has got to under - for me, in any event, you were 
getting inputs from various groupings.  I mean, here we 
have heard from Mr Linnell about stuff that happened much 
higher up, we have heard about other people being 
involved but you had a war room and the war room, 
Chairperson, I must say in their minutes also called for an 
inquiry.   
Sure, I mean, it did not talk about the stages but 
also called for an inquiry.  Now I am not sure what the 
basis of that was but there was also a call for an inquiry 
10 
from the war room.  I just – that is really the only thing I 
can add on …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, it would be important if one 
could find minutes to that effect because I certainly have 
not had that part. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Tsotsi did say that when he was 
told at the Durban meeting about the idea that there should 
be an inquiry as into the affairs of Eskom, that resonated 
with him because he had himself thought about the idea of 
20 
an inquiry, that is what he said, you know?  So it was easy 
for him to go along with that part.   
The part which he said he found difficult was the 
suspension of the executives but whatever – what we do 
know is that Mr Tsotsi was called to a meeting in Durban by 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 231 of 285 
 
Ms Myeni, according to Mr Tsotsi’s version, to meet with 
the former President, Mr Zuma, and he came and at that 
meeting the idea of an inquiry was raised as well as the 
suspension of the executives.   
Whether either the then President or Ms Myeni had 
got the idea of an inquiry from the war room or from 
somebody who was assisted with the war room, we do not 
know but I have also seen Ms Lynne Brown’s affidavit who 
makes it clear that he knew nothing about the Durban 
meeting.  She makes that clear.  And that is strange if the 
10 
Minister responsible knew nothing about the plans for that 
meeting but Ms Dudu Myeni, who had nothing to do with 
Eskom, was the one coordinating and calling everybody to 
the meeting and, of course, according to Mr Tsotsi and Mr 
Linnell, when they met with Mr Zuma in that meeting, 
according to them it was clear that Mr Zuma knew the 
issues that were being discussed.  So the idea of an 
inquiry that was being pursued by the board was the idea 
that was raised at the Durban meeting.  Whether before it 
went to the Durban meeting it had been to the war room or 
20 
it came from somewhere else, we do not know.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Ms Klein, the war room issue, 
yes, the Chairperson is correct, you are raising it for the 
first time that the war room also had contemplated an 
inquiry and it is very strange because when Mr Tsotsi met 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 232 of 285 
 
with the board on the 9 March, Mr Matona says I am 
confused, you are telling us that the President wants an 
inquiry into Eskom’s affairs but cabinet, which is headed by 
the same President has decided that there should be a war 
room and it is conducting essentially and investigation to 
help Eskom turn around its situation.  So he says how can 
the President, when he is in cabinet, speaks with one 
voice, when he out of it, he speaks with another voice?   
 
So it difficult to say, I mean, that the war room itself 
would have wanted an inquiry when Mr Matona spoke along 
10 
those lines. 
MS KLEIN:   Let me respond this way to you, Chairperson, 
I am actually making the comment on the war room based 
on the minute of the 9 t h.  Remember I was not there on the 
8 t h.  My understanding of what Mr Matona said, unless I 
read it wrong, was that here was – I did not understand 
him to mean that here is an inquiry, I understand him to 
mean but the war room has also called for an inquiry.  So 
there may be – then Chairperson, then let me just go and 
reread and maybe, Chairperson, come back to you on that 
20 
because the point I made on the war room was specific to 
my reading of the minute of the 9 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MS KLEIN:   But let me rather just go – remember you 
have given me a recording as well, so let me go and re-
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 233 of 285 
 
read it and read that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, you do have the recording, 
you do have the transcript, so it is there in the transcript, 
in the record. 
MS KLEIN:   Do you want me to do it now or do you want 
us to…? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, you do not have – you can do it 
now …[intervenes] 
MS KLEIN:   No, I will come back to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   I may have misunderstood what I read there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   So I understood that to mean Mr Matona is 
saying this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, you can come back to it. 
MS KLEIN:   But I can come back to you, let me clarify and 
then I can [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, maybe it might be in an affidavit 
20 
way, that is fine. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja, ja, I will do that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is the one thing but I want to 
come specifically to you, Ms Klein.  You said in your 
affidavit and you have said this to the Chairperson when 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 234 of 285 
 
you were here before that you supported the departure of 
Ms Matona because he did not have a plan.  He did not 
have a handle on the turnaround.  In your affidavit you say 
that but to the Chairperson, he did not have a plan. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes.  Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But, Ms Klein, you were in the meeting 
of the 11 t h prior to the meeting with the Minister.  You were 
in that meeting.  Mr Matona presented his report and the 
minutes read: 
“The CE had developed a turnaround…” 
10 
Had, past perfect tense. 
“…developed at turnaround plan which was being 
updated and put onto a firm foundation.  The initial 
presentation had been used at the board induction 
and presented to the Deputy President.  The CE 
was in the process of engaging labour and the trade 
unions, staff morale was a serious challenge that 
was being explored.  He stated that the turnaround 
strategy considered all initiatives and tabled them 
at the war room for consideration.  At the last war 
20 
room meeting with the Deputy President Eskom had 
advised that they had responded to all requests for 
information from the war room and had requested 
that management be advised of any gaps.  At this 
point 
the 
Chairman 
was 
excused 
from 
the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 235 of 285 
 
meeting…” 
That is Mr Tsotsi. 
“…to meet with the Minister of PE.  Ms Klein took 
over as Acting Chairman.” 
This is mentioned just before you take over as Acting 
Chairman. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I maintain my position, which is 
I had no confidence in the CEO.  Can I just quickly just 
complete? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   I completely support what you say because 
that is exactly what is minuted.  However, the full 
turnaround strategy had never been presented to the 
board.  In part it is saying there he had developed it and 
he was updating it.  The first time the full strategy gets 
presented to the board is at the next board meeting.  So 
the full strategy had not been presented to the board. 
 
So I am still sitting here, and I have given you my 
views. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MS KLEIN:   Not everybody else’s, about that I had no 
confidence in the CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I think Mr Seleka’s point is this.  
When the Minister arrived on the 11 t h, as I understand the 
position, Mr Matona had not finished presenting his plan, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 236 of 285 
 
he was interrupted by the fact that the Minister had arrived 
and the board had to meet with the Minister.  That is my 
understanding, at least.  In other words, therefore: 
1. He had not finished. 
2. The board had not had a chance to digest his 
plan and engage him. 
Now against that background, the question that arises is 
how could you not have confidence in him at that stage 
before you could listen to the whole plan? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, my understanding of what Mr 
10 
Matona was presenting that day was the CEO update, it 
was not the turnaround strategy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But even if it was not the turnaround 
strategy, he had begun – he had been appointed as Group 
CEO I think with effect from sometime in October or 
beginning of November, I cannot remember – or beginning 
of October, beginning of November, that is when he was 
appointed.  So would this not be a situation where even if 
he had not yet come up with a turnaround strategy, given 
the shortness of the period within which he had been at 
20 
Eskom, that would be understandable and he should 
therefore be given a chance to come up with a turnaround 
strategy? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I think I have explained myself, 
my perspective to you the last time.  The world I come 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 237 of 285 
 
from, a CEO earning R500 000 a month, comes in, does 
not look at all the problems of the past and starts 
immediately turning things around. 
 
The piece that Advocate Seleka read is one hundred 
percent correct, I referred to it the last I was here to say 
that he was in the process of it, he was developing it, 
which was – it does not take away – you may have a 
different view on it, but my position, where I was at, given 
that we were on a burning platform, we needed to move but 
I felt that we were not moving fast enough. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, I – you may be saying in your 
view even that period that I say was short was long enough 
or somebody who is paid so much money if he was worth 
that amount to have prepared a turnaround strategy and 
have it ready, you might be saying that – and I cannot 
necessarily say that is not true, I am not sure - but on the 
face of it, it just seems to me that given the fact that he 
was appointed so late in the year and given the Christmas, 
December, January holidays, it maybe that it is unfair to 
expect that be early March he would have completed a 
20 
turnaround strategy particularly because I imagine that if a 
strategy was to be successful, he would had to get a buy-in 
from 
various 
units 
within 
Eskom 
and 
maybe 
even 
stakeholders, I am not sure, there had been no board 
which maybe could have approved that strategy if he 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 238 of 285 
 
needed to present to approve it before he could use it, I 
am not sure.  This board had its induction mid-January.  
They were appointed in December.  It seems to me that 
there may be room for saying given all of this maybe it was 
not – it would not be fair to expect that by early March he 
would have had a strategy that had had the buy-in of all 
concerned.  But you might say the world in which you have 
operated is different, forget about holidays, when there is a 
job to be done, you get into the job, he should done, a, b, 
c, d and have the turnaround strategy read by the induction 
10 
of the new board. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So feel free to say that is… 
MS KLEIN:   That is what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what you are saying.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Well, that has 
raised a new concept which is that you do not have 
confidence in him but what you were saying to the 
Chairperson is that he did not have a turnaround strategy 
and I was showing you that minute which actually says the 
20 
contrary. 
MS KLEIN:   Then, Chairperson, my point last time round 
was to say that he did not have a completed strategy – did 
I say completed? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 239 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, you did not say completed, ja. 
MS KLEIN:   I said completed – said he was busy 
developing a strategy, that those were my words. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja, you said that, ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Those were my words. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   So which you just read now, that is exactly 
what is in there as well.  But I think the question that I was 
asked was that he was stopped when the Minister came in.  
He was busy giving us his CEO update at the time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay. 
MS KLEIN:   Which had to do with the development of the 
strategy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the strategy, okay, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Then to the Chairperson’s point – 
well, so he has not given a chance to do that.  The 
settlement agreement with Mr Matona and Dan Marokane 
are both in May 2015, respectively Matona 15 May 2015, 
Dan Marokane 28 May 2015.  And here is the narrative, Ms 
Klein.  Now the board knows these people are out of the 
20 
way.  No suddenly the board realises the investigation has 
nothing – it is not about anything new, we know this thing, 
we are in June, we do not need this investigation.  The 
impression is the board now knows.  They have achieved 
their objective.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 240 of 285 
 
They go along with Mr Linnell, they dump him after 
seven days.  A month later they appoint Dentons.  The 
executives are on suspension about …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But surely – please do not forget your 
line of though, Mr Seleka.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one part which you are not 
mentioning even before you come to the appointment of the 
Dentons, which I was going to raise with you in due 
course, is Mr Tsotsi is himself kicked out by this board and 
10 
Mr Tsotsi testified before me to the effect that around 
about beginning of February around the days of the State 
of the Nation Address 2015, he was called by Minister 
Lynne 
Brown 
to 
a 
meeting 
where 
she 
said 
to 
him 
Chairperson, 
I 
am 
getting 
complaints 
that 
you 
are 
interfering in operational matters, or something like that, 
you must stop that or otherwise I will find somebody else 
to do your job.  Mr Tsotsi says later that day, same day, 
maybe a few hours later, he got a call from Mr Tony Gupta, 
I think he asked him to come for a meeting with him, and at 
20 
that meeting Mr Tony Gupta said to him Chairperson, you 
are not assisting us, we are the ones who put you into this 
position, we can take you out.   
 
Within two month thereafter this board has kicked 
Mr Tsotsi out.  It has kicked out these three executives, it 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 241 of 285 
 
has kept Mr Koko, it kicks out Mr Tsotsi, against this 
background of this evidence, which has at least not so far 
been denied, and it stops the investigation.  It stops the 
investigation and, of course, I mean, there is the issue of 
Mr Brian Molefe and Anoj Singh being taken from Transnet 
and brought to Eskom.  And, of course, later I have had 
evidence about some of the things they are alleged to have 
done at Eskom which are alleged to have benefited certain 
people. 
 
So, I said do not forget your line but I though you 
10 
may have forgotten the Tsotsi matter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He has been kicked out against the 
background of what had been told by him by Minister 
Brown, according to his evidence, and by Tony Gupta, 
according to his evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Yes, Chair, thank you.  Yes, the 
Chair has added the foreground to that because along with 
Mr Linnell this deep dive investigation, that he is removed.  
He cannot even finish his terms of reference.  He talks 
20 
about his meeting with Ms Mabude at Mr Tsotsi’s house 
and Ms Mabude, this time around, has a cooling – shows a 
cooling of enthusiasm, according to Mr Linnell.  But the 
executives are suspended.  
 
The board then, a month later, appoints Dentons.  It 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 242 of 285 
 
stops that investigation, midpoint, Dentons says.  It pays 
Dentons over 17 million for working a little over six weeks 
but Ms Klein – and I have stopped there because I am 
putting a pause.   Because, you see, this was a company 
without money and here you sat on the board that 
approved the payment of a little over six weeks’ work, 
which you stop midpoint, of R17 million and then the 
executives are paid a total and we have not touched on 
whether they were paid for their pensions, which is not 
mentioned.  So these figures we are talking, might be even 
10 
more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the executives it seems are paid 
not less than R18 million, all of them, the three.  So if you 
say R18 million to the executives, R17 million to Dentons, 
you are going to what, 35 million?  This is the board of an 
entity that is said to be in serious financial trouble and this 
investigation, for which they pay so much, is stopped 
immediately, within seven weeks.  Lots of money is even to 
the executives. For what?  To allow them to go.  To allow 
them to go, that is what it seems to be. 
20 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, all I can say to you is that we 
were running an operation of about – what did we call it?  
R4 billion, with a buffer of 4 billion which was one month’s 
turnaround.  The Eskom numbers are huge.  It was costing 
us R30 million a day – sorry, an hour, to run that business.  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 243 of 285 
 
There was a budget received of R20 million for running 
Dentons’ inquiry.   
For you to ask me why we stopped it after seven 
weeks, I have given you the answer that I know.  If there 
was a different answer, maybe you need to bring different 
people to give that answer.  The only answer I know, which 
is the answer that was provided by audit and risk, was that 
what was coming out of Dentons was nothing new. 
And now, remember, I am not Chairperson of audit 
and risk but when we talk about 20 million for a company 
10 
that does not have money and 18 million for suspended 
executives, Chairperson, we were running a business with 
a turnover of 340 billion.  These were huge numbers, so 
whilst in the context of the discussion today, it is big.  If 
you had looked at Eskom’s complete salary bill, for 
example, it was – numbers we spoke about was negligible.  
I suppose what you are asking me, is do we feel that we 
wasted the money?  Maybe is that the point? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It ends up – it goes back to was there a 
good reason?  Was there a good reason to get rid of the 
20 
executives?  
Was there a good reason to 
pay the 
executives the amount that they were paid and then you 
ask yourself the question were there good reasons to bring 
in this investigation and spend R17 million or was all this 
simply and excuse – was it part of an agenda to achieve 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 244 of 285 
 
certain things?  Some people – that some people might 
have known about, maybe others might not have known 
about, that that is the context. 
MS KLEIN:   And I cannot add to anything you have said, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I did think that – I have been asked the 
question and I have given you the best answer I can give 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, you have, you have and I think you 
10 
cannot add.  I think the reason why one keeps on coming 
back to this, because the more you think about it, the more 
you really get very concerned. 
MS KLEIN:   I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  But at some stage, Mr Seleka, I 
think I would like to hear what Ms Klein has to say about 
whether the charges that were preferred against Mr Tsotsi 
and that whole thing, whether that was justified, that was 
genuine or whether charges had to be found because he 
needed to go, according to certain people and, of course, 
20 
maybe not everybody in the board might have been privy to 
any agenda. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So but I just mention that at some stage 
you might deal with it. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 245 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, so that I do not forget it, Chair.  
And we heard to these costs, Ms Klein, the legal costs that 
would have been incurred, Bowmans being sought to give a 
legal opinion about keeping somebody – whether or not to 
keep somebody on suspension or whether or not there is 
wrongdoing against him when the board knew – the board 
knew that Dentons was not investigating any wrongdoing 
against them. 
 
But, if I got to the main thing, is that the impression 
created is that the investigation was a sham because it 
10 
was never in fact undertaken.  There was a purpose, 
ulterior, to Eskom that was being pursued.  Your comment 
on that? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I was part of a board who had 
agreed the inquiry.  I was not part of audit and risk when it 
was stopped.  I have given you the only answer I have 
which was what I was told as a board member is that things 
that were coming out were not unfamiliar, which is why at a 
time that was the view.  But I do feel, Chairperson, that 
you would need to bring the people who made the decision 
20 
to stop that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine. 
MS KLEIN:   To properly interrogate it, as I mean I cannot 
give you more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 246 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   And it may not be the answer that is being 
sought right now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But I cannot say to you I stopped it and this is 
why because I do not have that answer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine.  Let me ask this 
question.  Was the Dentons’ report used to any useful 
effect in the end by the board? 
MS KLEIN:   Absolutely, Chairperson.  In fact I have 
10 
included in my affidavit the findings.  Then, what happened 
to the findings is it was broken up by different divisions 
and how the board on a regular basis, thought audit and 
risk used to get feedback on how progress had happened 
in each of the areas identified.  I sit it under correction, 
but I think there were like 72 areas identified and each of 
those had to then go to different executives for plans to be 
put in place and that was tracked on a regular basis by the 
board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now I assume that if that is correct, if 
20 
that is true, it may be that its recommendations that they 
made that may have been used like that as opposed to 
what they unearthed, because you have told me that seven 
weeks into the investigation they were told to stop because 
what they were unearthing was what was known, is that 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 247 of 285 
 
correct? 
MS KLEIN:    That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja, 
so 
it 
may 
have 
been 
just 
recommendations. 
MS KLEIN:   Correct, what the Board was working with was 
the recommendations out of the work that Dentons had 
prepared. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Can I ask you a 
question on this Ms Klein because it is very ironic that the 
10 
Board 
says 
ultimately 
that’s 
the 
Board 
making 
that 
decision, what we are getting from Dentons is nothing new, 
but you want to assert to the Chairperson that there were 
recommendations that the Board could use from that 
report, which gave you nothing new. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson the recommendations that came 
out of Dentons, to answer your question, was taken, 
broken up into different departments and that was then 
established as this is what the Board is going to track.   If 
that is considered to be nothing new that we need to ask 
20 
the executives, I am a Board member, I get given 
something which I am told by my ARC colleagues who 
looks at this, and I do feel Chairperson that you need to 
get the Chairperson of ARC in here to ask these questions 
because I am answering this as a Board member who didn’t 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 248 of 285 
 
serve there at the time but to the best of my recollection 
this is the recommendations, I am told from ARC there was 
nothing new but these are the recommendations, the Board 
then wants to see that these recommendations are now on 
a monthly basis tracked and that we get through to 
conclusion on the outstanding matters, but for me to sit 
and say to you now there was nothing new but therefore 
the recommendations – I can’t respond to that Chairperson, 
I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MS KLEIN:  I think this is not where, I was not on Audit 
Risk that you need to ask them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but of course what you would have – 
what you would be expected to have been interested in as 
a Board member is whether the work of Dentons made any 
difference at Eskom, whether the investigation or the 
recommendations ended up making a difference at Eskom 
because you would want to know did the people we brought 
in as a Board add value, you know to Eskom, if they made 
recommendations, it is one thing to say different units must 
20 
use those, but you would go beyond that one would expect, 
in due course say give us a report.  The implementation of 
those recommendations how does it work practically, how – 
has it been helpful, you know that’s the kind of thing one 
would expect Board members to want a report on at some 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 249 of 285 
 
stage or another.   Is that something you are not able to 
say? 
MS KLEIN:   No, no I can respond to that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR KLEIN:  That is what I had attached to my affidavit, 
was to say these were the findings and on a monthly basis 
Audit & Risk used to sit on a monthly basis or six weekly to 
say now executives give us feedback on each of these, but 
to reconcile that point back to – these are things that was 
known before, I cannot respond to that, because I don’t 
10 
know 
what 
was 
before, 
I 
am 
talking 
about 
the 
recommendations that went out and that those were 
tracked, by the time I left Eskom I know that there were 
only 
two 
matters 
that 
had 
come 
out 
of 
the 
recommendations that were I think still open. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS KLEIN:   But what it was and was it a duplication of 
before I think you would need to ask that of the people who 
were involved directly with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If the Board did not interrogate what 
was given to it Ms Klein as it sounds ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   We are at ten to six. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, as it sounds to be from your 
explanation to the Chairperson, it sounds, it gives the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 250 of 285 
 
impression that the Board would have failed in its fiduciary 
duties. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson I do not agree with that, the 
question 
that 
I 
am 
being 
asked 
is 
did 
the 
recommendations, were those recommendations if it was 
no, was it the same and I am saying to you I do not have 
the answer, we would need to go back to the people, 
number one, who wrote the letter to say stop this because 
there is nothing new here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you didn’t know what was known 
10 
before? 
MS KLEIN:   I don’t know what it was before.  What I know 
was that the recommendations that came out here was then 
tracked on a monthly basis.   It would be interesting, I 
mean if Counsel is asking me was it the same as before I 
would suggest bring in the Chairperson of ARC and let him 
give you the answer because I cannot.   
 
I believe my fiduciary duty was fulfilled by here 
were 
recommendations, 
here 
was 
value 
for 
money 
according to me and this is how we track the progress. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, then this narrative continues Ms 
Klein because then we see after the Board had acted 
together with Mr Tsotsi. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 251 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Before the month ends on the 19 t h of 
May, that’s 11 March you acted with him after the Minister 
came there, Dr Ngubane says after the Minister left it was 
now clear that is the shareholder who wants the inquiry 
,the shareholder who wants the executive to step aside.  
Nine days later you are sitting in a meeting of the Board 
where you are resolving that Mr Tsotsi must be charged, 
the first charge is that he procured the services of an 
external consultant Mr Nick Linnell to provide consultant 
services to the company without following the company’s 
10 
prescribed procurement processes or information the Board 
– or informing the Board of his actions, but you agreed 
with him.  Mr Nick Linnell was invited to the P&G, to ARC 
by Dr Pat Naidoo to Build Programme Committee, how is it 
that the Board charges Mr Tsotsi with the very thing or 
conduct the Board itself took part in it? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson with due respect my view I don’t 
believe that we invited Mr – look I can’t talk about the 
meetings he was invited to outside of the 11 t h, but on the 
11 t h Mr Linnell came into that board meeting under false 
20 
pretences, my view.  
 
We were told that Nick Linnell had done work into 
the on-goings of Eskom for months before, which could 
help us with the suspension, which is – and Nick Linnell 
came to the 14.48 meeting, in that transcript you can hear 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 252 of 285 
 
me ask Mr Linnell questions like Mr Linnell you have told 
us, or we’ve been told, not you, we have been told at the 
earlier meeting Nick Linnell has been doing this work, he 
has got all the answers and he is going to help us with this 
investigation.  I asked Nick Linnell, I said please explain to 
me you know your role and how long you have been doing 
this and he gives me a hypothetical answer and I go as far 
as saying Mr Linnell please this is not hypothetical, we 
were told that you had been doing this for six months and 
you could provide us with a report.   
10 
 
Lots of toíng and froing and pushing and ultimately 
his aide memoire is accepted, so if you ask me Nick Linnell 
was brought into that meeting Chairperson, with due 
respect, under false pretences.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes and what happens thereafter? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let – maybe that is so and Mr Seleka 
will deal with that, but what do you say to the proposition 
that he was presented to you as the Board and for 
whatever reasons you embraced him, you embraced his 
role, you did not object, you didn’t say no, no, no Mr Tsotsi 
20 
have you followed procurement procedures, what, what, 
what, you didn’t say that as the Board.   You allowed him 
to take part in the meeting, actually when one reads the 
transcript one sees that he was allowed to play a very 
active role in the making, he was being asked these 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 253 of 285 
 
questions and he was allowed to play that active role, so 
the question arises how does the Board allow somebody to 
do this, to play this role, they embrace him and then 
afterwards seek to charge Mr Tsotsi alone and say you 
procured the services of this man without processes, that 
is the question. 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson I am saying my understanding 
was he is coming there to fill us in because he had done 
all this previous work which was going to help us with the 
inquiry. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That I understand up to a certain point 
when you make the point that as far as you  are concerned 
it looks like he was brought in under false pretences, that 
might be a separate issue.  The charge as I understand 
what Mr Seleka is saying, the charge didn’t seek to talk 
about him being brought in under false pretences, it sought 
to say Mr – to allege that Mr Tsotsi did something, brought 
him in without the Board’s approval, without following 
processes, and yet the Board embraced him, that is the 
question that is being put to say how could you as the 
20 
Board see it as right to charge Mr Tsotsi or bringing Mr 
Linnell into the Board to play this role and yet you had 
embraced him, and you had embraced his role, rightly or 
wrongly but you had embraced him, why do you then 
charge Mr Tsotsi now. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 254 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson all I can say to you is that at 
Eskom there were very rigid rules about how to go about 
procurement, so if maybe after all of this we’re saying the 
entire Board should have been charges because of this, 
then I will accept that.   I however do maintain that if we 
knew who Nick Linnell was from the very beginning that he 
had done three days worth of work, not six months, 
because we were told six months worth of work, in fact I go 
a step further and you would pick that up in the transcript, 
I asked Mr Linnell the question, I said are you here today 
10 
based on the fact that you knew that there was going to be 
a piece of work done or is there something that you have 
been a part of for a long time and that is when the 
Chairman says to me just Nick let’s just tell them as it is, 
because I think that was very hard for him as well. 
 
But if you are saying to me that I let – by listening 
to Mr Linnell we should accepted accountability and not 
just Mr Tsotsi, you know what then as a Board member 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what I am saying. 
20 
MS KLEIN:  Then as a Board member Chair I will accept 
that.  I am talking for myself, I am not talking for other 
members. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, no that is what I am saying 
because the charge is not about whether he was qualified 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 255 of 285 
 
to do the job, it is not about whether he was brought in 
under false pretences, it says Mr Tsotsi you brought in this 
person without the Board’s approval or without following 
processes and yet if the Board had an objection to how Mr 
Tsotsi brought him in the Board had an opportunity to say 
hang on Mr Tsotsi we can’t let Mr Nick Linnell play this role 
without following procurement processes.   Have they been 
followed?   They didn’t say that, they embraced him, they 
embraced his role and then turned around and said we are 
charging Mr Tsotsi, and that is difficult to understand for a 
10 
Board that acts like that, and when you add all these other 
things that we have been talking about, decisions being – 
seemingly being taken outside of Eskom, being pushed to 
the Board to take and to rubber stamp, that kind of thing, 
you get worried to say what exactly was going on here, and 
then of course you remember Mr Tsotsi’s evidence.   I was 
told by Mr Tony Gupta that they put me into this position, 
they could take me out because I was not assisting them, 
and of course sitting here Ms Klein I can’t not remember 
also Mr Jonas’ evidence that the Gupta brother who met 
20 
with him on the 23 r d of October 2015 at the Gupta 
residence, who seems to have been Tony Gupta, told him, 
according to Mr Jonas, that Mr Nene was going to be fired 
as Minister of Finance because he was not working with 
them, and indeed Mr Nene was fired in six weeks time, and 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 256 of 285 
 
Mr Nene was fired under very strange circumstances, he 
was fired in circumstances where the President himself 
was saying in the media statement that was issued that Mr 
Nene had done a sterling job as Minister of Finance, so the 
question arises how do you fire your star minister who you 
say has done a sterling job, that has been the media 
statement that was issued, that is before the Commission, 
and then you say you are firing  him because he is your 
candidate 
for 
a 
certain 
position 
that 
has 
not 
been 
advertised and he sits at home for more than a year, 
10 
nobody ever contacts him about this position and of course 
I have heard evidence from one of the people at the bank 
where he was supposed to get a job saying no the rules of 
that bank would not have allowed this.   Mr Nene himself 
has said here before me that reason given by Mr Zuma was 
a fabrication, that’s what Mr Nene said under oath here. 
 
So when one looks at these things questions arise, 
and sitting here and looking at evidence that I have been 
hearing from a lot of witnesses I also remember that Mr 
Themba Masego gave evidence and said Mr Ajay Gupta 
20 
told him that Ministers who don’t want to work with them 
they report them to President Zuma, that is what Mr 
Themba Masego said Mr Ajay Gupta told him.  That 
evidence remains un-contradicted. 
 
So I am bound to think about all of these things as I 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 257 of 285 
 
hear what was happening at Eskom. 
MS KLEIN:  I hear you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Chair.   Chair the reference to 
what I am reading is in the reference bundle Ms Klein, the 
minute of 30 March 2015, it says on page 228, Ms Klein 
you will know these charges, page 228, let me just read 
them to you.   The second charge is that the Chairperson 
will see how Mr Tsotsi responds to these charges in that 
minute.  The second charge is the consultant commenced 
10 
with his word to the knowledge of the director and without 
the Board of Directors being informed that work had 
commenced within the company.  The director was aware 
that no contract of engagement for the consultant had been 
concluded, thus exposing the company to non compliance 
with applicable statutes and procedures, but Dr Ngubane is 
heard saying Nick we are contracting with you, do you 
recall that? 
MS KLEIN:   Yes I do Chairperson, but what I also 
remember is in – on the evening, I think you are reading 
20 
from the 30 t h.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the 30 t h.   
MS KLEIN:   30 t h of March, when the charge is put to Mr 
Tsotsi, Mr Tsotsi said there was no contract with Nick 
Linnell, I think there are two things here Chairperson, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 258 of 285 
 
there was no contract with Nick Linnell, what you are 
saying is by us letting him into the meeting we by definition 
contracted him.   I think that, I think they’re all saying the 
same thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was no formal written contract but 
he was allowed to play a role in the affairs of Eskom, of 
the Board for the duration of a certain time. 
MS KLEIN:   Time that’s it, I can’t argue with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MS KLEIN:   I think we’re saying the same thing now. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, charge 3 is that the director 
authorised the commissioning of a media statement in 
relation to an inquiry into the affairs of the company with 
the assistance of the consultant without the knowledge 
and/or consent of the Board.   The media statement 
consequently fell into the public domain. 
 
Now you know Mr Tsotsi’s response to that/. 
MS KLEIN:   I think I heard him say, if I remember 
correctly you can help me, that it was leaked. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, you say that much in your 
affidavit. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes I think that was what we were told. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that he didn’t know how it got 
leaked.  Mr Baloyi in fact testified yesterday ...[intervenes]  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 259 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   I heard. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Exactly to that effect, that apparently 
the leaks were on the part of the DPE ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Very hard for me to comment, was it DPE, 
wasn’t it, I can just tell you as a Board member what was 
of concern to me on the charge, if you will. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   This charge? 
MS KLEIN:   On that charge, of the media statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay, here we are the Board, we are sitting 
10 
and we’re discussing this whole thing about the inquiry 
which already is so contentious, and there were so many 
diverted views.  Do you suspend, don’t you suspend you 
know, do you need the inquiry, don’t you need the inquiry.  
Nick Linnell drafts a memorandum or a media statement, 
which I think he attested to. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   That something about is it Edward Nathan 
Sonnenberg I think was the group, or some group together 
with ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja, he did use the firm ENS.  
MS KLEIN:   Ja, together with a retired judge etcetera.   
Here we’re sitting as a board member knowing how porous 
Eskom is, you talk about something in a Board meeting 
which affects people’s lives and five minutes later it is on 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 260 of 285 
 
the wire somewhere so that is why I think there was an 
issue of bugs etcetera. 
 
Now 
that 
communication, 
to 
the 
best 
of 
my 
knowledge never came to the Board, and I think that is 
what infuriated, personally me, I can’t talk about anybody 
else.  How is it that something that is this prescriptive gets 
into the media domain and the Board hasn’t signed this 
thing off, at a time when we are going through all the 
volatility within Eskom that we are.   So I mean, I talk for 
myself now, that is actually, that was for me very, very 
10 
upsetting to read about that in the media. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But how – on what basis did you take 
the view that he was responsible for the statement 
reaching the media at the time that it did? 
MS KLEIN:  Chairperson I can only answer you this way, 
none of us had it, if it was a DPE like Mr Baloyi said 
yesterday I don’t know about that.  So for me as an 
individual, and I am not talking for anybody else, you will 
have to ask them, this was in the hands of the Chairperson 
and in fact if I remember correctly I even,  I said in my last 
20 
testimony here that the person in the Chairperson’s office, 
Leo Dlamini, I think had a copy of it.   
 
So somehow it got out, so who leaked it I don’t 
know.  The fact that it was in the public domain and the 
fact that it was in the Chairperson’s hands is I think what 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 261 of 285 
 
infuriated me as a person.   You may not agree with me, 
but that’s my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I can tell you that there are affidavits of 
witnesses that have been submitted to the Commission that 
have found their way into the media in circumstances 
where they should not be in the media and that is 
something that is of great concern to me and sometimes 
when they do, when that happens a copy might be with me 
because I have been given it so that I can work on it, a 
copy might be with a member of the legal team, a copy 
10 
might be with an investigator.   Investigations have been 
done by the commission to see how do these leaks happen, 
but somebody outside of the commission may well be 
having a copy as well, and they happen, so one wonders 
whether a Board that had no agenda to get rid of Mr Tsotsi 
wouldn’t have handled that differently in circumstances 
where they didn’t have anything to say he was responsible 
for that because what would he be seeking to achieve by 
leaking that prematurely.   You know, I don’t know, maybe 
somebody in the Board might have had an answer to say 
20 
this is what he would have wanted to achieve, I don’t know, 
so ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But Ms Klein here is the point, the 
Chairperson raised, not raise in itself but added to what Mr 
Baloyi was saying yesterday, and it is here in this minute.  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 262 of 285 
 
The minute says Mr Tsotsi stated that, the Chairperson is 
page 229: 
“Mr Tsotsi stated that he was unaware as to how the 
media statement had got into the public domain 
before it had been approved.” 
He 
reported 
that 
the 
P&G 
had 
reviewed 
the 
media 
statement of which you were part, P&G, and had asked Mr 
Dlamini to review it further after some members had made 
further 
changes. 
 
In 
the 
interim 
Mr 
Kumalo 
had 
recommended that the media statement also be reviewed 
10 
by a media specialist, Mr H Ntsingela.  A long session had 
been held with Mr Ntsingela after the P&G input at 
Bryanston City Lodge before the media statement was 
released the next day.   
The P&G had suggested that Dr Ngubani, the Acting 
CE, and Ms Klein in her capacity as Chairman of P&G 
should accompany Mr Tsotsi to the media briefing which 
had been done.  Mr Tsotsi reiterated that he was unaware 
as to how the media statement got into the public domain.   
If not approved at least that media statement passed under 
20 
your careful eye. 
MS KLEIN:   And Chairperson I want you to please give me 
the copy that I approved where we spoke about a retired 
judge, where we spoke about the stuff Nick Linnell put in, 
because those were not things that were ever put in front 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 263 of 285 
 
of me at P&G.  There may be more than one version of it, 
but what was discussed at P&G did not have the retired 
judge, it did not have – there were a couple of factual 
problems with it, so Chairperson if you can give that to me 
I would be very happy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the point you are making is that there 
is a media statements, a proposed media statement that 
passed through you but you say that one did not have 
these things and you are saying the one that found its way 
into the media had these things. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   That is what I am saying Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, of course one would come back to 
the question why would the Chairperson of the Board leak 
a statement to the media that had not yet been approved 
by the Board in circumstances where everybody knew, 
including him that the Board had to approve.  What would 
he have been rushing to achieve that could not wait until t 
he Board had approved? 
MS KLEIN:  I cannot answer that for you Chairperson, that 
is something only he can answer. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it is the kind of question that I am 
saying the Board before charging him with this ought to 
have asked itself to say if we are saying we are charging 
the Chairperson for this what are we saying he would have 
wanted to achieve, why would he have done this?   He is 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 264 of 285 
 
the Chairperson of this Board, he would have known that 
there was a media statement being prepared, which would 
have had to be approved by this Board then it could be 
sent to the media.  What is it that he would have been in a 
rush to achieve by sending out actually a statement that 
has not been approved?    
 
Why would he do that?   I am suggesting to you is the 
board should have said but it does not make sense to think it 
was him.   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, possible not. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But I think it is important to note that the very 
document that Nick Linnell, the media statement Nick Linnell 
put together or helped to craft, is the one that found its way 
into the press, not what was discussed with the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   And I think that may be... your question about, 
what did he stand to benefit? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   I do not know.  If one is to assume that Mr 
20 
Tsotsi was taking instructions, maybe Mr Tsotsi was under 
pressure to get exactly what he was instructed to do, out 
there.  I do not know.  I cannot respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, if the board’s thinking was that it 
was Mr Linnell, maybe there would have been no basis for 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 265 of 285 
 
thinking along those lines.  Maybe there would have been for 
present purposes, I leave it at that.   
 
But I have more difficulty with the board thinking that the 
chairperson would prematurely release such a statement.  I 
am inclined to think the board should have thought but why 
would it have...  
 
Why would he really have done that when he knew the 
time before he gives us the media statement and then we 
approve it and then it can go out? 
MS KLEIN:   I hear you Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   I am giving you my perspective. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But I do hear you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, thank you. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, we are at quarter past... fifteen 
minutes past six.  I would like us to finish at half-past six if 
we can. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Before that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am mentioning that because if we are not 
done 
by 
that 
time, 
we 
might 
have 
to 
adjourn 
and 
unfortunately, Ms Klein might have to give us another.. might 
have to come back.  But I would have liked us to finish with 
her.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 266 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She was here already yesterday. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there really kindly had no objection to 
coming back today and she has been on the witness stand 
for the whole day.  But also, I am thinking ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   It is the second day Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS KLEIN:   It is the second day. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja.  [laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I do not know.  What is your own 
assessment of how far we are to finishing issues?  But as I 
said, you know, the issues we are dealing with are important. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, they are. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If we have to arrange for her to come 
back, we might have to do that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if we are about to finish, then it is 
20 
fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I think we are about to finish, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me just pace myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, I must say to Ms Klein.  Just 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 267 of 285 
 
remember that even if come half-past, we say we are 
finished.  We might think of something later. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And ask you to come back. [laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   Ja-no, I understand.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   She already owns us a supplementary 
affidavit, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   [laughing] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Klein, in the minutes, it is clear that 
the person who chaired the meeting, I think it is mister 
...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Pamensky. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He gives the opportunity to the members 
to come.  It says: 
“The acting chairman thanked Mr Tsotsi for his 
presentation and asked members if they wanted 
clarity on any items.” 
20 
 
The only question we see there is about Sumitomo 
Corporation.  No one else raised the concerns you are 
raising now, not even yourself.   
 
That, we are charging you because you leaked a 
statement that did not pass through us, the P&G.  As he has 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 268 of 285 
 
explained in himself here.   
 
But this comes five years later from you.  More than five 
years later.  How should the Commission deal with that?  
Because it is not on the day when you are given the 
opportunity.   
 
Do you have any comments?  I mean, members are... 
ask members if they want to clarity on any items.   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I know we are mindful of time.  I 
am not sure what is the question.  I mean, what is 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The question is ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   What is five years later? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, let me clarify.  The question is.  You 
have said to the Chairperson.  Mr Tsotsi... give me this... you 
say to us.  Give me the media statement that was leaked so I 
can show you it does not...  
 
Essentially, you are saying, it does not... it is not the 
same that passed before us as the P&G.  I said, Mr Tsotsi 
told you the media statement that was leaked is exactly the 
one that passed before you as the P&G.   
20 
 
He is saying that here.  The chairperson gives you the 
opportunity to clarify.  If you have any questions of clarity 
with Mr Tsotsi.   
 
The only question we are seeing in the minutes, it is 
about Sumitomo Corporation.  Your concerns which you have 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 269 of 285 
 
now laid out before the Chairperson are not here.  More than 
five years later. 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, I am not even sure how to answer 
that question.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the first question is in effect.  How 
can you now, more than five years later, say that the 
statement that was leaked to the media was not the same as 
the statement that went through the P&G Committee, 
because...  
 
I guess, it is Mr Tsotsi, who said in your presence, the 
10 
statement that went to the media is the same statement that 
went through the P&G Committee.   
 
And at that stage, you all did not say:  No, that is not 
true.  That is the first question.  What do you say to that? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, all I can say to you is.  I cannot 
answer that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I mean really. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   If you are asking me, why did I not say it that 
20 
night? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And the idea is simply that, if at that 
time, your knowledge was that the statement that was leaked 
to the media was not the one that went through the P&G 
Committee, you would have raised that to say:  No, no, no.  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 270 of 285 
 
These are two different statements.   
 
But if you did not raise it, it suggests that your 
knowledge may have been the same as his, namely it is the 
same statement that went through the P&G Committee that 
was leaked. 
MS KLEIN:   Okay.  Chairperson, I am not sure that I...  I 
want to disagree with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KLEIN:   The very purpose of the charge was that what 
was agreed with us was not what was in the media. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   So to say that why I am raising it five years 
later.  The very charge was it was a different... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  But remember that Mr Seleka is 
reading where he says Mr Tsotsi said in effect, I am putting it 
in my words now, but:  What are you people talking about?  
It was the same statement.   
 
Now what he is saying is.  If you did not agree with Mr 
Tsotsi that it was the same statement, you would have said 
there and then:  But Mr Tsotsi, what... your... that is not true.  
20 
The statement that went through the P&G Committee is not 
the statement that founds its way to the media.   
 
But because you did not say that, one tends to think it 
must be because what Mr Tsotsi was saying was in 
accordance with your knowledge of the facts.   
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 271 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, where I am struggling here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is about the charge? 
MS KLEIN:   It is... that was the actual charge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   The charge is, it was a different thing.  What 
was I going to add on ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   ...if that was the actual charge?  The charge is 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MS KLEIN:   ...that this is not the statement.  So not raising 
it at another time, I am not sure what benefit that would have 
been. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But remember, that if the charge was:  Mr 
Tsotsi, you leaked to the media a statement that had not 
gone through the P&G or the board.  It was an excellent... it 
would have been an excellent defence for Mr Tsotsi to say to 
the charge, to say:  But actually, it is the same.   
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must acquit him on the charge 
20 
because if he says it was the same statement, the one that 
was leaked or that went to the media, is the one that went 
through the P&G Committee.   
 
So now, when he confirms you or when he says that, if 
you know that not to be true, you are expected to say:  No, 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 272 of 285 
 
no, no.  Mr Tsotsi, you are not... that is wrong.  The 
statement that went to the media is not the same as the 
statement that went through the P&G Committee.   
 
But you do not say that.  How could you not say that if 
your knowledge was that what Mr Tsotsi was saying was 
false? 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, the way I understood it was.  That 
was the charge that it was leaked.  Now if it was exactly the 
same, why is the fact that it was leaked such a big issue?  I 
mean, I do not, unfortunately, have the benefit of having that 
10 
minute in front of me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Because Mr Tsotsi’s minute... actually, can you 
just give me that?  Because he responds to that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   Maybe it is just interest... can we just read what 
Mr Tsotsi’s response... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka knows the ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, the reference bundle. 
MS KLEIN:   Where is it? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The reference bundle. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 228. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just assist her in terms of where to find 
what. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 273 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Yes, just give me some time.  Please, Mr Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Just hang on. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And Chair, might I add ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Is it 341(?)?...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...Ms Klein is looking at that.  Ms Klein, 
you will see the beginning of the charge is that he 
commissioned a media statement in relation to an inquiry 
into the affairs of the company with the assistance of the 
consultant.  And here is the charge:  Without the knowledge 
10 
and/or consent of the board.  Now that first part has nothing 
to do with lead. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct] [microphone not switched on.] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Page 228.   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, can I in the interest of time? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   Can I ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, I have read this. 
MS KLEIN:   Can I help the Commission? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   If your view is that I have done something 
wrong here, then let me take the punishment.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Just come closer to the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 274 of 285 
 
...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   No, no, no.  I know what you are saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Come closer to the mic and face this side. 
MS KLEIN:   Sorry, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   I say, if your view is that I have done something 
wrong, then let me take the responsibility for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, at this stage, one is not necessarily 
saying you have done something wrong.  At this stage, one 
10 
is trying to understand why the board behaved the way it 
behaved.   
 
One... under charge one, it charges Mr Tsotsi with 
bringing Mr Linnell without following processes or without 
the board’s approval and yet it embraced Mr Linnell.   
 
So one does not understand this kind of behaviour.  Two, 
it now charges him with leaking or sending out a media 
statement without the knowledge or consent of the board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me assist the Chair.  The second 
charge, actually, flows from the first. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which is, Mr Linnell commenced work 
without the board being informed.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, without the board being informed.  But 
that is that part. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 275 of 285 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that is not what you have asked her 
for now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   No, it is when ...[intervenes]  
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC:   ...it 
is 
where 
the 
first 
charge 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The first charge is what the Chairperson 
has in mind. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is he is commissioned the drafting 
of the media statement ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...without the knowledge or consent of 
the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the board.  So one is simply saying.  Is 
this a case where the board genuinely had a reason to act 
against Mr Tsotsi or could it be that Mr Tsotsi was not 
wanted as chairperson of this board anymore and something 
20 
had to be found to kick him out?   
 
And when one thinks about that Ms Klein, one has got to 
also think about who replaced Mr Tsotsi when he has been 
kicked out.   
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 276 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is replaced by Dr Ngubane as 
Chairperson.  And Dr Ngubane had an existing relationship 
with Mr Salim Essa.  He acknowledged that when he gave 
evidence here.  Number one.   
 
Number two, later on as chairperson of this board, Dr 
Ngubane has the kind of relationship with Mr Salim Essa that 
he seems to allow Mr Essa to send him documents, 
indicating what decisions must be taken by the board.  And 
Dr Ngubane places those before the board and the board 
takes those decisions.   
10 
 
So you then go back to saying, early February, Mr Tsotsi 
says:  Mr Tony Gupta said, we put you into this position.  We 
can take you out.   
 
Is it a coincidence that on the evidence that one has 
heard so far?  Maybe there will be other evidence about Mr 
Tsotsi that might change the picture.   
 
But on the evidence that one has said, it appears as if 
Mr Tsotsi was not cooperating with the Guptas and he was 
kicked out.   
 
Somebody was put in as chairperson of the board in the 
20 
place of Mr Tsotsi, who was prepared to allow Mr Salim 
Essa...  
 
I do not know whether Mr Howard(?) too, to basically 
influence what decisions the board was taken.  At least in 
regard to the newspapers that ...[intervenes]  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 277 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...were dealt with in in a particular 
document.  Is it a coincidence or was this... was the whole 
thing part of a larger plan?  We will get rid of these three 
executives.   
 
Maybe because we know that they are not the type of 
people who are going to cooperate with us.  Or because we 
do not know whether they will cooperate or they will not.  
Once we have got rid of them, we will get rid of Mr Tsotsi 
because he is not cooperating.   
10 
 
Then we will push somebody into the position of 
chairperson of the board that we know will allow us to 
influence what the board is doing.   
 
And then, we will go... we will then say, let us bring in 
Mr Brian Molefe from Transnet and Anoj Singh and they will 
then be brought to Eskom.   
 
So one asks the question where it was part of a bigger 
plan or whether it was a coincidence that these three 
executives were left.   
 
That Mr Tsotsi left or was kicked out.  That it was Mr 
20 
Brian Molefe and Mr Anoj Singh who were brought in.  
Whether all of these were coincidental.   
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, maybe just one comment from my 
side and I know we are pushing time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 278 of 285 
 
MS KLEIN:   You know everything that you have said now is 
probable.  You know, like you say, if you take it all into 
account and you have had the benefit of looking at all of the 
affidavits.  But when the board was replaced, surely that 
would have been a good time if the idea was to get rid of Mr 
Tsotsi, and I am not talking about suspensions and this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS KLEIN:   But in terms of the bigger plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   If it was that.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KLEIN:   You know, because the board was only 
appointed in December. 
CHAIRPERSON:   December 2014. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   2014. 
MS KLEIN:   Ja, 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KLEIN:   But... anyway... but look, that is not my job.  I 
am not here to ask questions.  Sorry.  I am not here to ask 
questions.   
20 
 
But I mean, based on what you have just said.  I... that 
is all I could think, you know, if it was part of a bigger 
scheme, rather than going through all of the pain of doing all 
of this.   
 
I mean, that would have been probably... if I were the 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 279 of 285 
 
one pulling the strings, first...  But Chairperson, I cannot 
respond to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  I understand what you are saying 
and one does...  I mean, one of the questions that arose with 
me is.  Both in regard to... well, firstly in regard to Mr 
Matona.   
MS KLEIN:   Mister?  Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Matona. 
MS KLEIN:   Matona. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say, but this man was appointed 
10 
...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ... to this position at Eskom only in 
October. 
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why do you want to get rid of him so 
quickly?  It does not seem to make sense. 
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He had not been allowed, it seemed to 
me, to show himself, his capabilities, put together his plans 
20 
and test them and see whether they worked.  And when he is 
got rid of, it is not on the basis that he is being confronted to 
say:  You cannot do this job.  It is too much for you.  Or, your 
performance is poor.  No, it is not that.  But he is got rid of.   
MS KLEIN:   H’m. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 280 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then you come to Mr Tsotsi and you say:  
Why was he allowed to continue with the new board? 
MS KLEIN:   H’m? 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then he gets... got rid of like this.  But 
of course, the person who allowed him to continue is the 
minister.  And on the face of it, it is not the minister who got 
rid of him.  It is the board.  This board was new.  It had not 
worked with him for a long time and suddenly seems to be so 
intolerant of him and get rid of him.   
 
Then Dr Ngubane takes over and Brian Molefe is brought 
10 
in.  Then Mr Anoj Singh is brought in.  And of course, we 
know later in 2015, certain things happened with regard to 
optimum coal and better and so on.  Ja, okay. 
MS KLEIN:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Chair, that is why I cannot control 
the time.  [laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Ja-no, I think if...  
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think we have to stop. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have one or two ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Please. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let us... 
CHAIRPERSON:   One or two questions? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Let us see ...[intervenes]  
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 281 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we... after that... but I do not want us 
to not do justice on issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you ask those two, will you be 
comfortable that we have covered them or we should arrange 
for Ms Klein to come back later?  I do not want us to... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Miss...  Yes, it will... I will be 
restricting myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   If I say to... I will be restricting myself. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe we should adjourn.  Maybe 
we should adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If obviously, you note where you were.  
[laughing] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I am know. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But when she comes back, how much time 
do you think you need? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thirty minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thirty minutes. 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 282 of 285 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thirty minutes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I personally thirty minutes.  [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Oh, well ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   He is laughing at me Chair. 
MS KLEIN:   Can we not find ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   This gets slapped to me all the time.  
[laughing] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   Chairperson, can we not try to finish now, 
please?  I am becoming a permanent feature here.  I prefer 
10 
not to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MS KLEIN:   I am feeling I am becoming a permanent feature 
here.  I prefer to get this done. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, it is to seven. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, we must adjourn.  If at all possible, 
I was thinking.  Maybe... I think Dr Ngubane is coming on 
Tuesday, is it not? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Tuesday, next week. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If at all possible, we could start with her 
20 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...before Dr Ngubane. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Tuesday, the 13 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How is your... do you know whether that is 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 283 of 285 
 
doable? 
MS KLEIN:   Let me see on my phone and I will quickly tell 
you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And ...[intervenes]  
MS KLEIN:   Just a minute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And your counsel? 
ADV MAHON:   I beg your pardon, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MAHON:   I am unfortunately involved in an arbitration 
that is running the whole of next week. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The whole of next week? 
ADV MAHON:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, says he needs about 30-
minutes.  I doubt if I will have a lot of questions.  I give no 
guarantee but I doubt.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am wondering whether it might be 
possible, depending on when your arbitration starts and 
when it finishes, whether it might be possible to start early 
20 
with her on one of the days next week.   
 
And you come and then we give that 30-minutes or 
whatever and then you can proceed.   
 
Or we... she comes in the afternoon late, like, four 
o’clock or five o’clock.  We take 30-minutes.  You might be 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 284 of 285 
 
out of that arbitration.  Is that doable? 
ADV MAHON:   I think so Chair.  My preference then would 
be the afternoon because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   For the afternoon, yes. 
ADV MAHON:   ...then we have no risk of any ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine.  I think what should 
happen then.  Mr Seleka will talk to you and obviously Ms 
Klein, which of the days next week we will see but let us find 
a day where she can come, four o’clock or five o’clock.  And 
you... when your arbitration might be done for the day. 
10 
ADV MAHON:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then we finish.  Is that alright? 
ADV MAHON:   Yes, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Would that be fine with you Ms 
Klein? 
MS KLEIN:   Not my first choice Chairperson but thank you 
very much. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] 
MS KLEIN:   It does not look like that I have got too much of 
20 
choice.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughing] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Okay alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you very much to 
08 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 279 
 
Page 285 of 285 
 
everybody who... everybody has cooperated.  Thank you very 
much. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are going to adjourn for the day.  And 
tomorrow ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...I will hear an application at nine and 
after that, there will be another witness who will be coming 
in. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   There is two more ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is two more? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...witnesses, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you.  We adjourn for the 
day.  We adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 9 OCTOBER 2020    
 
