 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
19 APRIL 2021 
 
 
DAY 377 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 224 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
19 APRIL 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 3 of 224 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 19 APRIL 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Freund, good morning 
everybody.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Modise and good 
morning Mr Masondo.  Thank you.   
 
Before we start I just want to say one or two things 
relating to the commission.  Over the past few days two 
incidents have happened which are a cause of concern on 
the part of the commission. 
10 
 
During the week I got a report that somebody 
apparently had fired a shot through the window of one of 
the offices of the commission.  It must been in the evening 
and a bullet was found in one of the offices of the 
commission. 
 
Of course over the weekend there was a break-in at 
the offices of the commission.  The law enforcement 
agencies are investigating these matters.  I don’t know 
whether it is just ordinary criminality or whether it is much 
more than that. 
20 
 
Of course in the break-in a computer and a monitor 
were stolen but I just want to say that if anybody if trying 
to intimidate the commission into not doing its job properly 
they must know that the commission will not be intimidated. 
 
The men and women who keep this commission 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 4 of 224 
 
going everyday dedicate a lot of extra hours to its work in 
the 
evenings 
and 
over 
weekends 
including 
Sundays, 
Saturdays, Sundays to sacrifice to make sure that we have 
evening sessions here are very determined that the work of 
this commission will be completed properly. 
 
Members 
of 
the 
legal 
team, 
members 
of 
the 
investigation team are very committed to making sure that 
the work of the commission is completed properly. 
 
I certainly would not be intimidated by anybody into 
not finishing this work the way it should be finished. 
10 
 
We are determined to do what we are required to do 
and to do it properly up to the end.  We hope that the law 
enforcement agencies will do their work and find those who 
are responsible for this and bring them to book. 
 
I thought that it is important that I should just make 
it clear and that the nation should know we are not going 
to be deterred in the work that we are doing. 
 
Thank you.  Yes Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes thank you Chair.  Chair as you will 
be aware the primary evidence to be led today and before 
20 
we come to the evidence this evening of Mr Mantashe to 
complete his evidence of last week will be evidence from 
the Executive Authority of Parliament which of course is a 
joint executive authority comprising of the Speaker of the 
National Assembly Ms Modise, the Chairperson of the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 5 of 224 
 
National Council of Provinces Mr Masondo.  They have 
prepared both a joint submission and they – and a joint 
supplement submission to deal with both houses.  
 
We propose to start with Ms Modise who presently 
is the Speaker and later probably only this afternoon we 
will reach the evidence of Mr Masondo.   
 
So with your leave I would wish to call Ms Modise to 
testify to be sworn in and then we can do the formalities of 
placing the evidence on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Before we do that I just 
10 
want to say to Ms Modise and Mr Masondo and also to the 
public when I approached them last year and indicated that 
I would wish Parliament to make a contribution by way of 
evidence they had no hesitation in assuring me that they 
would be very glad to do that.   
 
 
They are not here because of anything they are 
here 
because 
they 
believe 
they 
should 
assist 
the 
commission so I take this opportunity to thank you Ms 
Modise and Mr Masondo for your cooperation and for the 
fact that you – you are here to give support to the 
20 
commission and to make such contribution as you can to 
assist the commission to make its contribution to the 
challenges that it is looking at. 
 
Thank you very much for coming and availing your 
selves.  Thank you.  Please administer the oath or 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 6 of 224 
 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS MODISE:  I am Thandi Ruth Modise. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS MODISE:  Not at all. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MS MODISE:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
10 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MS MODISE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair you should have available to you 
Bundle 6 of the Parliamentary Oversight bundle, is that 
correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And Madam Speaker you should have 
20 
the same bundle with you? 
MS MODISE:  Yes I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Can I take you please to page 7. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well you have helped me Mr 
Freund because I was about to ask Ms Modise because I 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 7 of 224 
 
was not sure but I think he has given the indication it is the 
fact that it is not in Parliament does not mean that we 
cannot address her as Madam Speaker. 
MS MODISE:  Mr Modise will do fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.  I just was not sure and I 
did not want to – okay no – okay. 
MS MODISE:  Anything  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I think in this venue I may have – if I 
may refer to you as Ms Modise.  Ms Modise would you 
10 
please turn to page 6 – page 7 of Bundle 6. 
MS MODISE:  Page 7.  I have page 7. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And if you would keep your finger there 
and go through to page 36.  In fact… 
MS MODISE:  Yes I do have it. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes page 36. Is that the submission 
that you jointly together with Mr Masondo prepared on the 
25 t h of February of this year to submit to the commission? 
MS MODISE:  It is. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And if I can just take you to… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright may I ask you to just raise 
your voice so that it can be recorded properly or maybe 
you can bring the microphone closer.   
MS MODISE:  Yes Chair I will bring the microphone closer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay thank you.  Is the lighting fine 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 8 of 224 
 
there?  Can you see? 
MS MODISE:  So far it is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MS MODISE:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And if I can take you to paragraph 3 on 
page 9.   
MS MODISE:  Paragraph 3. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You say there: 
“The facts set out in this submission are 
10 
true and correct.  They are within the 
personal 
knowledge 
of 
the 
Executive 
Authority unless stated or the context is 
otherwise 
or 
had 
been 
obtained 
from 
documentation under the control of the 
Executive Authority where the Executive 
Authority relies on information conveyed by 
others the Executive Authority states the 
source of the information and believe such 
information to be true and correct.” 
20 
 
Now I take it that is correct? 
MS MODISE:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And – and I just draw your attention to 
the Chair that although that is stated the format of this 
submission is not an affidavit but nonetheless Ms Modise is 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 9 of 224 
 
testifying under oath and is confirming the contents and I 
will address the same with Mr Masondo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  She – by confirming its correctness under 
oath she gives it the same status as an affidavit. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now Ms Modise if you could just now 
go to page 37 you will see that there is a list of the 
annexures to your original submission, is that correct? 
MS MODISE:  It is 37 –  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  It has annexures, you see that? 
MS MODISE:  I think my bundle might be saying something 
else because my bundle on page 37 still deals with 
committee reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think somebody will assist you. 
MS MODISE:  I am looking the red one. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Are you with me Ms Modise. 
MS MODISE:  Yes, yes that is so. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you will see that there is a list of 
annexures A through to K. 
20 
MS MODISE:  From A to J – to K.  Yes Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now if you keep your finger there at 37 
and go all the way through please to 395 or let me stop at 
maybe 393. 
MS MODISE:  Yes Chair 393. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 10 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right and can you confirm that those 
are some of the annexures that you originally provided to 
the commission? 
MS MODISE:  I can confirm that Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then if I take you to 394 and 395 
can you confirm that you have also submitted electronically 
to 
the 
commission 
many 
more 
pages 
that 
comprise 
annexures J and K which have not been printed but which 
are essentially 00:13:18 extracts of debates of relevance 
to this commission. 
10 
MS MODISE:  I can confirm that Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then if I take you to page 397 
through to 399 is it correct that the commission addressed 
– in fact through me addressed a further letter to the 
Executive Authority in response to your original submission 
asking for certain supplementary information and we find 
the letter asking for that information at 397 to 399, is that 
correct? 
MS MODISE:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Then if I take you to 400 is it correct 
20 
that that is the letter under cover of which you submitted 
the page that I will call a supplementary submission? 
MS MODISE:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then if we go to 401 through to 407 
is that the body of the supplementary submission – 401 to 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 11 of 224 
 
407? 
MS MODISE:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then if we go to 409 all the way 
through to the end is it correct that those are some but not 
all of the further documentation that you furnished together 
with your supplementary submission? 
MS MODISE:  I can confirm that. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Chair against that background I move 
that 
the 
submission, 
annexures, 
the 
request 
for 
a 
supplementary submission, supplementary submission the 
10 
annexures thereto all collectively in Volume 6 of the 
Parliamentary Oversight Bundle be admitted as Exhibit 
ZZ15? 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the exhibit number? 
ADV FREUND SC:  ZZ15 – 15. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  The submission by the Executive 
Authority of Parliament and the documents indicated by the 
evidence leader that are attached to it will be admitted as 
Exhibit ZZ15, is that right? 
ADV FREUND SC:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Ms Modise can I now ask 
you to turn back to page 9 please?  
MS MODISE:  Page 9? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Page 9.   
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 12 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:  I have page 9. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you say the following in paragraph 
4 at page 9 – you say and this is you speaking collectively 
with Mr Masondo.  You with me page 9? 
MS MODISE:  I am – I am –  
ADV FREUND SC:  Paragraph 4. 
MS MODISE:  Paragraph 4 yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You say this: 
“This 
submission provides a high level 
summary of the role played by Parliament in 
10 
executing its constitutional mandate prior 
and during investigations into allegations of 
state capture.” 
 
I take it that is a summary of the purpose of this 
submission? 
MS MODISE:  That is true. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now before we proceed any further we 
have already introduced into the record that you serve as 
the Speaker of the National Assembly but could you give 
the Chair just a very brief as it were biography of your 
20 
political career and in particular insofar as it involves 
participation in the National Legislature? 
MS MODISE:  Thank you.  Chairperson I was amongst the 
first to be in the Democratic Parliament in 1994.  I spent 
the first ten years of my political life there.  The first two 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 13 of 224 
 
as a member of the Joint Standing Committee and other 
committees.  The eight years that followed I was both 
Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence 
and the Portfolio Committee on Defence.  Here and there 
serving in other portfolios and ad-hoc committees of 
Parliament.   
 
I then went from 2004 to 2009 to the North West my 
Province and served as the Provincial Legislature Speaker.  
 
In 2010 I was then requested by my party to go and 
become the Premier of the North West that was from the 
10 
end of 2010 up to 2014 when the elections came. 
 
From 3014 to 2019 I was the Chairperson of the 
NCOP and in the last elections I was given the opportunity 
and the honour to become the Speaker of the National 
Assembly. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you very much for that.  Now I 
want to take you just crisply through some introductory 
points.  Can I take you to paragraph 9 please – page 10. 
MS MODISE:  Yes Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And while you have your finger at page 
20 
9 may I ask you to go to page 38.   
MS MODISE:  I have page 38. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Now there is no need for 
us to go through Annexure A in any detail it speaks for 
itself.  You have sought to identify provisions in the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 14 of 224 
 
constitution that bear on the constitutional role of both the 
National Assembly and the NCOP in relation to Oversight 
and Accountability.  But perhaps you might just like to 
summarise or draw attention to what you think are the most 
important provisions of relevance when this commission is 
considering whether Parliament did or did not live up to 
what it is required by the constitution on the question of 
Oversight or Accountability. So the question I am asking is 
just highlight what you think are the most important parts 
of Annexure A? 
10 
MS MODISE:  The constitution it gives the people directly 
elected 
by 
the 
public 
the 
responsibility 
to 
be 
their 
guidance.   
 
When you become a member of the National 
Assembly you take an oath to abide by the constitution and 
to as honestly and as honourably as possible to represent 
the people. 
 
So it is important for us as Parliament to say that 
for us it is not just a prestige it is about service.  It is not 
just about holding the executive to account and to play 
20 
oversight over the rest.   
 
It is also to hear on behalf of the people and to 
speak on behalf of the people.  It is about ensuring that 
both houses ensure that nothing that is in the interest of 
the people of South Africa is 00:21:40 is diverted. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 15 of 224 
 
 
As the two houses jointly do that work they also 
joined forces with the provinces and local government to 
make 
sure 
that 
no 
corruption, 
no 
maladministration 
happens. 
 
So I would say that on top of that Parliament has 
the 
responsibility 
to 
also 
represent 
the 
country 
internationally and that is something that is important. 
 
Parliament also passes the National budget.  That 
is not just a function of oversight it is a power that 
Parliament can use but so far has not used effectively to 
10 
say no we will pass those budgets because we agree one 
hundred percent with it or we will withhold this budget 
because we think that in fact you need to do that. 
 
Now in the first few years of our democracy we had 
to find neighbouring mechanisms and that is why the 
money bills were elected to enable Parliament to be able to 
express their view on the budget in any other money bill. 
 
Sadly 
we 
have 
not 
yet 
exercised 
that 
power 
hopefully we will in future exercise that power. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right thank you.  What you then do if I 
20 
can take you back.  I am going to take you backwards and 
forwards your affidavit and the relevant annexures but if 
we can now go back to page 10.  Keep your finger where it 
is Annexure A because we are going to be back there very 
quickly. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 16 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  You will see at page 10 paragraph. 
MS MODISE:  Paragraph 10? 
ADV FREUND SC:  You say there: 
“Annexure B provides a summary of recent 
committee activities related to corruption.” 
 
Annexure B is to be found at page 40 and following.  
Now again I do not think we have the time to go through 
the entire content of Annexure D that starts at page 40. 
MS MODISE:  Yes. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  But on my reading of it it lists a series 
of examples of recent I stress that word recent instances 
of Portfolio Committees exercising oversight in relation to 
corruption allegations particularly.   
 
Perhaps you would like just to talk to this document 
briefly and in summary. 
MS MODISE:  It – in dealing with this one has to go back 
to how Parliament organises itself to deal with oversight.  
Chair if you look at the powers of committees no committee 
actually has an excuse for not asking pointed questions, 
20 
for not investigating, for not calling for witnesses, for not 
summonsing people. 
 
That 
is 
important 
because 
committees 
of 
Parliament, committees in the legislatures have the same 
powers.  So I want to upfront say it is a pity that we had to 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 17 of 224 
 
wake up when the issues around allegations of state 
capture were there because these are the powers of the 
committees.   
 
The 
House 
has 
further 
powers 
which 
enable 
members to ask questions, to call for snap debates, to call 
for motions and to actually pointedly put the executive on 
the spot. 
 
So we pulled this out because after the allegations 
of state capture it was important for us to begin to refocus 
the committees and Parliament itself into pointedly being 
10 
deliberate about following up on issues. 
 
And that is what we intend to intensify before this 
term of Parliament finishes because we want to say that 
committees do ask questions but sometimes you need to 
capacitate members to ask questions which are pointed to 
be able to produce evidence if the responses and the 
reaction they get are not there. 
 
So I would say that Parliament is – we pulled that 
out because when the allegations of state capture were 
given came out into the public Parliament woke up and 
20 
then deliberately said to committees you shall now look at 
these allegations and investigate them. 
 
And that is why you had committees that were 
mentioned as being related to any untoward behaviour 
where then pointedly going into those. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 18 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes now I am going to take you back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Freund, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Can I just follow up? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I am going to take you back in a 
moment to the period you referred – the period of 
allegations of state capture that led to the formation of this 
inquiry but these particular instances which are more 
recent instances are you saying to the commission that 
there has in fact in your judgment been a change of 
10 
00:27:24 practice in recent times? 
MS MODISE:  I am saying to the commission that we 
actually can give a report from 1994 of a mixed bag where 
there were committees which did not do their work with any 
fear.  Where the – because remember the first ten years 
Chair maybe to digress a bit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MODISE:  The focus was also on making Parliament for 
the first time to be more representative.  The focus was to 
ensure that laws were passed, policies and processes were 
20 
in place and therefore perhaps the focus of Parliament 
rather than to look at scrutinising was in making laws.  
Policing the laws that we are making, identifying the laws 
which were still disadvantaging people. 
 
So once you have made your laws you now must 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 19 of 224 
 
make sure that you actually have the means and the 
personnel to execute. 
 
You begin to give your attention to who are these 
people who are supposed to be at the implementation 
phase of this which are supposed to be integrating us as 
South Africa as one country. 
 
And I am saying that perhaps the wake up was that 
it is no longer so important to run and make more new laws 
it is more important for us to police what we have already 
put out there. 
10 
 
It is more important for us to query when an 
executive members makes an – a commitment, makes a 
statement to follow through whether or not what they have 
promised out there in public this person has the resources 
to executive, this person has followed through, what are 
the results on the ground? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I wanted to just take you back to the 
first answer you gave to this question Mr Modise because I 
do not want to forget what I wanted to raise.  You – you 
referred to the oath of office that members of Parliament 
20 
take 
and 
you 
referred 
to 
the 
constitution 
and 
the 
constitution  and makes it very clear that Parliament, as I 
understand it, is about the people of South Africa.   
MS MODISE:   That is so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The oath of office requires every 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 20 of 224 
 
member of Parliament, before he or she can do any work 
as a member of Parliament, to take an oath and swear that 
they will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa.  Now I 
understand you to be saying and I just want you to tell me 
if that is not what you intend to say.  I understand you to 
be saying, as Parliament, as members of Parliament in the 
interest of people of South Africa are paramount in our 
work 
as 
members 
of 
Parliament. 
 
Is 
that 
a 
good 
understanding of what you are saying? 
MS MODISE:   That is exactly what I meant. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   We would not be public representatives if 
we do not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   ...take and prioritise the interest of the 
people of South Africa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay thank you.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Can I know refer you to 
page 
11, 
paragraph 
12? 
 
You 
will 
see 
there 
are 
subparagraphs.   
20 
MS MODISE:   Sorry, I keep on taking my finger off.  Page 
11? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Page 11.  You see there a section 
headed, Function of Oversight? 
MS MODISE:   Yes. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 21 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And this part of your submission 
summarises 
the 
conception 
of 
what 
oversight 
really 
requires.  And before we going anywhere else.  Can I take 
you to page 13, paragraphs 18 all the way through to 21. 
We find the same is being done on the functions of 
accountability. 
MS MODISE:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   When I read that, I immediately 
recognised where those paragraphs come from.  Those 
paragraphs, I want to put to you and I want you to confirm 
10 
if I am correct, those paragraph are taken straight out of 
the oversights and accountability module adopted by 
Parliament in or about 2009.  Is that correct? 
MS MODISE:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And Chair that is in the supplementary 
bundle, the Reference Bundle which should be on your 
desk. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is – we do not have the black 
numbers on the top left.  We only have the red numbers on 
20 
the top right but it is PO-01 is the beginning of the 
oversight 
and 
accountability 
module 
and 
I 
think, 
Ms Modise, if I am correct, you have been given a copy of 
the Reference Bundle in which we find the oversight and 
accountability module.  It is right at the back of that file.  It 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 22 of 224 
 
is not quite at the back, it is second from the back. 
MS MODISE:   Can you just...   
ADV FREUND SC:   It is PO Ref 01.   
MS MODISE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now there has been quite a bit of 
evidence already led before the Commission in respect of 
this document and therefore there is no need to cover the 
same all over again but in summary, is it correct, that this 
document 
really 
expresses 
the 
considered 
view 
of 
Parliament when it was adopted as to how Parliament 
10 
should 
go 
about 
its 
constitutional 
oversight 
and 
accountability responsibilities.  Would you agree? 
MS MODISE:   I would agree and extend it to the 
considered view of the legislature sector of South Africa 
because Parliament did not work alone on the oversight 
module.  It worked with the provincial legislatures. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And we have already heard 
evidence that there are some important features of this 
oversight and accountability modules that were proposed 
but were endorsed in principle by the adoption of this 
20 
module but were in fact not implemented for example a 
tracking and monitoring mechanism, just to take one 
important example.  And I suggest that you should be given 
access to the affidavit of Mr Magashule speaking for the 
African National Congress.   
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 23 of 224 
 
 
I am not going to take you to that but I think you 
would have seen in Mr Magashule’s affidavit which is 
endorsed by Mr Mantashe who will be testifying this 
evening, says:  Well, the ANC, for one, accepts that there 
are certain cautions of the oversight and accountability 
module that were not implemented that still should be 
implemented and that the implementation of what has not 
yet been implemented has become a priority.  You concur 
with that and I give you a fair summary. 
MS MODISE:   I agree and I am happy that the ANC in their 
10 
affidavit that says that we have actually started with that.  
In both houses, whenever members of the Executive 
expresses and commit to doing certain things to or for the 
public, we take note.  Committees take note.  When 
committees report, when ministers make statements on the 
floor of The House we write to them to remind them you 
have said this.  Please give us the progress report.   
 
What we had not finalised, which we are working 
on, is to then have a kind of a report at the end of each 
session that says we wrote to you Minister X on your 
20 
commitment but you have not come back to us to say how 
far you have gone on that commitment, whether you have 
done it or not done it and what the reasons are for not 
doing that.  That we agree is what we are in the process of 
finalising and getting the personnel to do that.   
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 24 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And that is directly related with 
another feature that has been much discussed on the 
evidence that we have already heard on parliamentary 
oversight.  We first, really, heard about it arising from the 
evidence of Mr Godi, a former Chairperson of the – of 
SCOPA, and his perspective was the following, that SCOPA 
for one, in his view, responsible and appropriately grabbled 
with the problems drawn to their attention particularly by 
the Auditor General’s report.   
 
Conducted hearings, drew reports and in the 
10 
reports highlighted features that were not regarded as 
satisfactory and also highlighted what they believe should 
be done about it.  And then according to Mr Godi, those 
reports of SCOPA would be adopted by the National 
Assembly 
and 
then 
the 
relevant 
portions 
would 
be 
conveyed 
through 
the 
Office 
of 
the 
Speaker 
to 
the 
appropriate representative of the Executive.   
 
And Mr Godi’s point was this.  Although that is 
done, not only is there no direct follow-up but there is no 
sanction for a member of the Executive who simply does 
20 
not do what is requested or directed by Parliament and that 
some attention needs to be given to this problem of 
sanction 
or, 
we 
can 
put 
it 
differently, 
consequence 
management, what is to be done when Parliament does it 
job and the response does not come, not only you not get 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 25 of 224 
 
the report back, as you discussed it, but sometimes you 
much reach the stage which becomes apparent there is no 
intention to do what Parliament is directing.   
 
Do you want to comment on that issue, the issue 
of consequences and non-compliance with the clearly 
expressed recommendations or proposals of Parliament 
when adopting Portfolio Committee reports? 
MS MODISE:   I want to respond in two ways.  Mr Godi was 
right but he also had the powers as the chairperson of that 
committee to follow up not only at committee level but in 
10 
the floor of The House to call for the Minister to respond.   
 
The second leg of my response would be that the 
reason why we are looking at a tracking is precisely to be 
able to, at the end of the year, at the end of five years, be 
able to write a report card to the President and say this is 
what your minister has done, promised and not delivered 
on.  This is how they have failed.  This is how they have 
failed to further.   
 
But in the meantime, in fact, the Leader of 
Government Business does get whipped by the presiding 
20 
officers now and then because we as Parliament do not 
have the power as the presiding officers.  The members 
can do that.  They can ask any question.  One of the 
members have on the floor of The House is to ask 
embarrassing questions.  We used to call it the power of 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 26 of 224 
 
embarrassment where you embarrass the Executive into 
action.   
 
So what we have done is to, when members 
complain to us, that we are not getting the joy.  We whip 
the Leader of Government Business so that the Leader of 
Government Business whips the people he leads in the 
Executive to take us seriously.   
 
But I want to make an example when I was in the 
NCOP.  We had a Minister who was not taking us seriously, 
would never come to the NCOP when they had questions 
10 
there.  So at a particular instance, this minister was very 
enthusiastic because the budget was coming up.  And I 
said to the minister I do not think we have any appetite in 
dealing with you.  You disrespect us and therefore you see 
to finish how you get recognition and adoption of your 
budget.   
 
Recently 
one 
of 
the 
ministers’ 
budget 
was 
coming up.  He was quite new.  He had an engagement at 
the AU and thought that they could skip the budget and I 
said if you go to the AU and your budget is on the floor I 
20 
can guarantee you we will not pass the budget because the 
priority of our international responsibility cannot be so 
superior as to the budget of this country in the functioning 
and the dipping of democracy and empowerment in this 
country.   
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 27 of 224 
 
 
So it is not just about having a device, a tracking 
device.  It is also about having members of Parliament 
experienced enough to push their point at committee level 
and on the floor of The House.  It is about us following 
through between us, the presiding officers, on those letters 
we have written three months ago.  Minister have you?  I 
do not see your response.  You have not recommitted.  You 
have not given us in fact the extent of what you have done.  
And that is why we are saying we want to do that tracking 
so that we can do this. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes.  And when you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the topic is quite important, 
Ms Modise.  What should be done with regard to a member 
of Parliament who wants to do his or her job properly in 
this regard who happens to be a member of the majority 
party and but feels that if he or she does he or her job in 
this regard the way she would like to do it she might be 
viewed by his or her colleagues, members of the same 
20 
party as behaving like the opposition and therefore she 
feels or he feels like that, no, I cannot be too robust.  I 
cannot ask an embarrassing question to my comrade who 
is a Minister.  I must remember I am not the opposition.  
What do we do about that? 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 28 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:   Chair, I think if the member is not too sure 
that they will not be treated like they are not loyal to the 
party, they have – in the first instance there is a chief whip 
that they can go to.  And in fact within every portfolio 
committee there is a week for a party and all parties try to 
put somebody in there.  They can take a stand there.  They 
can approach us the presiding officers.   
 
We have had meetings with the chairpersons and 
the 
ministers 
where 
the 
tensions 
were 
rising 
and 
intervened.  But I must make a personal example of myself.  
10 
In those eight years I had the Minister of Defence and at 
some point we – the two of us had to be called by the 
President because I insisted that I understood what my 
role was and the insisted that we understood and... 
 
Because on two occasions as chair for the 
support of the committee of the just Standing-in Committee 
I had actually cancelled the meeting because the minister 
was ill-prepared and ask the minister to leave.   
 
So sometimes when – especially when you are 
still new in Parliament and you are not and sometimes if 
20 
you really are not certain you will not – you will be 
intimidated but if you know that you are right, you can take 
this matter up right there in Parliament in your party 
structures and have your battles there. 
 
Because once you are in Parliament you take the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 29 of 224 
 
same oath and the same oath is where the public per spare 
ten 
cents 
you 
must 
follow 
that 
ten 
cents 
unafraid, 
impartially asked the questions because it is not our 
resources, it is the resources out there and you will find a 
good size of MP’s who do that.   
 
I do know that some people think it is the 
electoral system.  The electoral system is there but it can 
intimidate you but I think that the member of Parliament – 
perhaps our weakness is not in strengthening the resolve 
of this individual member of Parliament to be unafraid.  To 
10 
say it is in my party but in fact the parties here to 
represent the interest of the majority that has been brought 
here and therefore in putting this question. 
 
And in some instances you have heard very 
stinging questions that have began to come from the floor 
in, not this budget debate, I think just before we went into 
Covid.  I remember the Portfolio Committee on Human 
Rights – on Human Settlements and Water pushed me.  
They said we really are not having the appetite to pass this 
budget because of this and this and this. 
20 
 
Now this was ANC members telling to their 
minister.  And they said the only reason we are passing 
this is that we are recognising that you are new in the 
department.  So more and more over time it means that we 
would be able to have members of Parliament representing 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 30 of 224 
 
the people and the people’s interest. 
 
Now one of the problems of the South African 
Parliament, Chair, is that every five years parties bleed 
members. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   You have got new people coming in.  
Uncertainty.  You still have to capacitate.  And in those 
years you do encounter where the Executive has the upper 
hand.  But I must also say that perhaps if we were to be 
able to move in such a way that the third arm of the state 
10 
actually unfolds and becomes an arm of the state and can 
really get the resources that it needs to do its job. 
 
You might not find that members, one, want to 
become 
cabinet 
ministers 
and 
therefore 
do 
not 
ask 
unnecessary questions.  Two.  They feel comfortable 
because the arm of state, the legislative sector is strong 
enough 
to 
protect 
all 
members 
irrespective 
of 
party 
affiliations and that is where I think into the future the 
South African Parliament will be doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is interesting you say – you mention 
20 
that last point because as you are talking, what was going 
on in my mind is, maybe there ought to be some way of 
addressing some of the things that might be attracting 
some members of Parliament to the Executive because 
maybe some they will – I do not want to do anything that 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 31 of 224 
 
could be career limiting.  [laughs]  I want to be considered 
to be a deputy minister or minister and so on and so on. 
 
Of course, it may be that some who may have 
that in mind have that in mind irrespective of whatever 
financial benefit that might come with but just the position 
but maybe with – if financially it does not make a lot of 
difference it might do good so that people can just do their 
job without an eye to, you know, promotion if it is 
promotion but I – obviously, that cannot be everybody but I 
think there would be some people.   
10 
 
But I think what is very important is to try and 
create an environment for members of Parliament which 
will encourage the robustness that we think should be 
there in performing oversight functions and holding the 
Executive accountable.  And it may well be the leadership 
of Parliament might need to think about what things need 
to be done or what measures need to be put in place to 
encourage members to do what is right and to know that 
doing your job the right way does not necessarily mean 
that it is career limiting. 
20 
 
But certainly if, for example, political parties or 
the majority party is going to be sending the message that 
do not behave like your position then people might feel 
that – well, your position – ask certain questions to 
members of the Executive in a certain way I must not do 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 32 of 224 
 
that.  I must remember that this is my comrade.  This is an 
ANC minister.  So.   
 
But at the same time one asks the question, who 
said that your party wants corruption to be swept under the 
covers?  Who said that your party wants a minister who 
might not be doing the right thing to address corruption in 
their 
department 
should 
not 
be 
exposed? 
 
Because 
corruption should be dealt with properly. 
 
So these are all the things that I think we all 
should look at but certainly I think Parliament is a very 
10 
important institution but it is important that they do not 
allow them not to take them seriously and I think that 
starts with doing its job properly and holding, you know, 
the Executive to account. 
MS MODISE:   Chair, I would agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MODISE:   And that is where we start every term of 
Parliament with induction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS MODISE:   A general induction programme for all 
20 
members, rules and all the housekeeping issues.  A more 
detailed workshop and training for chairpersons.  And then 
we do have an ongoing relationship with the University of 
Witwatersrand and to try and capacitate members but, in 
fact, nothing beats creating a capable member than a 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 33 of 224 
 
member who really reach up on the portfolio that they 
have, that they are in, that do research. 
 
In my time as chairperson I could subscribe at 
the expense of Parliament with any international body and 
magazine and therefore I was up to date.  The other thing 
is that, in fact, good chairpersons and good back benches 
actually make the best ministers.  They understand why 
questions are put to them.  They have no difficulties in 
coming clean.  They know when they are not supposed to 
be dilly-dally. 
10 
 
So our thrust is, get enough capacity for the 
individual member to understand their own environment to 
be able to read and analyse the budget of their portfolio to 
ask questions because ultimately if I am sitting at home 
and I am watching Parliament, I want to see this person 
that is supposed to be representing me.   
 
Asking 
the 
minister 
a 
question 
about 
what 
affects me.  Asking the minister about the quality of water I 
am drinking.  I do not want the ANC member to be praising 
the minister when I do not have water.  I want that matter.  
20 
And that is why you have got motions, you have got 
questions, you have got matters in the public interest so 
that as and when things develop out there, members of 
Parliament can take the gab and say I want to discuss this. 
 
You have also a balancing act because you also 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 34 of 224 
 
allow members of the Executive to come to The House and 
say:  Can I make a statement?  This has happened.  So 
that information goes out there because one of our 
responsibilities also is to take the information out into the 
public.  Are not take it and just leave it.   
 
It is also to ensure that the public is properly 
educated on issues of oversight on the laws that we pass, 
how they affect them on any policy or any relationship we 
might form with any outside body.  So Parliament has also 
that responsibility to educate and to inform. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, sorry to interrupt but it has been 
drawn to my attention that sometimes your personal mic is 
not centred and they are having some difficulty hearing 
your comments.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it might not be the mic.  I think 
working in this Commission for the past three years has 
done something to my voice.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Oh, okay.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think in the past nobody would 
20 
complain of not hearing me.  [laughs]   
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, but as you say, if I can just take 
you back ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I have adjusted it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Okay thank you Chair.  If I can just 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 35 of 224 
 
take you back a bit when I last asked you a question? 
MS MODISE:   H’m? 
ADV FREUND SC:   You started to tell the Chair about a 
practise of putting the Leader of Government Business on 
the spot and I just want to check as a matter of fact that 
when you were giving that evidence you were talking about 
in your present capacity as Speaker with the present 
Leader of Government Business, that is what you were 
referring to or were you talking more generally? 
MS MODISE:   No, it is practise that has been there.  The 
10 
Deputy President is the Leader of Government Business.  
The Deputy President and the presiding officers have 
sessions together.  If there is a deadlock on certain issues 
on Parliament, the chief whip of the majority party, the 
Speaker and Leader of Government Business are the 
deadlock breaking and mechanism. 
 
So the Leader of Government Business is the 
middle person between the Executive and the legislature.  
So 
the 
– 
even 
when 
we 
deal 
with 
programmes 
of 
Parliament we have to because we do not want to blind 
20 
sight them and they – we do not want to bring them when 
we do not turn up when we actually did not also take into 
consideration.   
So there is this ongoing two-way 
street between the Leader of Government Business and the 
presiding officers. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 36 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  So I want to refer to some of 
that more clearly now.  Before you were the Speaker of the 
National Assemble you were in fact the Chair of the NCOP.  
So you were – you have – although you were new to this 
job, relatively new to this job, you have actually been part 
of the Executive Authority and therefore would have 
participated in this discussions with leader of government 
business for at least the last two terms of parliament, am I 
understanding that correctly? 
MS MODISE:   That is correct. 
10 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC:   And 
of course the leader of 
government business is traditionally and at the moment 
and the preceding administration the Deputy President of 
the country so that it is the current Deputy President and 
the former Deputy President, now the President Cyril 
Ramaphosa and are you telling the Commission that in the 
period when you were the Chair of the NCOP and when Ms 
Mbete was the Speaker of the National Assembly you would 
have attended from time to time discussions between the 
executive authority of parliament and the then Deputy 
20 
President Cyril Ramaphosa? 
MS MODISE:   I am saying that, I am also saying as 
Chairperson of the NCOP I have had a sit-down with the 
then leader of government business on ministers who did 
not think it was important to attend to the sittings of the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 37 of 224 
 
NCOP on the quality of responses or questions put to them 
and we saw an improvement after taking that matter up 
with the leader of government business.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Now you will be aware, I 
am sure, that there has been quite a lot of evidence before 
this Commission on the manner in which parliamentary 
oversight 
was 
exercised 
particularly 
in 
the 
National 
Assembly more than in the NCOP but over the period 
particularly 2016, 2017 and there has been a point of view 
of some that parliament did not 2016 and up to the middle 
10 
of 2017 really get to grips with and pursue and exercise 
proper oversight in relation to allegations that the then 
widespread in the public domain on questions of alleged 
state capture, alleged corruption.  Can you tell us whether 
those sorts of issues were raised in the sort of process 
that you have described, the consultation between the 
executive authority and the leader of government business. 
MS MODISE:   I would not specifically respond directly to 
that one.  That would have had to be a discussion between 
the Speaker of the National Assembly and then – because 
20 
remember 
also 
that 
the 
executive 
members 
are 
not 
members of the NCOP and therefore the NCOP can only 
deal with them on the occasions they are in the NCOP and 
the rules of the NCOP applied for them.   
 
Now when they are members of the National 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 38 of 224 
 
Assembly it makes better sense of responsibility on the 
Speaker because these are your members.  They will have 
to come here for vote, they will have to come here for 
debates, they occasionally go to that house.   
 
So it would, in my own submission – this is one 
question which I suspect Ma’am Mbete will be better placed 
to respond. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That was precisely what I was trying to 
understand.  So if we want to know about that then really 
the people we have to ask are Ms Mbete and President 
10 
Ramaphosa because it would 
have been a personal 
interaction between the two of them.  Is that – am I 
understanding your evidence on that point? 
MS MODISE:   Yes, your understanding is correct, through 
you, Chair, I would say that yes, that matter would have 
come up but when you also look into what we gave you, 
you will notice that there was a swing, a change, especially 
after the judgment at the Constitutional Court where the 
National Assembly realised that it was their responsibility 
especially in that instance because I keep on saying that 
20 
any structure that is under the control of the executive 
becomes parliament’s business.   
 
So parliament would need to understand its role and 
when it is not clear of its role we do have a legal 
department and when we are not – they know when I was 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 39 of 224 
 
not happy – when I am not happy with the legal advice they 
give me, I force them to get outside help so that I can have 
a comparison.  So when you are presiding, sometimes you 
pause to look at whether or not the direction you are taking 
or you are being made to take is right but ultimately it is on 
the 
head 
of 
the 
Presiding 
Officer 
how 
matters 
get 
deliberated on, how they are concluded.   
 
If you are not careful you will let the thing flow and 
take the blame because ultimately, whatever it is that 
happens on the floor, if a decision is taken that [indistinct] 
10 
is adopted by the house, it is my responsibility, I must 
make sure that I follow through with that.  It becomes my 
bed, whatever.   
So if we do not create enough capacity to enable 
members 
to 
make 
distinctions, 
to 
enable 
members 
sometimes to say I would rather be slow on this matter and 
get more information and empower myself to take the right 
decision, then it will not – it will not be right with 
parliament.   
If we get put under pressure, especially towards the 
20 
end of a term, to run because then we have a lot of issues.  
I think that that is time when shortcuts are taken and which 
could be very pricy but I think that parliament must almost 
argue to take a slowly but sure path to insist that it is 
properly advised so that it can take the decision that do 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 40 of 224 
 
not just benefit parliament because we do get benefitted if 
the public is happy.  But, in fact, if the public is unhappy, 
we are the sound box. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I would just like to take you back 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just wanted to say although he is 
asking the questions, you are telling me so if you could 
face this side more often. 
MS MODISE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   More often.  You have been doing less of 
10 
it, sometimes I do not hear well, so ja. 
MS MODISE:   My apologies, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Ms Modise, in your last answer you 
referred to a Constitutional Court judgment and I got the 
impression that what you were conveying was that that 
judgment 
had 
been 
catalytic 
in 
assisting 
a 
better 
understanding of the role of parliament.  Was that a 
reference 
to 
the 
Nkandla 
judgment 
or 
some 
other 
judgment? 
20 
MS MODISE:   I think, yes, it is.  Because, Chairperson, 
before that judgment, if you read into what happened in the 
National Assembly, 
I 
suspect 
that 
National Assembly 
looked at its powers and functions and decided that in fact 
it is within its own right to review and to take whatever 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 41 of 224 
 
course of action they want to take but that decision of the 
court helped us because subsequent to that decision, I 
myself as Speaker of the National Assembly have not been 
happy about what has come out.  I have rushed to the 
court to say look, I think there is overreach here or I think I 
do not understand this, please clarify this. 
 
So 
that 
decision 
of 
the 
court 
has 
actually 
empowered parliament to begin to do things properly, to 
respect the space of the Chapter 9 institutions, to respect 
the courts but also to insist that it understands its mandate 
10 
better and must execute. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I am about to move onto a 
different topic, I see it is a convenient time to take a break. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us take a tea adjournment, it is 
quarter past eleven, we will resume at half past eleven.  
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair and Ms 
20 
Modise would you turn to page 409 please in bundle 6? 
MS MODISE:   Thank you very much, I do have it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now this is one of the annexures that 
you furnished as part of your – I am not sure if it was your 
initial submission or your supplementary submission but 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 42 of 224 
 
the point is this.  It is dated the 19 June 2017, it says this 
– it is issued by parliament and it says: 
“In the light of the recent accusations of state 
capture linked to alleged emails involving a number 
of ministers, parliamentary committees have been 
directed to urgently probe the allegations and report 
back to the National Assembly.” 
It then gives further details about Mr Frolick having written 
letters to various chairs of various portfolio committees.  I 
would like to start off by asking whether you had any 
10 
personal knowledge before this announcement was made 
that this was coming.  Did you play any role or have any 
insight as to who this came about or are you – let me leave 
it at that. 
MS MODISE:   No, I did not, I was in the NCOP but there 
had been a discussion between the Speaker and I on the – 
what was spilling out in the public. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Between the Speaker, that is Ms 
Baleka Mbete and yourself. 
MS MODISE:   Ms Mbete and I, yes.  And I …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Perhaps you could just share with us 
what you feel you can about that discussion. 
MS MODISE:   Your portfolio committees have powers to 
investigate and naturally we would have expected that 
immediately there is something like this that committees 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 43 of 224 
 
without being prompted would investigate but I think that 
what worried us were that it was not just your usual 
maladministration and petty thieving, this was – now the 
new term was creeping in the state and I think that she 
must subsequently have decided to – I do not know 
whether she had spoken before or to Mr Frolick or not 
before we had this – it was not an in-depth thing but we 
thought that yes, parliament must actually wake up and 
smell the coffee, we cannot leave this to chance. 
 
We could have left it, some committees might have 
10 
investigated, some might not but that the house chair 
responsible for committees was actually cracking the whip 
we thought was a good thing. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, but do I understand you correctly 
that even before it was announced, that the house chair 
was cracking the whip, you had already had a discussion 
with Ms Mbete in which she indicated that she thought, and 
you agreed, that there should be some pursuit of these 
allegations by the structures of parliament. 
MS MODISE:   Yes, the presiding officers have meetings 
20 
from time to time, we can confer on issues that affect both 
houses and now and whether it is formal or informal we will 
discuss about things, sometimes even bounce on each 
other for advice on how to deal with issues.  So we did 
discuss this but I think ultimately it was between Mr Frolick 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 44 of 224 
 
and Speaker Mbete at that time to take the matter forward. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Fine.  Now of course a fundamental 
feature of this is the timing of it.  This is in the middle of 
June and this – the very first paragraph of this document 
refers what are called some alleged emails which had 
become known in popular parlance as the so-called Gupta 
Leaks.  You would be familiar with that, I assume? 
MS MODISE:   Yes, yes, I am familiar. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now was it the Gupta Leaks that 
prompted this and if it was the Gupta Leaks that prompted 
10 
this, why did we have to wait for the Gupta Leaks to 
prompt this because the allegations that were allegedly 
substantiated in the Gupta Leaks had been in the public 
domain for a long, long time by then, I mean, as early as 
February/March a number of very senior personnel in the 
National Congress leadership themselves were making 
serious allegations.  So I am trying to understand the delay 
and the timing questions here insofar as you have any 
knowledge. 
MS MODISE:   Well, Chair, I will speculate.  In politics 
20 
sometimes there are games.  I, myself, when I got my farm 
was accused of having stolen a state farm.  So sometimes 
when allegations come out, until they are investigated you 
are not sure whether it is politicking or whether there are 
facts.  Clearly, as I say, if the Chairperson should have 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 45 of 224 
 
followed up or their ministers in their respective portfolios, 
these allegations are coming out, what do you say? 
 
But, Chair, when the emails were leaked it no 
longer just became probably propaganda or a game, 
political games, it became real and therefore I would 
understand why Mr Frolick would say you definitely now 
must investigate these matters because we need to get in 
there. 
 
Now the Home Affairs one was more serious.  If 
your 
Home 
Affairs, 
your 
population 
register 
is 
10 
contaminated, you have a serious issue of going to the 
elections and being sure that in fact these people who are 
sending public representatives indeed should have been 
the people who sent – so it makes you uneasy and 
therefore you would need to.   
PRASA important because the majority of South 
Africans use public transport so if you get allegations that 
there are things that are not going well there, you know 
that it is going to hit the poorest of the poor so you 
become even more anxious.  So I, as I said, Chair, I am 
20 
speculating on this one. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But, you see, take Mcebisi Jonas.  In 
February and March of 2016, fourteen, fifteen months 
before this, issues a public statement alleging that he has 
been offered bribes by the Guptas, very substantial bribes, 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 46 of 224 
 
to do their bidding and in exchange he will become the 
minister.  I mean, I can hardly think of a more serious 
allegation.   
Now this is not an instance of speculation and 
rumours, this is your own senior member making an 
allegation like this and he was not speaking alone.  Ms 
Hogan spoke out, Vytjie Mentor out and others.  Now the 
point I am making is they did this by no later than March of 
2016 and what mystifies me is why is this kind of action 
that we are seeing here only being taken in June 2017 and 
10 
why not back in March 2016? 
Now I understand you were not then the Speaker of 
the National Assembly and you may say to me I do not 
know, but I just want to know what you do know and to 
what extent you can assist us. 
MS MODISE:   Chair, I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just speculation that you heard. 
MS MODISE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MODISE:   But if I was the Chairperson of a committee 
20 
I would certainly have made it my business to find out.  If I 
was an ordinary member of the National Assembly I would 
have put a question to the minister to get clarification on 
this.  If I was the minister involved I would have approach 
the presiding officer for space to make a statement in the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 47 of 224 
 
house to clarify this matter.  So I am saying I am 
speculating because at that time I was in the NCOP and 
could just – in other instances just look on because 
remember, the two houses are distinct.   
Ntata Masondo cannot tell me how to run the floor, I 
cannot tell him how to run the floor in the NCOP but as I 
say, it would have been important for the committee 
chairpersons unprompted to have run using the powers that 
they have to investigate this matter and to put reports in 
the house. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course part of the reason why Mr 
Freund asked the question and we accept that you are 
unable to answer it because you were not in the National 
Assembly, part of the reason why he is asking it is because 
the Commission is quite concerned about understanding 
why certain things happened the way they did and why they 
happened at the time at which they happened because one 
of 
the 
things 
that 
it 
wants 
to 
do 
is 
to 
make 
recommendations that would be aimed at making sure that 
should a similar situation arise in the future there would be 
20 
enough measures that would make sure what the country 
went through is not repeated.   
So that is part of the reason to say maybe if 
parliament had acted a year earlier or even more than that 
but at the latest a year earlier, as soon as possible after 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 48 of 224 
 
March 2016, maybe certain things which happened after 
which are detrimental to the country in terms of what the 
Commission has heard maybe might not have happened.    
So that is the context but we accept that your 
contribution would be limited because you were not in the 
National Assembly. 
MS MODISE:   But perhaps, Chair, I must say that that 
being the situation, one can just say that awoke.  Now we 
know that we must not allow things to fester.  Now we must 
not allow somebody else to say take the initiative and as 
10 
we do our annual workshops with Chairpersons, we ask 
literally do you keep up with the newspaper reports, do you 
follow – it does not matter whether the minister will say it 
was a joke or what, but we are now at a point where we 
want to know everything, we want to cover ourselves and 
cover the people.  As is say, it is regrettable that in fact 
the impression is that parliament only woke up when things 
were now really bad and for that we must apologise to the 
South African people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I am very happy to hear that the 
20 
attitude is different now and that in particular committee 
chairs and committee members are directed to keep 
themselves informed of about what is in the public domain 
that they may have to pursue in order to make sure that 
they play their role.  Mr Freund? 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 49 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now we were at 
page 409 and you will remember – and I read you the first 
paragraph – I emphasised the words urgently probed and 
you are aware, the Chair is aware that there were four 
committees involved and I want to look at each of those 
four committees but some in more detail than other and 
that is not necessarily because it is more important but 
because we have a lot of evidence in some of the others 
and some we have very little evidence and I would like to 
take you please now to page 459. 
10 
MS MODISE:   459? 
ADV FREUND SC:   459.  That should be a document dated 
the 
14 
March 
2019, 
announcements 
tabling 
some 
committee reports.  If you could maybe just explain to us 
what that document is so that we understand how it fits in. 
MS MODISE:   Announcements tabling – these are reports, 
discussions, 
matters 
which 
have 
been 
entertained, 
discussed and finalised into committees, adopted by the 
committees which then are referred to the administration.  
They then get into this kind of document so that they 
20 
become public, they are now ATC’d, they – anybody can 
have access to them. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And by this time, we are into 
the 6 t h session, 5 t h parliament and we are a long way after 
June of 2017, where maybe 17, 18 months.  Now can I take 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 50 of 224 
 
you – you will see at the foot of page 459 you will see that 
one of the committee reports that was tabled, the very last 
one, number 5, is Home Affairs which it says is at page 49.  
So if we go to that page 49, that is in our bundle at page 
507.  If you can go to page 507.   
MS MODISE:   I am there. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 
Now 
would 
I 
be 
correct 
in 
understanding that this is now the Home Affairs portfolio 
committee having finalised its investigation and report, 
tabling this before the National Assembly for the National 
10 
Assembly to adopt if so minded?  I see you nod.  If you can 
just say yes into the microphone? 
MS MODISE:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  And I am not going to take 
you through all the details, the final reasons as to what we 
read here but I just want to take you to a few highlights.  
You will see in page 507 in the very first paragraph is the 
reference 
received 
from 
Mr 
Frolick 
requesting 
an 
investigation into the allegations of state capture involving 
the then former Minister of Home Affairs and the granting 
20 
of citizenship to non-South Africans and this all has to do 
with members of the Gupta family and then you see in the 
middle of the page within a couple of days, 20 and 21 
June, the portfolio committee wrote to the then Minister of 
Home Affairs and the then Minister of Finance, the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 51 of 224 
 
previous Minister of Home Affairs, Mr Gigaba, to attend a 
meeting on Gupta naturalisation on the 27 June and you 
will see that on the 22 June certain information is 
requested and received and then you see that on the 27 
June 2017 PCHA, that is Portfolio Committee on Home 
Affairs meeting: 
“Both current and former Minister of Home Affairs 
apologise for not attending.” 
And that is where the problem seems to start because if we 
read the balance of this document – and I am going to take 
10 
you through quite a bit of it, this oversight meeting that is 
meant to investigate as a matter of public urgency, 
requires and indicates the requirement for the presence of 
the two ministers and neither of them turn up. 
 
Now do you agree that this certainly became a 
problem not just in this instance but in other instances?  
There was a problem of ministers simply failing to turn up 
at portfolio committees no matter how pressing and urgent? 
MS MODISE:   I do admit that it would be problematic 
because if there was any official reason for them not to 
20 
turn up, arrangements could have been made long before 
the meeting for a postponement or a change of venue or 
time.  So I do acknowledge that that is problematic. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So then what we see – and I am just 
trying to run through this quite quickly.  You will see at the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 52 of 224 
 
foot of page 508 there is a reference to a report received 
by the portfolio committee from the Organisation Undoing 
Tax Abuse, OUTA, which puts a lot of factual material 
before the committee.  Then you will see that on the 8 
September the portfolio committee sends a letter to the 
DA, [indistinct]  
“The 
department 
of 
Home 
Affairs 
requesting 
evidence on the Gupta family’s investments and 
charitable contributions.” 
Which is one detail that related to this whole greater story.  
10 
And then you see the response.  The request was sent on 
the 8 September 2017, the response comes on the 7 
February 2018.  That is about five months later.  This is 
this urgent investigation.  The minister has not turned up, 
the information requested takes months and months to 
appear and I presume your answer is going to be the same, 
that this is regrettable, this is not how things should be.  
Do you agree? 
MS MODISE:   I agree. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I just want to go back to something 
that you dealt with early which I think connects with this.  I 
think you said that what parliament seeks to do now is that 
when the members of the executive fail to respond to 
requests for information or fail to give responses or take 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 53 of 224 
 
action that has been required by portfolio committee, your 
parliament, the idea is that at the end of the session 
parliament would compile a report and if I understand you 
correctly I think that report or part of the report would be 
made available to the President to say here are your 
ministers who did not respond or did not submit – or did 
not act as required or recommended and I accept that there 
may be situations where you might not as parliament be 
insisting on a particular action if the minister thinks that 
different action should be taken but you would want that 
10 
they say if they are not going along with what parliament 
says, they should given reasons why they are not going 
along and indicate what action they think is appropriate.  
But what I wanted to raise is this, I would think that you 
should not necessarily wait until the end of the session, I 
would think that there ought to be a time – maybe you will 
write to the minister once, there is no action, you write 
again to remind them.  But after that I would think maybe 
you should not wait until the end of the session.  That 
failure on the part of that minister should be brought to the 
20 
attention of the President as soon as possible because if 
you wait until the end of the session maybe the whole thing 
will be overtaken by other things whereas if you bring this 
failure by the minister to the attention of the President at 
the time the President might be able to make sure that he 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 54 of 224 
 
or she complies.  I do not know, do you want to say 
something about that? 
MS MODISE:   I agree with you, Chair, and that is why we 
are writing second letters now and we hope that we would 
not be forced to write third letters because at the point of 
the third letter we then think that we would be approaching 
the leader of government business. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MS MODISE:   And then we would be doing the report to 
the President. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, no, that is fine. Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Now if I can take you to 
page 510 we see that item 9 refers to the 27 February 
2018: 
“A motion to solicit the support of the parliamentary 
research and legal services to engage with the 
documentation we submitted to the committee.” 
And then on the 6 March 2018: 
“Reappointed Minister of Home Affairs, Mr M K N 
Gigaba, 
presented 
to 
the 
committee 
on 
early 
20 
naturalisation.” 
Now, of course, something important has happened before 
this, in this interim. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I think I have lost you, are 
we still at 509? 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 55 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   510, the next page, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If I can just indicate to you, I looked at 
item 
9 
which 
was 
that 
there 
should 
be 
assistance, 
technical assistance, research and legal services, and then 
I have moved on to the 6 March 2019 when Minister Gigaba 
finally arrives.  Now this is, I might point out, more than 
nine months after the date of Mr Frolick’s request for an 
urgent investigation and report back to the National 
Assembly and I am also pointing out to you not only that 
10 
there is a delay but there have been important political 
developments in the interim.  In the interim Mr Ramaphosa 
has been elected as President of the African National 
Congress in December and as President of the Republic, 
appointed as President of the Republic in February 2018, 
as I recall.   
So it seems from what we see here, that through 
the duration of President Zuma’s presidency Mr Gigaba 
does not see fit to attend this inquiry and that is only, it 
seems – and I am putting it to you for comment because I 
20 
do not know, I was not there, one gets the suspicion that 
this is really a new political broom that is sweeping clean 
but until that new broom is sweeping clean there was in 
fact not the diligent, urgent investigation of the type that 
Mr Frolick’s letter required.  Do you have a comment on all 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 56 of 224 
 
of that? 
MS MODISE:   Well, Chair, between that time you have – 
and I do not want to make excuses for the committees 
because I do not know what the real circumstances were, 
why they were delaying, but you would also have breaks, 
constituency, you would have recess.  In this instance you 
probably also had to break for elections.  When you come 
back, you have a break, when you come back, parliament 
usually has a mechanism where you go back to old 
business which may have lapsed and there is a deliberate 
10 
discussion which is sometimes left at the level of the Chief 
Whip’s Forum where they come together and they decide 
this is very important, we do not want this to fall through 
the cracks, we are bringing it over into this financial year 
or into this – so I really do not know why the committee 
would not say by the way, in your absence, when you were 
there, we had started this investigation, thanks God that 
you are now, we are continuing.  Because that is what they 
would have done.  But also, if you have had a change in 
the membership and leadership of the particular portfolio 
20 
committee, you might have people not having the memory 
of what was there and how to take it further. 
 
So perhaps what we need to do –administratively, is 
when a new Chairperson of Home Affairs comes in, there is 
a little bundle that they get, these were the matters before 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 57 of 224 
 
the committee, these were concluded, these were not 
concluded, do you and your committee feel that you have 
the appetite to resuscitate this matter?  If we can put in 
that then we would be able to say to the committee you 
were delictual, you did not do your work.  But if parliament, 
ourselves as the presiding officers and the administration 
have not facilitated the change of leadership that then I 
must say that it is difficult not to take the blame because 
you do not expect somebody who walks in to understand 
the focus and the importance of what happened especially 
10 
if those people are walking in as new members.  It would 
be very difficult for that to happen. 
 
So, as I say, I am not sure what exactly happened 
there but I think that we can prevent that into the future by 
putting up that at the end of the parliament – usually 
committees write what are referred to as legacy reports.  
Maybe we should then insist that it is important to go back 
to those reports for the revival of business.  That is very 
important, so that it is not five months, six months down 
the line that somebody rings a bell and says by the way, 
20 
that thing was important. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, Ms Modise, it was you who 
spontaneously volunteered a few minutes ago that the 
allegations in respect thereof were particularly serious for 
the reasons you gave and you are aware of Mr Frolick’s 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 58 of 224 
 
letter.  Apparently in coordination with Ms Mbethe and 
there is other evidence to show that the then Chief Whip 
was also party to that.  
 
To say this urgently needs to be addressed.  Would 
you agree with me that it does not look like this portfolio 
committee from its own report, did what was required of it, 
in terms of the speed with which it dealt with the matter.  I 
will come to its ultimate conclusion in due course and its 
ultimate conclusion in due course is to find that the 
approval given of certain naturalisation rights, was wrongly 
10 
given.  
 
That it took years and the question I am asking you 
is whether you agree that its failure looks at face value to 
be unacceptable.   
MS MODISE:  If I was to give any failure, I would have said 
the head of committees Mr Frolic himself, having written 
this letter to the committees, bringing these matters to the 
attention of committees on the importance and urgency, 
should have kept his tabs on these committees.   
 
In other words, before I hit this committee I would 
20 
hit the person who has direct responsibility to ensure that 
work happens there.  So I would, I would say that perhaps 
Mr Frolick should have cracked the whip, should have been 
if the Chair and the membership of the committees was 
removed because he was carrying on, should have been 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 59 of 224 
 
the person who brings that memory back and say but this 
was important.  Carry on here.  
 
Here are the documents that come from where ever 
so you do not have to start all over.  Continue here.  
ADV FREUND SC:  I hear that, and can I now take you to 
page 407? 
MS MODISE:  We go back? 
ADV FREUND SC:  We go back.  We will come back to 
where we are in a moment.  Now just to get your bearings, 
if you go back to 401, you have already told the Chair right 
10 
at 
the 
outset 
of 
your 
evidence 
that 
this 
is 
the 
supplementary submission that was furnished in response 
to the request from myself and the request from myself is 
in the preceding couple of pages, and you answer point by 
point certain of the questions.  
 
At page 407 you deal with the issue we are talking 
about now and you will see that you refer at page 407, 
under the heading response, you say that: 
 
“In mid-2017 a series of emails and documents 
commonly referred to as the Gupta leaks were 
20 
widely circulated in the media.  In light of the 
accusations of State Capture linked to these 
emails 
involving 
a 
number 
of 
ministers, 
parliamentary committees were directed by the 
house 
Chairperson 
responsible 
for 
the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 60 of 224 
 
committees, Mr CT Frolick to urgently probe 
the allegations and report back to the National 
Assembly.” 
 
You refer to a letter and the letter is before the 
commission and then you say this, and it is the point of my 
question: 
 
“This is in line with the role of the house 
Chairperson 
to 
ensure 
that 
committees 
conduct oversight of the executive and report 
to the National Assembly on their findings.” 
10 
 
I can see that that is what you have said, I just 
want to check if that is in fact your view and if it is your 
view, why is it your view that this is the role that the house 
Chairperson of committees [indistinct]. 
MS MODISE:  It is my view.  The house Chair of 
committees is responsible for committees.  Their function, 
their capacity, their programming, the follow through’s of 
their reports, and therefore if the house Chair experiences 
any problems, they go back to the speaker or deputy 
speaker to say I am hitting a wall here.  
20 
 
This is what I have tried, this is what I have not 
tried.  So the house Chair would be best placed after his 
interaction in this case with the speaker to take action.  It 
is the house Chair, I even though the Chairpersons are a 
structure that falls under the speaker, I do not interact 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 61 of 224 
 
directly with them.  
 
There is an intermediary called Mr Frolick.  So 
when I go direct into a committee, it is because there is an 
issue that needs to be resolved which he may say I have 
not been able to resolve, I have an issue here and there.  
So you always delegate responsibilities and give people 
space to do what they are supposed to.  
ADV FREUND SC:  And when you say I, you are talking 
about yourself in your capacity as speaker ...[intervenes]  
MS MODISE:  As speaker.  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  So what you are really saying is 
the responsibility vests in the house Chair, but above him 
the responsibility vests in the speaker.  
MS MODISE:  The speaker delegates that responsibility to 
the house Chair.  
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes.  
MS MODISE:  So ultimately the speaker is answerable, 
because the house Chair derives that responsibilities from 
the speaker.  
CHAIRPERSON:  The house Chairperson is part of the 
20 
structure of parliament.  
MS MODISE:  Yes, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right?   
MS MODISE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe for now, let us just talk about 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 62 of 224 
 
National Assembly.  So you have got the speaker at the 
top.  You have got the deputy speaker.  Would the next 
person on the hierarchy be the house Chairperson or there 
is somebody else? 
MS MODISE:  No, the house ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Or ...[intervenes]  
MS MODISE:  The house elects, Chair.  The house elects 
the speaker and the deputy.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS MODISE:  Then the house Chairs, depending on the 
10 
weight of responsibilities and as parliament of South Africa 
was 
growing, 
we 
were 
taking 
more 
and 
more 
responsibilities and therefore it was then decided that 
these two people, the speaker and the deputy speaker, 
cannot actually do everything and firstly there was a Chair 
of Chairs, and then that responsibility was then broken 
down into having three house Chairs in the National 
Assembly. 
 
So the three house Chairs are on par.  You have got 
one, this one who looks into committees.  Then you have 
20 
got one who focuses on the international site and then you 
have one who looks internally into the affairs and welfare 
of members.  
 
They are on par.  What the speaker does is after 
you are elected, you then look at what is on your plate and 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 63 of 224 
 
you then subdivide it and delegate to the deputy and to the 
house Chairs.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Or, there would be three house Chairs, it 
is not just one? 
MS MODISE:  There are three house Chairs.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, but do they all report to the 
speaker?   
MS MODISE:  They all report to the speaker, in the 
absence of the speaker to the deputy speaker.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  No, thank you. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  There is, is there not, a committee 
comprised of the Chairpersons of the various portfolio 
committees?  Am I right?  And then that committee is itself 
Chaired by what we call the Chair of Chairs, and that is 
really where Mr Frolic fits in.  
MS MODISE:  Mr Frolick becomes the Chair of Chairs.  
ADV FREUND SC:  The Chair of Chairs.  
MS MODISE:  In the old time, all he did was coordinate the 
Chairpersons 
and 
their 
business. 
 
So 
the 
Chairs 
Chairperson, are colleagues.  They cannot order each 
20 
other, but they have powers to sit together, inform the 
house Chair who is now called the, who is now Mr Frolick 
to say we intend to have these two committees or these 
three committees coming together, and in the past they 
would sit together but go and develop their reports 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 64 of 224 
 
differently. 
 
Now there is a proposal that says you can sit 
together, confer.  You can even report together, because 
that works much better.  So yes, there is that body of 
Chairpersons which is coordinated by the Chair called Mr 
Frolick. 
 
He is the Chair of Chairs.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And now, this reference to Chair of 
Chairs, that is ... is that a separate position or by virtue of 
being the house Chairperson responsible for portfolio 
10 
committees you also perform the role or the functions of a 
Chair of Chairs? 
MS MODISE:  Before the notion of house Chairs was 
introduced and accepted in parliament, below the deputy 
speaker there would be a member who would, whose work 
would be to coordinate the other Chairs.  That person used 
to be called the Chair of Chairs.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS MODISE:  So when the institution introduce the house 
Chairs, that position was now assumed by the house 
20 
Chairs.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MS MODISE:  So Mr Frolick in his capacity as house Chair 
of committees, is in fact the Chair of Chairs.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, so that at the moment it would be 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 65 of 224 
 
inaccurate to refer to a Chair of Chairs, because that term 
is no longer there.  
MS MODISE:  The term, the position has now evolved into 
the position Mr Frolick now holds Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes, but now I am particularly 
interested in the situation as it was in the middle of 2017 
and your evidence was before that Mr Frolick as a delegate 
of the speaker, had the responsibility then, in his capacity 
then, to monitor and ensure that the instruction that the 
10 
portfolio committee should exercise its oversight was 
carried out.  
 
You stand by that evidence? 
MS MODISE:  I stand by that.  we even when we go, we 
have a committee of parliament called programming, where 
matters are brought and it is a multi-party body where we 
decide where we slot what in.  Mr Frolick represents the 
Chairs 
there, 
the 
business 
that 
comes 
directly 
from 
committees.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you.  Now I am still going to be 
20 
coming back in a moment to that Home Affairs Committee 
that we have not finished with, but I am trying to 
understand this thing chronologically.  So what I would like 
to take you to next, please is page 715.  
 
Seven one five.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 66 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:  I have it Chair.  
ADV FREUND SC:  And that document runs through, if you 
can confirm for me, through to 725.  It is a confidential 
memorandum containing legal advice from Advocate Z 
Adikhare, chief legal advisor.  Am I correct? 
MS MODISE:  You are correct Chair.  
ADV FREUND SC:  This Chair is a document that I for one 
had never seen before.  Now you will recall, and if I can 
just digress, that there was not just the one committee that 
we are looking at, Home Affairs.  There was the Public 
10 
Enterprises Committee, there was Mineral and Energies, 
there was Transport and PRASA.  
 
The first to really get going, in fact even before Mr 
Frolick’s letter was public affairs, public enterprises.  
MS MODISE:  Public enterprise.  
ADV FREUND SC:  That was the committee then Chaired 
by Ms Runto, Mr Gordhan was a back stage member, there 
were a Ms Mathoni from the DA was a member and back in 
May 
of 
2017 
they 
decided 
in 
principle 
to 
have 
an 
investigation, that was also in due course discussed with 
20 
Mr Frolic and became part of what we could call the Frolick 
initiative.  
 
But it actually slightly preceded it and it was the 
one that got up and going the quickest.  What we are 
looking at here, at page 715, is an opinion dated the 15 t h 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 67 of 224 
 
of August 2017 on the proposed process for the Portfolio 
Committee on Public Enterprises to conduct the inquiry into 
state owned enterprises.  
 
The Chair of this commission can read this at his 
leisure in due course, but the just of it am I correct, is to 
say you are perfectly within your rights as the Portfolio 
Committee to proceed with the type of investigation that 
you wish to proceed.  
 
Do you agree with that as a summary? 
MS MODISE:  Absolutely.  I have been repeating Chair that 
10 
the powers of the portfolios is to investigate all witnesses.  
It is within their powers.  In fact they could have initiated 
and simply informed Mr Frolick this is the direction we are 
taking, because this is what we are finding out and this is 
what is before us.  
ADV FREUND SC:  Indeed, and if I can take you to 
paragraph 28 in the same document at page 723. 
MS MODISE:  723. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Page 723, paragraph 28.  If I may say 
so the point that you have just so forcefully made, is 
20 
precisely the same point made in the legal advice: 
 
“The process that the Portfolio Committee 
must 
undertake, 
falls 
squarely 
within 
its 
oversight 
mandate. 
 
The 
committee 
is 
embarking 
on 
a 
fact 
finding 
inquiry 
as 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 68 of 224 
 
envisaged in Rule 227 of the NA rules.  It will 
only after a proper analysis of the evidence 
and information presented to it, arrive at 
conclusions 
that 
could 
result 
in 
recommendations for the proposed actions and 
so forth.” 
 
And it is basically confirming that it has these 
powers, and it could take that decision as you have just 
said, at its own initiative.  It does not need anybody’s 
permission. 
10 
MS MODISE:  Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:  The problem with that is that when Ms 
Mantsani according to her evidence, and I do not think that 
Ms Letsatse Dube disagreed, when she in March of 2016 
was urging the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, 
to do precisely that. 
 
Precisely in relation to the allegations that I have 
spoken about this morning.  For example the allegations of 
Mr Jonas, Ms Hogan and others.  Apparently the legal 
advice given was you cannot do that.  Now if that legal 
20 
advice was given, firstly you would agree it is clearly 
wrong.  
MS MODISE:  It would be clearly wrong.  
ADV FREUND SC:  And secondly, would you agree with me 
that any Chairperson of the portfolio committee should 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 69 of 224 
 
know that.  This is squarely within the powers of a 
committee as clearly stipulated in the rules of the national 
assembly that they can do precisely that type of inquiry. 
MS MODISE:  If a member of the committee makes a 
recommendation that the committee should look into, that 
committee discusses that.  I suspect what might have 
happened is that in the discussion of that committee, they 
decided not to go with the recommendation of Honourable 
Matsoni, but it would be absolutely wrong to say that a 
member 
could 
not 
make 
a 
recommendation 
for 
an 
10 
investigation which is within the powers of that portfolio. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes, now of course you were not there 
and nobody blames you for not being there at this 
particular Portfolio Committee meeting, but I just want to 
fill you in on some of the evidence we have heard.  It is 
correct that the committee did not proceed with the 
investigation as Ms Zonde requested.  
 
But before that stage was 
even reached, 
Ms 
Letsatsi Dube informed Mr Matsoni, Ms Letsatsi Dube was 
then the Chairperson of that Portfolio Committee.  Informed 
20 
her that she has been advised by the parliamentary legal 
advice office that the committee had no power to do such a 
thing, and that as far as she was concerned the matter was 
closed, notwithstanding Ms Matsoni’s response as to say 
but that is wrong, look at this rule number.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 70 of 224 
 
 
Now my question to you is not what happened, 
because you were not there.  My question to you is 
whether you agree that a Portfolio Chairperson ought to 
have been well aware by March of 2016 that a Portfolio 
Committee did indeed have the power to pursue this type 
on inquiry if its members collectively decided to do so.  
MS MODISE:  Chair, it is a definite yes.  When members 
are sworn in, they do not only get a constitution, they also 
get a copy of the rules.  So even an ordinary member who 
is not a Chairperson, would have known that it was and it 
10 
still is within the powers of the committee to investigate.  
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I want to take you to another 
similar document at about the same time.  When you go to 
page 727.  Just to remind you the last document we looked 
at was dated the 15 t h of August 2017 and this document is 
dated the 23 r d of August 2017. 
 
So it is a week later, and it is on much the same 
issue, subject.  Opinion on steps to be taken by a Portfolio 
Committee in investigating allegations of State Capture in 
organs of state, and then if I take you to paragraph 2 at 
20 
page 729, the legal question to be considered is: 
A.  In terms of the law and rules of the National 
Assembly what steps may be taken by a Portfolio 
Committee of the National Assembly to conduct 
oversight over organs of state, and  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 71 of 224 
 
B. What other issue must the committee take into 
consideration in dealing with the referral and the 
advice, the Chair will read in due course at his 
leisure, the advice essentially is you will adopt 
whatever 
procedure 
you 
think 
to 
be 
most 
appropriate in your wisdom, as long as you as 
the committee keep control over the process, that 
is your rights. 
Now that I assume from your earlier evidence Ms 
Modise, is precisely what any Chairperson and frankly any 
10 
member of any portfolio should have understood already.  I 
see you nod, if you can just say yes into the record?   
MS MODISE:  Yes Chair.  
ADV FREUND SC:  Okay.  Now against that background, 
because what we are now looking at, if we give the ruling 
party the benefit of the doubt to say well, in June of 2017 
they finally woke up through the Chair, through the 
speaker, 
through 
the 
Chair 
of 
Chairs, 
through 
this 
announcement issued in the press, in response of the 
Gupta league.  
20 
 
They said there does now need to be an urgent 
investigation in four committees on these allegations in 
relation to State Capture.  Now let us go back and look at 
how that is implemented.  We were at Annexure O.  We 
were at pages 499 to 515.   
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 72 of 224 
 
 
Let me just see if I completed that.  Yes, can I take 
you perhaps through to 510?  I think that is where we 
digressed.  
MS MODISE:  I have that page.  
ADV FREUND SC:  You will recall that I drew your 
attention at page 510 to the 6 t h of March 2018 when Mr 
Gigaba finally appears before the committee, and then the 
report summarises how things developed and you will see 
at page 511 that, and this is Roman numerals 14: 
 
“In a meeting of the PCHA on the 27 t h of March 
10 
2018, the committee decided to broaden the 
scope of the investigation into the broader 
process of naturalisation of the entire Gupta 
family.” 
 
I will leave it at that, and then you will see if you 
turn to the next page, page ... I think if we you can go to 
page 513: 
 
“On the 11 t h of September the committee 
finalised its preparations for the inquiry, on the 
12 t h of September inquiry day 1.” 
20 
 
So we finally start this inquiry and we see 13 
September, inquiry day 2.  9 t h of October inquiry day 3.  
12 t h of March inquiry day 4, 13 t h of March discussion and 
adoption of the final report and that is the very report we 
are now reading, and if we leave out a lot of the details 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 73 of 224 
 
which will be familiar to this commission for other reasons 
and we go through to reading the conclusion of this, or the 
conclusion parts of it, if we can maybe start at page 555.   
MS MODISE:  555? 
ADV FREUND SC:  555. 
MS MODISE:  Have it.  
ADV FREUND SC:  You will see there is a section, headed 
observation.  This is after summarising what has happened 
at all the various days of the inquiry.  Now we start coming 
to as it were the conclusions and they make what they call 
10 
observations, and the very first observation, they say this: 
 
“Based 
on 
the 
evidence 
provided 
to 
the 
committee, despite the limitations and gaps of 
information 
mentioned 
in 
Section 
1, 
the 
observations of the inquiry are the following.  
One, the committee acknowledged that the 
initial applications for naturalisation by AJ 
Gupta and family were dealt with by the 
department as a family application and were 
correctly rejected, because that was the nub of 
20 
the issue.  What happened subsequent to that 
is the Minister overturned that decision and 
what this committee is finally saying is they 
were correctly rejected.” 
 
And then point 3 on the next page: 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 74 of 224 
 
 
“The 
application 
for 
early 
naturalisation 
approved by former Minister Gigaba of AJ 
Gupta’s family was incorrect.” 
That is one of their observations, and then they 
comment adversely on various senior officials and then 
they 
make 
some 
recommendations 
and 
the 
recommendations 
include 
amending 
certain 
legislative 
provisions and that criminal charges should be laid against 
Ashu Tjaula and members of the Gupta family relating to 
false information submitted in the early naturalisation 
10 
applications.  
 Now what I want to put to you is this.  At the end 
of the day, what appears at face value to be a credible 
report that was produced, but that the delay in producing it 
was completely inconsistent with the mandate which was in 
the middle of June 2017, urgently to investigate and report 
back to parliament?  
 It is quite clear that that did not happen, you 
agree? 
MS MODISE:  I agree.  
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I am not going to spend any time 
on the portfolio committee on public enterprises, because 
we all know what happened and this commission has heard 
a lot of evidence in that.  In short, there was a decision 
starting in May 2017 to conduct an inquiry.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 75 of 224 
 
 
It broadened and then narrowed down to Eskom.  It 
was a proper inquiry.  It produces a report.  The report was 
furnished to this commission.  But I would like to look at 
the other committees.  The Transport Committee was 
mandated to look at allegations in relation to PRASA, is 
that correct? 
MS MODISE:  That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:  And I think if we go to your own joint 
submission, paragraph 46, fairly early in Bundle 6, page 
19. 
10 
MS MODISE:  I have that.  
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I am attributing no personal fault 
to you Ms Modise, but what I am going to be putting to you 
as what he stated here, is not entirely accurate.  So let us 
just look at it.  Subsequent to the letter from the house 
Chairperson, the committee issued a report, documenting 
its past oversight committee, oversight activities over the 
Department of Transport in PRASA during the period 2014 
to 2017. 
 
Let us just pause there.  This request is made in 
20 
the middle of 2017.  The report detailed engagements 
regarding the management and operations of the entity, 
which also included various references to investigations 
into financial misconduct, alleged within the entity and 
then the sentence that I take issue with: 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 76 of 224 
 
 
“Specifically 
the 
committee 
submitted 
this 
report in lieu of the formal inquiry and did not 
generate any new insights.” 
 
In other words the suggestion that is made in your 
submission 
is 
that 
the 
response 
from 
the 
Transport 
Committee is that we have done all that and there is no 
need for it.  We have investigated adequately thus far.  
Now let us just leave that there.  I will not ask you a 
question about it because I want to put something else to 
you.  
10 
 
If I take you now to page 736 of the same bundle.  
MS MODISE:  730?   
ADV FREUND SC:  736.  Perhaps that is not fair.  I do not 
think it is fair.  You have it, it is a letter dated the 16 t h of 
March 2018. 
MS MODISE:  16 t h of March 2018.   
ADV FREUND SC:  So the impression created by your joint 
submission is that where it is the response of the Transport 
Committee is that there is no need for an investigation 
because of our prior oversight, but if you read this letter of 
20 
the 16 t h of March 2018 I want to put it to you, that it shows 
that that cannot possibly be correct, not  least because if 
you go to page 738, second paragraph you will see in its 
meeting of 20 February 2018 the committee resolved to 
institute on investigation into the matters of concerns 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 77 of 224 
 
regarded by the various stakeholders etcetera, and then 
they talk about, in the second last paragraph, the terms of 
reference having been adopted. 
This 
committee 
actually 
did 
resolve 
but 
only 
resolved in February and March of 2018, to carry out an 
investigation of precisely the sort that was directed by the 
Chairperson further.  And what is more, I want to just 
explain to you, we have had evidence from both Mr De 
Freitas, correct, the DA member Manny De Freitas of 
attempts that he made in this committee to have these 
10 
investigations take place and we had Ms Mgazi who has 
responded and I think she herself accepted in her evidence 
that the committee had been remiss in failing to investigate 
as they should have.  
So all I want to really put to you is can you accept 
that when your join submission says that really there was 
from the response from the committee, no need for an 
investigation and a died there. Your evidence is just 
mistaken, because there is a whole lot of detail, which you 
were presumably unaware of. 
20 
MS MODISE:   Chair, I have no option but to accept what 
you are saying but remember that we also said in our joint 
submission - and I noticed that this letter that say’s now 
we are investigating comes from the same member, Mgazi. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, indeed. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 78 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:   Who you are telling me had earlier on said 
that 
they 
were 
remiss 
in 
not 
investigating. 
 
The 
Chairperson of the NCOP and I stated upfront that where 
we have not personally dealt with matters, we have been 
informed that things are right, and we accepted that they 
are right and true because we could not have known every 
little…[intervene] 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I understand that I want to give 
you my personal unequivocal assurance that I understand 
the spirit in which this evidence is given.  You were not 
10 
even then the Speaker, much less personally involved, but 
you are now the Speaker, you rely on documents that had 
been presented to you.  
You have made clear in your submission, that not 
everything is in your personal knowledge and you rely on 
documents which are attached.  But nonetheless, it's my 
duty if I see something that seems to be wrong in the 
document, to point that out otherwise what you have said 
might be taken as being clearly correct, when there is 
reason to suspect that it may not be correct. 
20 
MS MODISE:   Chairperson I am grateful that the 
disconnect is pointed out to us, if that means we must be 
more thorough next time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, I want to just move on until and 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 79 of 224 
 
be quite brief with a few other features of your joint 
submission. So can I take you to paragraph 54, which is at 
page 21. 
MS MODISE:   I have it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, just want to put this in context, 
quite understandably what your joint submission does after 
referring to the Frolick letter and the press release to be 
looked at, you look at the four committees that were 
identified by him, but then you move on and say that it is 
also important for the Commission to be aware of things 
10 
that happened in other committees beyond those four.  
And one of those that you draw attention to is the 
Portfolio Committee on police. and you make the point in 
paragraph 54: 
“During the fifth Parliament, the Portfolio Committee 
on police in addition to its business held six 
meetings 
on 
State 
Capture. 
These 
meetings 
considered progress reports by the Directorate of 
Priority Crime Investigation, DPCI on high profile 
cases under investigation, including State Capture.” 
20 
And you then itemise those in the paragraphs that follow. 
You refer to what happened on the 28 t h of February 2018, 
the 7 t h of March 2018, and so forth through to March of 
2019. I have no reason to doubt that those summaries are 
reasonable summary.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 80 of 224 
 
But the point I want to put to you is, again, this has 
to be seen in context is it not, because this is commencing 
once the new President has taken office and it is not 
showing us what this committee the Police Committee were 
doing in the heat of the era in which these allegations were 
being made.  
And I want to put you, for example, just to illustrate 
the point, that there has been a lot of evidence before this 
Commission in relation to BOSASA.  In relation to BOSASA 
the evidence is that in 2010, or perhaps 2011, the SIU had 
10 
investigated these allegations, it was publicly made clear 
that these allegations have been reported, had been 
reported and given to the National Prosecuting Authority, 
referred for further investigation.  
Eight, nine, ten years later, we are not seeing 
precisely the sort of response that you are highlighting 
here as to what happened from February 2018 onwards, we 
see precisely the opposite, that although this report is in 
the public - not in the public domain, but although the 
members of Parliament are fully aware that the SIU 
20 
believes 
there 
is 
substance 
in 
these 
very 
serious 
allegations of extensive corruption. Nobody is saying what 
is happened to this prosecution, or if they are not with any 
diligence, or follow through, you want to comment on that 
at all? 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 81 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:   It is difficult to get into the head of 
something that happened in 2010 and try and make an 
intelligence response.  I cannot even tell you what I was 
doing in 2010, whether I had heard of this or not.  But I will 
go back to my response that perhaps we need to make 
better use of the Legacy Reports from Portfolio Committees 
to carry on.  
 
Because between 2010, you have an election in 
2014, I am not even sure whether the membership of the 
committee is still the same.  But what we do have been 
10 
posted is the administration, and that is why I went on 
earlier on to say perhaps, that is where we need to make 
the link so that as you have the new membership, the new 
committee Chair, there is orientation, and there is a 
discussion about the resuscitation of business.  
Because if you have a new committee, and nobody 
brings to their attention, that there by the way, there are 
issues that were hanging there they will continue and 
discover 
new 
things, 
and 
if 
the 
executive 
or 
the 
administrative heads are still the same, who says they 
20 
would be keen to reopen what they perhaps do not want to 
reopen.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   So we can only charge ourselves as 
Parliament to say, we need to be more alert to this, we 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 82 of 224 
 
need 
to 
pay 
more 
attention 
to 
the 
last 
reports 
of 
committees and the revival of committee work reports. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, but you know, I accept your point 
but your point illustrates the problem of all what happened, 
in fact, rather than what should have happened in theory, 
because the Legacy Report in 2009 raised this as a matter 
of extreme concern.  
The SIU Report is issued shortly into the period of 
the next Portfolio Committee when it issues its Legacy 
Report in 2014, not even mentioned but notwithstanding 
10 
that it remains reported on in the press and nothing 
happens. Now, I suppose this is really not a fair question 
to put to you because you are not directly involved in this.  
But the principle we can discuss and the principle is 
that I am sure you would accept that it is incumbent on 
responsible members of Parliament within their respective 
portfolios, when serious allegations of corruption have 
been made known to them to - and when it's been reported 
to them, but the SIU thinks there is merits to these 
allegations to satisfy itself by repeated questioning and 
20 
follow up, that these allegations have been appropriately 
disposed of, you would accept that principle? 
MS MODISE:   I will accept that principle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One would obviously not want to dictate 
to Parliament how we should deal with its internal matters, 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 83 of 224 
 
but it may well be that the House Chairperson responsible 
for Portfolio Committees should be, should make it his 
business or her business if the agenda changes. 
Make it his or her business to know the Legacy 
Reports of the various Portfolio Committees, particularly 
what was identified as needing further attention by the 
incoming 
committee. 
 
But 
that 
also, 
once 
the 
new 
committee has identified has looked at the Legacy Report 
and identified matters that they want to take forward, which 
came from the previous Parliament that maybe they should 
10 
share this information with him or her so there would be 
somebody who has a global picture of what is taking place.  
But that might just be something it may be that it's 
not 
necessary, 
but 
one 
would 
think 
somebody 
who 
coordinates some of these things, and maybe if something 
is later left out and not pursued that seems quite 
important, and ask questions to say but this is important, 
why are you not taking it further?  I do not know what you 
– do you think that might help? 
MS MODISE:   It, it will help, Chair we have been looking 
20 
at the capacity of Parliament and that seems to me it falls 
right there because if you cannot retain - not only that, but 
also the good practices because as you empower members, 
you must be able to pull out to the good examples and bad 
examples.  And so for me, it comes back in into how do you 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 84 of 224 
 
ensure that things do not fall between the cracks. 
So in that regard, I would not even say that, leave 
the blame, with the Chair of Committees, take it right up to 
us who are responsible.  Speaker do something about that, 
make sure that you track you know, we know where things 
are, and that is a commitment I can make, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, if I could now take you to 
page 16, please.  
MS MODISE:   One, six? 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   One, six.  This is when you - after 
having introduced the topic of what are the duties, what is 
oversight, what is accountability, you start dealing with the 
substance of your submission.  And you make the point in 
paragraph 32.  You say: 
“The 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Justice 
and 
Correctional Services raised its concern about the 
delay in establishing the terms of reference for the 
Commission.” 
That is this very Commission which for you are now we 
20 
testifying.  
MS MODISE:   H’m. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, I just want to pause and consider 
this, because in October of 2016, the Public Protector 
released her State of Capture Report.  There was some 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 85 of 224 
 
original - there was some initial controversy about whether 
it was going to be made public, there was threatened or 
actual litigation.  
But by November of 2016, as your supplementary 
submission correctly points out, it was in the hands of the 
Speaker of the National Assembly and if I am not mistaken, 
I think it may well even have been tabled before the 
National Assembly.  Is that correct so far? 
MS MODISE:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, the recommendation by the 
10 
Public 
Protector, 
that 
there 
should 
be 
a 
Judicial 
Commission of inquiry, whilst it has its advantages, and we 
are seeing many of the advantages now, it also could 
perhaps have been used as a pretext by some not to do 
what they should have done.  
 
So there was a view that was expressed by some 
that this question, all these allegations should simply be 
left from the time of the October 2016 Sate of Capture 
Report through the whole of 2017 into 2018, it is not 
Parliament 's business, that the Commission be appointed.  
20 
Now, from what I have been hearing, in your 
evidence this morning, you would not be of that school, 
you would be of the school that Parliament must do 
Parliament 's job and if Parliament is aware of allegations 
of relevance, they had the power and should exercise the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 86 of 224 
 
power to investigate, obviously, seeking not necessarily to 
duplicate in two forums work being done simultaneously in 
both. 
 
But 
the 
principle 
that 
the 
existence 
of 
the 
recommendation for judicial inquiry is not a good reason 
for Parliament not to do its own work. You agree with that 
principle? 
MS MODISE:   I agree that within the powers and 
responsibilities of Parliament, any matter could have been 
investigated. 
If 
the 
Judicial 
Commission 
was 
then 
established, then all the committees would have needed to 
10 
do is, is to hand over the work that they had done so that 
there is no duplication. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, and I do not think that anybody 
here takes any issue with it, but what you then say in 
paragraph 32 - and I am not saying it is wrong, you say: 
“The 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Justice 
and 
Correctional Services raised its concern about the 
delay in establishing the terms of reference for the 
Commission.” 
That that was one of the issues on which, in my request for 
20 
further information, I said when, you answered that in your 
supplementary submission, and we find the nub of the 
answer at page 412.  This is one of the additional 
documents that you furnished. 
MS MODISE:   I have it. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 87 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And it exactly bears out what you said 
but of course, as ever, timing is important, and we see that 
this is a report dated the 24 t h of January 2018.   
It is after the election of a new African National 
Congress President. This is a whole new political world we 
in, 
Parliament's 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Justice 
and 
Correctional Services today expressed its grave concerns 
about the delay in releasing the terms of reference with 
regard to the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture.  
Committee Chairperson, Dr Mathole Motshekga said 
10 
to the President must issue the terms of reference as a 
matter of urgency and it must be based on the remedial 
action of the Public Protectors Report on State Capture, 
this matter cannot be delayed any further.  
Now 
I 
do 
not 
think 
anybody 
would 
criticise 
Motshekga for saying that but my question to you is 
whether you think that the pending possibility of this 
Commission of inquiry actually served as an excuse that 
was latched on to by some by not doing what they should 
have done in Parliament, in relation to the issues, very 
20 
serious issues that emerged from the Public Protectors 
State of Capture Report? 
MS MODISE:   Chair, I am not sure how to answer this 
question.  I have to now creep into people's mind-sets and 
try and explain, why but remember Chair, that Parliament 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 88 of 224 
 
does not have the powers to establish the Judicial 
Commission.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   They can just make noise and urge the 
President to do that…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can put pressure. 
MS MODISE:   They can put pressure on the President to 
please hurry up and do this thing.  In the meantime, as I 
said earlier on, nothing would deter a committee to do the 
little bit that they can. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, and the only part of your answer I 
take issue with is the word little bit because those 
committees have a power of subpoena, they have a power 
to compel people to come and answer questions, and they 
have expertise in their own respective domains.  So in fact, 
it is a significant power that they have. 
MS MODISE:   They have big powers, I use to boast about 
those powers but the little bit I am talking about is that at 
that time, most of the information that is now in the public 
domain, and within the reach of Parliament was not there, 
20 
that most of the issues which we are now confronting - and 
sometimes we still get shocked. 
There 
was 
the 
hearing 
on 
the 
Intelligence 
Committee, and we said - and held onto our chairs, 
because there are things that the rest of committees would 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 89 of 224 
 
not know and therefore, the little I refer to is what I know, 
and what is before my committee, I must pursue.  So that 
each and every committee can then - and that is why Mr 
Frolick was right, in writing to those committees that were 
identifiable, as being affected by the State being captured, 
to say, hey hurry up and investigate. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   Because in that way, we thought, he thought 
we is, as Parliament that perhaps we would be able to get 
to understand exactly what has happened, what is the 
10 
extent of this thing.  Up to that time, we had never heard of 
a member of Parliament who had received any money 
relating to doing or not doing their job. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But what you had heard long before 
that time - this is what I explored with Mr Mantashe last 
week, as early as February of 2011 reports in the press, 
alleging undue influence by the Gupta family, not only over 
the President, but of the appointment of Cabinet Ministers, 
over the appointment of SOE Boards and Chairs.  
And Mr Mantashe’s response was well, we had no 
20 
evidence to confirm that but then in an NEC meeting, in 
that very year, a Minister says, well, I can confirm it, I was 
one of the people who was told by the Gupta’s and nothing 
happens.  
Now with the benefit of hindsight and this is 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 90 of 224 
 
obviously not a matter for your personal accountability we 
are looking at the system.  With the benefit of hindsight, 
would you accept that Parliament could and should have 
investigated a lot more vigorously, a lot earlier? 
MS MODISE:   Chairs got the same Parliament must 
investigate any matter related to their portfolio’s as 
portfolio’s.  It is difficult sometimes when you investigate 
everything that you read about in the newspapers because 
I have read stories about myself starting to – and only 
when I saw my name and I became aware oh, they talking 
10 
about me - information that, you know, things I am 
supposed to know or have done that I do not know.  
So when you get into that space, you realise that 
Parliament - and that is why when a member stands out up 
in the house and makes an allegation that is serious, that 
can affect the standing, the conduct of the member, we 
immediately say, substantiate so that we actually deal with 
facts.  
Now, if a member of the ANC sits in the NEC of the 
ANC and says yes the Gupta’s - how does Parliament 
20 
transport that into a Portfolio Committee? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, that was going to be my question 
to you, because either it can or it cannot, but I think the 
answer must be a can.  So if the allegation is that there is 
undue influence, affecting ultimately the control of State 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 91 of 224 
 
owned entities, then that seems at face value to fall within 
the remit of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises. 
And how can they deal with it?  They can summon that very 
Minister and I they can summon the persons whom he 
accuses, and they can examine whether there is any truth 
or not in it.  Do you agree with that? 
MS MODISE:   I have to agree but if they know…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess that is Mr Freund if they get to 
know what happened in the NEC 
ADV FREUND SC:   Oh, absolutely. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Absolutely, but what was alleged to 
have happened in the NEC was also reported in the press 
in that year, but I would not know if those press reports are 
true. But at least it gives you the basis to ask the people 
about the press reports that have been made.  Did you say 
that, if so, please tell us the details?  If somebody else 
denies it, come and tell us your story, and we investigate.  
That is really the problem, that for year after year, 
after year these allegations that I as a citizen had nothing 
20 
to do with Parliament or politics, I was fully aware of, it 
seems to me, Parliament turned a blind eye to it and just 
did not investigate.  Now, I do not know if you wish to 
comment on that? 
MS MODISE:   Chair, it is difficult to comment on this 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 92 of 224 
 
because the question I put is, how do you take a 
discussion 
which 
happens 
in 
a 
political 
party 
into 
Parliament? 
 
You 
– 
supposing 
they 
had 
done 
it 
Chairperson, would that committee particular committee 
not have been accused of taking factional issues of the 
ANC into Parliament, and therefore.  
So sometimes you need to put yourself into the 
political space and try and understand where were they 
coming from.  If the Minister made that statement. In a 
Portfolio Committee in the house, definitely we would have 
10 
had to say but this.  It is difficult with hindsight to say, but 
they were wrong here.   
Is it a matter they could have investigated, yes, 
they can investigate anything, anytime? Why did they not 
do it at that time, I really do not know. 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, I understand that you were not 
party to that, you were not in that committee, it was not a 
decision that you personally had to deal with but I am 
trying to explore the question of principle here, and the 
question of principle really, is this.  
20 
If there are allegations in the public domain, not 
only in the press – well they have been made in the press, 
but they are reporting matters, which if true, are a very 
considerable concern that I am sure you would agree those 
should be investigated.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 93 of 224 
 
So the question then becomes, well was there 
sufficient material in the public domain to justify an 
investigation?  And Mr Mantashe had told us last week that 
by 2013, the Integrity Committee of the African National 
Congress was urging the President to stand down in 
relation to these very sorts of issues. 
If it was known to them, surely, it was known to 
enough people in the ANC that if the President did not step 
down, if the President disputed these allegations, which 
was absolutely his right, there was a duty to inquire 
10 
through Parliament, I emphasise it, through Parliament, not 
merely through the structures of the ANC whether these 
allegations of State Capture are true.  
MS MODISE:   My think would be that the ANC knowing 
getting evidence and perhaps even proof should have dealt 
with their internal problem, should have acted rather than 
to say, we will sit back and see if Parliament can take this 
matter because that for me is not really shouldering what 
is your responsibility. 
If Mr Mantashe said that they knew as early as 
20 
2013, then they should have done something about it in 
their collective leadership. So that today, we do not 
hammer members of Parliament who do not sit in that NEC, 
who may not have had a first-hand what the Minister 
Mbalula had said at the time.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 94 of 224 
 
When - you will remember Chair, that there was a 
time when I was accused of having written a document and 
given it to Patricia de Lille, on the arms deal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not remember. 
MS MODISE:   It was not investigated by Parliament, it 
really wreaked havoc with my personal life, when the 
Mayor de Lille came out in the open and said, it is not that 
one but I have given my undertaking not to reveal the 
names of this people. There was no investigation, I asked 
for it. So I can understand that the frustration is something 
10 
is being said there and sometimes somebody is being 
wrongly accused there why are you not investigating?  At the 
end of it I was told no we understand you did not say it.  But 
the damaged out there in the street was something else and 
I had to wait until that man who had given the document 
whatever it is to Madelene died for Madelene to feel free to 
say in fact so and so had given me this document and it was 
years later. 
 
So sometimes not getting – and I could not get 
anything of substance that I could go to the police and say 
20 
investigate this other than to start a fight with my own party 
because the accusations were not coming from Parliament 
they were coming from the party. 
 
So sometimes you – you look at circumstances and 
you know that if the committee perhaps has even tried to – 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 95 of 224 
 
to probe quietly and they do not get substance they are 
going to be unable to run with this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – I think that you and Mr Freund might 
not be on the same page or it might look like that but maybe 
you are on the same page.  Let me ask one or two questions 
to see if we can clarify this. 
 
My understanding of your evidence includes that you 
have no problem with the proposition that members of 
Parliament obviously Chairs of Portfolio Committees and 
members 
of 
Portfolio 
Committees, 
different 
Portfolio 
10 
Committees ought to keep themselves informed of what is in 
the public domain in case part of what is – what is in the 
public domain relates to their work in the various committees 
and may well require them to do something in order to carry 
out their function. 
 
Am I correct so far? 
MS MODISE:  You are correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Another point that I think you may be 
making is that obviously you cannot expect members of 
Parliament 
and 
members 
of 
various 
committees 
to 
20 
investigate everything that they see in the media, is that 
correct so far? 
MS MODISE:  You are correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What I think you then say – suggest is that 
when members of various committees or members of 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 96 of 224 
 
Parliament see certain things or become aware of certain 
things that are in the media that fall within their Portfolio 
Committees they need to weigh them and if they are serious 
enough they need to take steps using their powers and the 
rules of Parliament and the mechanisms of Parliament to do 
what they need to do. 
 
Is that correct? 
MS MODISE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Therefore I would say that I would 
understand you to say the mere fact that Mr Mbalula may 
10 
have said what he said at an NEC meeting does not on its 
own prevent members of Parliament if they be – if they 
become aware of it from where you get and see whether they 
should do – take certain steps, is that correct? 
MS MODISE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So it just depends whether it has 
come to their attention and whether when they assess it they 
think it deserves further attention. 
MS MODISE:  It does Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MS MODISE:  Alternatively if they take what is unproven into 
a committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MODISE:  They are within their right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 97 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:  To approach any of the state agencies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MODISE:  That are responsible to – they could have 
approached the police to say look there is this thing we 
cannot handle it we do not have evidence can you look into 
this matter?  That would have been the way to go. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some action ja.  But also – but also my 
thinking is that there will be nothing wrong in a member of 
the Portfolio Committee or a member of Parliament in the 
National Assembly but a member of the Portfolio Committee 
10 
who has become aware of what was said in the NEC to 
actually put a question to Mr Mbalula who was a member of 
Parliament – was a Minister put a question intended to see 
whether he will tell the committee the same information that 
he told the NEC and if he tells the same information then you 
take it from there. 
MS MODISE:  I would agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MODISE:  Alternatively to even put such a question to 
the President himself. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes to the President himself ja. 
MS MODISE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja thank you.  I hope that has clarified Mr 
Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes thank you.  And – and Ms Modise I 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 98 of 224 
 
do not disagree with you but there have been situations in 
which would be the sensible course of conduct to ask for 
example the police to investigate.  But there are also 
situations in which the powers of the Portfolio Committee not 
limited to asking somebody else to investigate and they are 
not restrained in only calling before them the executive.  
They can call before them anybody can they not?  They can 
all before them for example the Gupta brothers. 
MS MODISE:  They can.  They can call for documents. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And it is a question of judgment as to 
10 
whether there is allegations or information available that 
make it responsible and appropriate to ask – to ask those 
questions.  It all depends on the prevailing circumstances.  
You agree? 
MS MODISE:  Not fully.  The Portfolio Committees are 
multiparty bodies.  Would a member of Party A without proof 
take that matter into the committee and investigate and 
ultimately find out that in fact there is nothing and if such a 
member especially if they are not senior enough in the party 
not risking alienating and that is precisely if you go back to 
20 
the submission – ag I –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Makwassi. 
MS MODISE:  Makwassi – centres around the inability of 
what is right for me to take a stand on and what might be 
interpreted as being not doing well by the party.   
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 99 of 224 
 
 
And so a party member of any party by the way will 
sometimes want to have at least substance before they open 
their mouth.  That is quite an 00:07:58.  And that is why we 
are saying in Parliament you need to increase capacity for 
this private member.  This member must be able to 
investigate properly, must be able to analyse and be able to 
say no, no, no I am sure there is a case here. 
 
And I am saying alternatively with all these powers 
that vest in the committee this member might actually decide 
ay (speaking in vernacular) I am taking it further.   
10 
 
Portfolio Committee do you have 00:08:31 they do 
not.  Okay in my capacity as a public representative I can 
approach the authorities, investigate this thing further 
because it makes her uneasy. 
 
So for me that would be that I am in no way wanting 
to suggest that a citizen, a public representatives fall under 
the constitution and to obey all law has the right to suppress 
information that I would not agree. 
 
But I – I want to look at how you transport things that 
happen out there into the committee. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see we are at twelve minutes past one. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Ja I am not quite done with this witness.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:  My suggestion is we take the lunch 
adjournment I will not be a great deal of time after that 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 100 of 224 
 
actually. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay let us take the lunch adjournment 
and we will resume at quarter past two.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Modise can I take 
you to paragraph 71 of your affidavit it is at page 25.   
MS MODISE:  I have got that page. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now what you deal with in that paragraph 
10 
and the paragraphs – next four paragraphs is the plenary 
and perhaps in this commission’s examination of oversight 
by Parliament you have overstressed Portfolio Committees 
and perhaps under stressed the plenary.   
So I would just like to explore a little bit about what 
you can tell us about the role of the plenary in respect of the 
issue of particular interest to this commission which is in 
respect of addressing allegations of state capture and 
allegations of corruption in the public sector.  
 And let me say this that you have through your office 
20 
kindly made available to the commission an enormous 
volume of 00:01:43 transcripts of various debates and I see 
no point in us trying to go through all of those. 
 
What I am really more interested in is as it were an 
overview with the benefit of your experience and wisdom 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 101 of 224 
 
about what role in fact was played to the extent that you 
have known this in plenary sessions of the National 
Assembly in relation to these allegations and what role in 
theory you think they should be played and how could that 
be made better? 
 
Now I understand those are three different and very 
big questions but let us just deal with your understanding of 
the extent to which as a matter of fact the plenary sessions 
of the National Assembly particularly shall we say in the Fifth 
Parliament which is the particular period of focus of this 
10 
commission.  What role did the plenary play in fact in 
relation to oversight and accountability regarding allegations 
of state capture and corruption? 
MS MODISE:  Again Chair I must make a preface I was in 
the 
NCOP 
so 
to 
talk 
about 
the 
beginning 
of 
the 
investigations in the NA I will give you second hand 
information.  
 
But in fact Chair it is not – for me it is good that we 
spend a lot of time on committees because that is actually 
where the bulk of the work gets done.  That because they 
20 
are smaller than the House there is better space for each 
and every member of the committee to express themselves 
to speak to whatever at committee level. 
 
Now plenary then gets reports from these committees 
after they have adopted them, they bring them to the House.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 102 of 224 
 
You have got to look at then plenary in this way when it 
deals to the business of committees.  
 
That forum that I referred to earlier the 00:04:11 
forum can sit sometimes and say this is what we want go and 
recommend to the Programming Committee what must go 
into the program which means these will be the matters that 
would see a debate unfolding on the floor of the House or 
these 
reports 
are 
fine 
they 
have 
been 
adopted 
by 
committees less – then they can go straight to ATC. 
 
So the business of the House is actually determined 
10 
there.  Put aside the budgets and the mini plenaries that we 
set up where different things will come in.  So committee 
reports can be brought to be discussed by the whole of the 
House.  Because the House that divides up its space all 
parties then participate even the parties that do not have the 
chance to sit in the Portfolio Committees.  So in a way for 
the very important matters all political parties then gets to 
participate there.   
But also you use plenaries’ questions – questions 
matters of public interest, motions with and without notice 
20 
and as I said earlier on you deal with issues that – that like 
adoption of 00:05:48 things that sometimes are of outside 
looking issues. 
Sometimes you use plenary to – to bring up issues 
which do not necessarily have space within committee work.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 103 of 224 
 
You will remember is it last year that the President asked us 
to convene a joint sitting.  So you would have a joint plenary 
of the two houses to discuss a specific issue of gender 
based violence and what we can do about this. 
 
But the plenaries also are interesting because you 
can also have sectoral Parliaments which happen on the 
floor of the House which means that those issues which do 
not necessarily have an executive member responsible or a 
Portfolio Committee that schedules that member it can be 
taken straight into the floor of the House. 
10 
 
And then of course you have got things like the 
difficult ones motions of no confidence.  They must go to the 
plenary.  You cannot have a sub-committee deciding what 
you can have is ensuring that the process leading to that 
plenary is okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now if I can just follow factually on that.  
My impression is that the Portfolio Committees follow 
essentially the Ministries.  One Minister, one Portfolio 
Committee or maybe – maybe sometimes they have more 
than one Minister but the point is this there does not seem to 
20 
me to a Portfolio Committee that has as its mandate 
oversight over the President.  Would that be correct 
factually? 
MS MODISE:  The – the President is responsible for all the 
posts.  He delegates some of those posts to the leader of 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 104 of 224 
 
government business.  So the President entertains those 
questions who directly he must respond to the questions to 
the President. 
 
But since he has delegated his powers to the 
Ministers of Cabinet when Portfolio Committees deal with 
those issues they actually deal with issues which are 
reported directly to the President and if the Minister fails 
then the President can face questions from the floor the 
House. 
 
And yes we do not have a specific committee that is 
10 
the Portfolio Committee on the Minister – on the President. 
ADV FREUND SC:  On the Presidency. 
MS MODISE:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now what I want to put to you for your 
comment is whether that is a lacuna that perhaps should – 
there should be consideration as to whether it is necessary 
and let me put it in this context.   
 
A lot of the state capture allegations and I underline 
the word allegations actually related ultimately to the 
Presidency and as it were I wonder whether those problems 
20 
do not fall through the cracks of the Portfolio Committees 
because if the question is, is the President captured or is the 
President subject to an inappropriate relationship or should 
we investigate that is there in fact a structure within 
Parliament whose task is to do that?   
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 105 of 224 
 
My impression is that there is not and my impression 
is that when you tell us about things like votes of no 
confidence questions to those Presidents – to the President 
in the National Assembly or in a plenary there there is a – 
there are – there are tools for oversight over the President. 
 
But I want to your – I would be interested in your 
comments as to whether just as we now have a Ministry in 
the Presidency whether there should not in fact be some 
structure 
within 
Parliament 
whose 
mandate 
includes 
oversight over the Presidency. 
10 
MS MODISE:  This question has been entertained over the 
years.  The problems with some provinces have a Portfolio 
Committee on the office of the Premier and on the office of 
the Speaker. 
 
The difficulty is that when you look at the office of 
the President and the office of the Premier they actually are 
coordinating the work of the whole executive. 
 
And the burden of the work of Portfolio Committees is 
to ensure that resolutions, laws, undertakings, the monies 
identified I used to do that which people say it that way. 
20 
 
Now President – what does the President do?  He 
signs off laws, he is delegated most of his responsibilities to 
cabinet Ministers, he whips even Premiers into place, 
Premiers are also having their legislatures which have 
question times on them so I am not sure if in actual fact it 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 106 of 224 
 
would serve any purpose and I know that some people when 
we over the years have tried to understand why did – would 
want to have a Portfolio Committee on the Presidency.  They 
would say well diplomat of truths that is the business of the 
Joint Standing Committee of 00:11:38. 
 
The crimes stats what you have got police, you have 
got correctional service, you have got justice so most of the 
work that the President does is actually already covered 
there. 
 
And – remember the President is strictly speaking not 
10 
a member of the House he is this coordinator who must have 
enough space to coordinate the three arms because he had 
the executive but in fact I would argue that he sees most of 
this heading of the executive responsibility to the leader of 
government business.  
And that is why when we have issues at the 
legislature we go to leader of government business because 
he has to make sure that these Ministers perform their day to 
day, that the coordination between themselves and ourselves 
is in place. 
20 
 
So yes it is something that has been brought to our 
attention.  I am not sure that it is – it is – it will really do – 
the – what will it do otherwise pass the budget for the 
Presidency that is done by the President himself but any 
committee especially the finance committees actually look at 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 107 of 224 
 
– at that budget with the legislature, with us it is because at 
some point in an endeavour to come out as an arm of state 
working with the provinces we came out with the financial 
management of Parliament and the Provincial Legislature.  
And in that legis – in that legislation we then created a 
committee which would then – because we also created this 
thing of having the speakerage and the Chairpersonship as 
the executive authority. 
 
So because you are the executive authority you have 
got that committee that – that looks into that.  I am not sure 
10 
it is the head of state – the head of the three arms the 
Portfolio Committee, it would do what – if it calls in the Chief 
Justice what – what reach do they have?  Because if you are 
going to form this thing for the President it means that this 
committee must also be able to reach the immediate 
structures that he is overseeing. 
 
So I – I am not sure. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well … 
MS MODISE:  But if Parliament at – one day wakes up and 
says ja now we want this committee we would have to follow. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Obviously.  But can I just take you just to 
facilitate this debate to page 38.   
MS MODISE:  Page 38.   
ADV FREUND SC:  You remember those are the provisions it 
is the summary of the provisions of the Constitution of 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 108 of 224 
 
Relevance.  I want to take you to Section 55.2 in particular. 
MS MODISE:  (Inaudible). 
ADV FREUND SC:  So the constitution says: 
“That the National Assembly must provide 
mechanisms to ensure that all executive 
organs of state in the National sphere of 
government are accountable to it and to 
maintain 
oversight 
over 
the 
exercise 
of 
National Executive Authority.” 
 
Now the President is the head of the National 
10 
Executive Authority and what you are really saying to me is 
that there is quite deliberately no mechanism whose focus is 
to 
maintain 
oversight 
over 
the 
head 
of 
the 
National 
Executive. 
 
Now I want to put to you that whilst it is true that a 
President delegates to Ministers responsibilities for all sorts 
of spheres there must be as the facts of the old state 
capture story illustrate instances where what is really 
required is oversight over the head of the National Executive 
and I just ask you whether you want to reconsider it or 
20 
whether you stand by what you have just said that you think 
there is really no – there is no purpose served by a Portfolio 
Committee whose primary business is to consider oversight 
over the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe before you respond I could add 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 109 of 224 
 
this so you can deal with all of them.  It may well be that you 
might 
not 
need 
a 
stand-alone 
Portfolio 
Committee 
responsible for the Presidency.  It may well be that the 
responsibility would be given to one of the existing Portfolio 
Committees so that to the extent that you may have concern 
to say but they will not have much work to do, what will they 
be doing most of the time if you give it to – give the 
responsibility to one of the existing committees then that 
committee has got its normal job and then you just add this.  
And it may well be that apart from the issue of the budget 
10 
there might not be lots of times when they have got to do 
something about the Presidency but if and when the need 
arises everyone – everyone knows which committee has the 
responsibility to take up those issues.  So I just put that as 
maybe something that you might think about as you respond. 
MS MODISE:  Chair may I just say… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I just say also maybe just something 
to look at given what you said earlier on that Portfolio 
Committees are – are – that is where the real work gets 
done.  You know.  So it may well be that a President comes 
20 
just answers questions in the National Assembly maybe is – 
maybe would not be as effective as how issues would be 
dealt with by – at the Portfolio Committees I am not sure oh 
but I thought you could just address Mr Freund’s question 
together with all of those subsidiary questions. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 110 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:  Chair with respect Chair Mr Freund seems to 
suggest that I am throwing it out – I am dismissing.  I am not 
dismissing. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja, no, no you are not dismissing any of 
that. 
MS MODISE:  I am dismissing it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you just have reservations. 
MS MODISE:  But I am saying that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not sure. 
MS MODISE:  We – I am not sure – I am not sure whether 
10 
this Portfolio Committee on the Presidency has worked 
anyway and I am not saying if it has worked anywhere we 
cannot go and look at it. 
 
All I am saying is that the work of the President is 
divided into this, this, this and this which – so I would look at 
Chair making sure that you actually enable Parliament in its 
structures without multiplying because the more you multiply 
the Portfolio Committees the more you disadvantage those 
small parties that have wanted because they cannot sit in all 
the parties on all these Portfolio Committees and therefore 
20 
the more you disadvantage the people who are behind this 
one seat or two seats.   
So when you create structures in Parliament you 
must 
also 
be 
looking 
at 
to 
what 
purpose 
– 
how 
representative are going to be the views here.  Do you allow 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 111 of 224 
 
the House when – because when you bring matters to the 
House then you are forced to give every party speaking 
space.  
And of course the – the other thing might be that yes 
in Parliament any member of Parliament can go into any 
Portfolio Committee and that is bad.  The only qualification 
would be that they would not vote if the vote is taken 
because it would only be the registered members.   
So you could look at that.  But I would say that it 
would – it would – it would seem to me that because we think 
10 
we felt pain at some point we therefore must create 
structures because the pain that we have felt we think we 
will cure with structures. 
 
I think what we need to do is to create consciousness 
within the general society and I think we should be speaking 
as all parties that the people that we send to Parliament 
honestly are honourable members. 
 
00:21;09 if I believe that the House I lead is filled 
with honourable members then I know that whatever it is that 
is wrong, that is not in accordance with the law with ethical 
20 
behaviour they will stand up to fight against whether this is 
their party member or not their party member. 
 
And I always say when you accept to be called an 
honourable member you must not allow anybody else to 
correct your behaviour.  You must be able to be that person 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 112 of 224 
 
that the public sees says I – whether I voted for her party or 
not that is my leader.   
 
And if we can get to where we can get honour, 
allegiance we will then see that in fact issues of corruption 
will be dismissed as they start.  Might not see the day 
because who enables corruption?  I think the politician 
maybe part of it they do it yes but who signs off?  Why are 
the people who are accounting officers agreeing to do that 
which in anybody worth its soul says to its members you will 
not do anything illegal. 
10 
 
So I think we – we – I am not throwing it out Chair 
but I am saying let us look at – at what – let us address our 
societal issues.  We do have corruption.  We used to be very 
proud that we were the least corrupt but we have now been 
exposed to possibilities of putting our hands in the cookie. 
Let us deal with this.  Let us sharpen the – the police.  The 
courts must do their work.  Let people who do wrong face the 
might of justice so that even when I lead a structure I am not 
tempted to take a cookie.   
 
But as I said Chair if tomorrow there is consensus 
20 
that we set up a committee we understand in SA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I can just say I do not know whether 
you share this view but I would imagine that just as there 
would be Ministers above whom there would be concerns 
that they are not really doing their job properly in terms of 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 113 of 224 
 
various things which are in the public interests you could 
have a situation where you have a President who does 
nothing about Ministers who – who are not doing their job 
and to the detriment of the public and one would imagine 
that for that kind of situation it would be good that in the 
forum which is – which represents the people to be able to 
say – to say Mr President let us deal with this.  Do you see 
that Ministers – we as Parliament do our part?   
He expects the Ministers to do their part but the 
people are complaining.  They are not getting – you know 
10 
services and so on and so on but Ministers seem to just get 
away with things you know and – and basically have that 
interaction which in respect of a Minister would be done by a 
Portfolio Committee. 
 
So it – it may well be that it is something to look at.  I 
understand you that you are saying look you not throwing it 
out you saying that you might have reservations but you 
know if more people think it is something worthwhile looking 
at let that be a discussion and let us see where that 
discussion takes us.   
20 
 
But I – it may well be I do not know whether if you do 
not give that responsibility to a Portfolio Committee – an 
existing Portfolio Committee or a new Portfolio Committee 
whether there is a way of handling it at National Assembly 
level. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 114 of 224 
 
 
Now I do know obviously that the President does get 
called from time to time to come and answer questions in 
Parliament and that is part of accounting and so on and so 
on and the National Assembly can be asked about whatever 
in terms of government.   
But I do not know to what extent it is possible in that 
kind of situation to be focussed you know.  The kind of focus 
that you can get in a committee or maybe move be a 
question of making more time and then – but with a specific 
focus that there could be more discussion.   
10 
Because I get the impression sometimes when I 
watch the – when the President answers questions that there 
seems to very little room for follow ups – for follow ups and 
so on. But I do not know and I am speaking about something 
that I know little about you – you know better.   
But I think that what would be important is that there 
should be room for a situation where you have a President 
who is allowing things to just go on when they are going in 
the wrong direction.  Ministers are not doing their work and 
there is no accountability and so on.  You ought to be able to 
20 
say – Parliament ought to be able to say we elected because 
they are elected by Parliament and now let us deal with this. 
 
Now of course Parliament does that normally with but 
now without a Portfolio Committee because they call upon 
the President to deal with certain question, answer questions 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 115 of 224 
 
and put questions but I just do not know if the environment 
in which it is done allows for focus. 
 
But maybe it does but I just mention that I – if you 
want to say something you can but I understand your 
position if you say I have said all I wish to say, I will accept 
that. 
MS MODISE:  No Chair I am laughing because I – I know of 
a particular President who would have almost all the parties 
in the House reflecting on him and – and if it was – the 
House I think carries a harsher sanction because it is bigger 
10 
when it is sitting. 
 
It has more voices.  It accommodates the leaders of 
parties who do not necessarily sit in all this.  So when there 
are issues of the Presidency not only when it is a motion of 
no confidence.   
When they raise issues sometimes on the Presidency 
the attacks can be very, very, very severe and therefore in 
my own thinking you would have to think very hard of going 
for a fewer or else if there is the subject that needs to reflect 
on the Presidency that you do not actually find a mechanism 
20 
other than that of a motion of no confidence because so far 
the debates and the 00:29:36 comes during the question 
time to the Presidency – they reflect on the performance, 
they give ultimatums there as parties but also motions of no 
confidence is when they say I – we have been talking we are 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 116 of 224 
 
tired. 
 
So I am saying let us …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MODISE:  Maybe one needs to apply, look at… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MODISE:  What other people are doing and if it is doable 
I do not think Parliament would say no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  That is fine. 
 ADV FREUND SC:   ...[Indistinct] with the evidence that 
we have heard from Mr Mantashe in just a couple of days 
10 
ago.  His position, as I understood it, was under no 
circumstances would it ever be tolerable for the majority 
party to support a vote of no confidence introduced by an 
opposition party.  Now if that is the view being expressed 
by a senior leadership when he was the Secretary General.   
 
I understood that was the advice he gave to the 
Parliamentary caucus.  It seems to suggests that a vote of 
no confidence is not likely to be a productive problem 
solving exercise.  And so one is left wondering, well, what 
would be a productive exercise given, of course, the 
20 
partisan nature of our politics as well.   
 
How do we deal with the problems or alleged 
problems when those problems are located right in the 
heart of our state, the Chief of the Executive?   
MS MODISE:   Chair, I think you capacitate.  You create a 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 117 of 224 
 
system which enables a member of Parliament to be able 
to express themselves without fear on issues that can be 
your 
own 
personal 
believe 
in 
the 
believe 
of 
their 
constituency because if you do that, then sanctuary is not 
just allowed to come from the opposition benches. 
 
Then all of us know that it does not matter if you 
do something wrong, it does not matter what colours you 
wear, we will be on top of you.  And that is why I earlier on 
said let honourable members be honourable members and 
that honourable members not feel scared to express 
10 
themselves because the power of the MP lies in the 
constituency.  That our electoral system is party based still 
forces us to rely on the majority.   
 
Now as if tomorrow we go back to Parliament 
and say we are going to have a joint committee on the 
presidency.  The rules of Parliament is going to – are going 
to force us to look at the strength of the parties and then 
allocate membership on that.  As things stand now, the 
ANC would be in the majority in that party.  Had you solve 
anything?  No.   
20 
 
But if you empower the individual member to be 
able to stand up, actually you do not.  You need only one 
member in the South African system to propose a motion of 
no confidence in the Head of State as long as it is 
substantiated.  In other parliaments I know of, if you 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 118 of 224 
 
cannot have the numbers to take the decision, they do not 
even look at the motion you are putting. 
 
So in many ways, even though we do look weak, 
South Africa is very forward but as I say, it is something 
that we will look at but for me the first choice would be 
produce members who can stand their ground. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is...  Well, Mr Mantashe is coming 
this evening.  I think we will still revisit that subject with 
him.  I certainly would like to revisit it because I am not 
sure and you might not be able to say anything about this, 
10 
it might be Mr Mantashe.   
 
I am not sure of the constitutionality of an 
approach that says even though the Constitution does 
provide for members of Parliament to vote, whether they 
support or not support your motion of no confidence in the 
President, members of the majority party shall never vote 
in support of such a motion no matter what.   
 
I mean, I – if you have a president that you as a 
member of the majority party – if you have a motion of no 
confidence in front of you and the president is from your 
20 
party that is alright.  And it is quite clear to you that if this 
president is not removed this country is going down and 
your 
party 
says 
you 
dare. 
 
I 
am 
not 
sure 
if 
the 
constitutionality of that approach. 
 
But also the – as I understand it the Oath of 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 119 of 224 
 
Office that members of Parliament take, you as a member 
of Parliament are required to be faithful to the republic and 
that seems to me to suggest that if there are conflicting 
interest – as long as you are now performing your functions 
as a member of Parliament you must be faithful to the 
public.   
 
Now if you know that I am not – if I say do not 
support this motion, I am not going to be faithful to the 
republic, what are you suppose to do?  But that it is 
something that you might not wish to say anything about 
10 
that but I am sure ...[intervenes]  
MS MODISE:   It is something you do not level.  I must 
keep my mouth shut. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MS MODISE:   [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But these things, we need to be frank 
about them because we are not going to identify the right 
solutions to the challenges that we are seeking to address 
if we are not honest and frank about what are the problems 
that have contributed to putting us where we are. 
20 
 
But when I say that I am not saying that the 
solutions are simple.  I am not saying the problems are 
simple.  Indeed.  Some of them are complexed and so on 
and so but it is important that we are frank about what the 
challenges are and take it from there.  Okay. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 120 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:   I think when you lead, there comes a time 
when you need to solve it one way and make the decision 
of whether you actually think you are still or whatever. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   Make the decision the best interest. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS MODISE:   And for me, leadership, if you cannot self-
introspect you are in trouble.  And sometimes there comes 
a time when you must be whether you are the president or 
not and if your own people say:  Look, we think it is time.  
10 
That you should not, actually, wish people to even start 
pushing him.  But – I do not know.  Mr Mantashe is the 
Chairperson of the ANC.  I do not know that – I think he 
must ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MODISE:   He must be able to push this point and 
convince the Commission that he is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MODISE:   Chair, it might interest you that Covid has 
led to a new improvement in our systems.  Of course, 
20 
members when they vote they can vote whichever way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   With the virtual platform we have had to not 
only 
take 
a 
chance 
that 
they 
will 
vote. 
 
That 
we 
deliberately after the party voters come in called out for 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 121 of 224 
 
members who wish to vote against their party vote to come 
through.   
 
And therefore from the point where we are it is 
another leap forward which we do not know how far it will 
go into the future but as we take vote we allow for – we do 
deliberately ask members:  Members, your vote has come 
in as a party.  Do you wish to vote against what your chief 
whip says is your vote?  Then it is up to the members. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would guess that in a way it is a good – 
it might be a good thing.  It is just always going to depend 
10 
on what the party is saying because on the one hand 
wishes members of Parliament to stand their ground and 
what they believe is right.   
 
And I accept that in regard to certain matters, 
you know, in all the policy matters they might have to bear 
in mind what the party policy says but there are certain 
matters and corruption is maybe one of them and you know 
there are other things.   
 
Somebody concerned to say:  Well, the Speaker 
say – is asking whether I wish to vote against my party.  
20 
Well, what will the Speaker do when tomorrow I am told 
...[intervenes]  
MS MODISE:   To go. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] I must go.  [laughs]  The 
Speaker will not be able to protect me, you know.  So.  But 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 122 of 224 
 
it may be that it is an attempt to try and move forward and 
then one can take it from there to say:  Okay still there are 
certain challenges and let us see.  Okay.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I want to try and wrap up as 
quickly as I can.  I have got one small issue and one big 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The small issue is study groups.  You 
deal with study groups in your submission and if I 
understand it correctly, you expressed the view that there 
10 
is nothing wrong for study groups inviting whoever they 
like which might include the minister, often would include 
the minister, might include director generals and other 
senior officials.   
 
And you say that function must be distinguished 
from the function performed by the Portfolio Committee or 
its meeting as the Portfolio Committee exercising oversight 
over the Executive.   
 
Now I want to put to you my difficulty with that.  
It sounds fine in theory but the evidence seems to suggest 
20 
from what we have heard in this Commission that routinely 
study 
groups 
meetings 
immediately 
precede 
Portfolio 
Committee meetings.  That in the study group meetings 
and that is not only the, in this case, the ANC caucus for 
that study group but also the very persons over whom 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 123 of 224 
 
oversight is to be exercised be it primarily the minister and 
subsidiary the minister ’s senior officials.   
 
They are all from the same party, they take a 
decision in caucus and they go into the oversight – into the 
Portfolio Committee having decided in the study group 
what position to adopt.  Now if that is factually correct then 
does it not – so it is quite problematic this practise of 
study groups including ministers, DG’s and other ruling 
party deployees as if this is innocuous and does it not 
subvert the proper exercise of oversight? 
10 
MS MODISE:   Chairperson, it does not.  There is not a 
political party in any part of the world that does not have a 
study group on any issue, on any portfolios.  When you 
look at the opposition parties in South Africa – look at the 
UK – you – a system they called shadow ministers, who 
shadow minister within his and her party, has a group of 
people, whether they are members or members of his or 
her party, who are the go-to, who research and try to 
create expertise around particular issues.  That is what a 
study group is.   
20 
 
And therefore in themselves there is nothing 
wrong with any study group existing.  It would be wrong to 
leave this Commission with the impression that DG’s are 
members of study groups.  That is wrong.  It would also be 
funny that a study group, say on education cannot openly 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 124 of 224 
 
invite the DG of Education and say we are formulating a 
position on this but we need you to give us information.   
 
It would also not be right to say that any political 
party cannot write to the department say please explain 
this thing and give us information on this one.  If they are 
not doing that, they are doing themselves a disservice.  
You will remember the former Public Protector beating to a 
pulp by people who really should not have Madonsela 
because she was invited to address a gathering of the 
Democratic Alliance.   
10 
 
Her capacity as Public Protector will give her a 
right, 
a 
constitutional 
right, 
because 
she 
cannot 
be 
expected to go to one party and not to the other.  And that 
is the point we are trying to make.  The same thing with 
Mjawa(?).  If the study group on the Financial Management 
of Parliament calls her, she can go.   
 
If the DA has a similar study group, she cannot 
turn and come to me and say I am not going to go because 
the DA is calling.  When the Chief Whip Forum which is 
made up of the chief whips of all parties, ...[indistinct]  
20 
they go.   
 
So in that way you demystify this thing of here it 
is only the majority party.  It would be absolutely wrong.  I 
will say that caucus is a different thing also because 
caucus is the wider group of a political party.  They discuss 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 125 of 224 
 
the party line.  But also, let us go back to the elections.  
All 
parties 
come 
out 
with 
their 
manifestos 
and 
the 
manifesto that gets a popular vote becomes the majority. 
 
Now we were saying as presiding officers at the 
beginning of this – to the chairpersons, it is important for 
you to have had sight and to understand all the parties that 
are here in the National Assembly what they are saying on 
each and every party because in that way you can 
understand when you chair that all political parties who 
want to say to their electorate we have not forgotten the 
10 
manifesto that sent us here. 
 
And therefore sometimes you allow that and that 
is why I say it quite openly, in Parliament there can never 
be a right or wrong question.  Members – it does not matter 
how simple the question might be, they are owed space to 
express themselves.  Information must flow.   
 
No member, for instance of this administration of 
Parliament can be called to a caucus and say I am not 
going, I am only going to the ANC.  I will find a problem 
with that.  And I think that if Statistician General is another 
20 
example, just invited by all the caucuses.  If he gets 
invited into a study group it would be wrong for the Stats 
General to say I am not going ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   But ...[intervenes]  
MS MODISE:   Because they are not party political 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 126 of 224 
 
animals. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
MS MODISE:   So you become a DG, it does not matter 
what or how you vote privately then, there you must do, 
you must respect all the voices.  That is where I come from 
Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I understand completely the point 
of view that says party structure, whether it is – we are 
focussing for the moment on study groups that specialise 
on portfolio basis, it is entirely proper for them to educate 
10 
and inform themselves and try to understand what is going 
on and to ask people who could help them to understand 
what is going on.  I cannot see any difficult with that. 
 
The difficulty I want to put to you is when that 
same meeting and in particular when there is a scheduled 
meeting of the Portfolio Committee to follow the study 
group meeting, the purpose of which is to decide how to 
exercise oversight over that minister and that minister is 
part of that caucus that is making that decision.   
 
Now I do not know whether that is factually right 
20 
or wrong but that happens.  We have been told it happens.  
But if it does happen, do you think there is something 
wrong in principle with that or do you think that is fine? 
MS MODISE:   It depends what is on the agenda of that 
study group.  And Chair, when we went to Parliament in 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 127 of 224 
 
1994 we knew nothing about the navy(?).  I think Ronnie 
Kasrils was the Deputy Minister.  To understand, we would 
invite him, not to lobby him or not to – to say we need this.  
What is your understanding?  How is this thing structured.   
 
We invited generals.  I criss-crossed this Africa 
with some of the former South African generals because we 
did not know and we became South Africans and that is 
why we could..  So sometimes these interactions they 
create bridges between us.  But if the study group is called 
to say:  Here, Minister.  I am here.  This is the question we 
10 
are going to ask you.  We have prepared for it.  That would 
be, obviously, out of order.  That would actually be 
defeating the oversight purpose.  So on that one I would 
say... 
 
But if you call in, for instance a study group on 
health because Zweli Mkhize says there is a debate out 
there.  Explain to us why you want to choose that and you 
are not choosing that.  He can go and give exactly the 
same information to any other study group.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Ja, I understand ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be correct to summarise your 
response in this way in regard to this question that you are 
saying in principle there is nothing wrong with different 
people attending a study group depending on what the 
issues are to be looked at but you would say nothing 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 128 of 224 
 
should be done or decided there which means that a 
member of Portfolio Committee who was in that meeting 
cannot do his or her job in the Portfolio Committee properly 
the way she or he is expected to do?  Would that be a fair 
summary of what your position is? 
MS MODISE:   Chair, it would be a fair summary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MODISE:   Remember that Mr Mantashe’s party also 
has what we call a party democratic processes where you 
are allowed 40-days(?) and that is exactly what happens in 
10 
the study group where different angles from a party, a 
direction and a position on a particular issue. 
 
Now I am saying that it would be wrong if that 
decision of these MP’s is then pushed and directed by the 
same Executive Authority that sits – that comes to that.  If 
the intention of inviting is to get advice and understanding 
there is nothing wrong.   
 
So for me it is just what drives the agenda of 
this caucus and this thing because whatever it is, South 
Africans 
must 
always 
work 
towards 
building 
and 
20 
progressing together.  So Parliament cannot lend itself to 
motivations and things that really do not matter to the 
electorate.  The electorate... water, safe houses, transport 
and so on.  
 
So if they call the executives or the DG’s to say 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 129 of 224 
 
explain.  I have no issues.  If it is ...[indistinct] and this the 
direction, then of course, there would be something very 
wrong then.  So what we do need to say is all around the 
world there study groups, there are caucuses.  Maybe we 
should interrogate what happens in there.   
 
Can you outlaw them?  You cannot outlaw them 
because if you say in Parliament you will not, you will not.  
In the first – in speaker – previous time, we scheduled the 
days for study groups.  Mondays, we knew that all parties 
would have.  Right now we schedule Thursdays, it is party 
10 
caucuses.   
 
All the parties go into caucuses.  They develop 
and they sharpen their debates there and whatever and 
their strategies.  So I think what would not be on is if it is 
to go and scheme because there is no better word I can 
use. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I ...[intervenes]  
MS MODISE:   Because if you are going to go and scheme, 
then you defeat the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The purpose. 
20 
MS MODISE:   But also remember, Chair.  Across – there is 
a lot of lobbying in Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS MODISE:   There is nothing this party standing there.  
Parties talk amongst one another.  This is my position.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 130 of 224 
 
What do you think?  They [speaking vernacular]  So you – 
when you get into that, you need to be careful that you do 
not kill that because as simple as it seems, we have built 
friendships, we have been able to integrate communities 
because we can talk.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I was going to ask you to say in 
English 
what 
[speaking 
vernacular] 
means 
but 
you 
...[intervenes]  
MS MODISE:   Yes.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think when you said they should not 
10 
scheme, I think you effectively translated. 
MS MODISE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It...  Ja, okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Can I turn to one last one point which 
has really got two sides to it?  The one is to summarise 
your own view of the role of the Speaker when it comes to 
the question we are talking about which is the question of 
Parliament having a duty to ensure that there is proper 
oversight and accountability of the Executive  What is the 
role of the Speaker?   
20 
 
And linked to that, the second question is.  Do 
you agree with the view that some express that it is 
problematic for the Speaker not to been non-partisan?  Or 
put it this way.  For the Speaker to be an active 
participating member in the majority party?  Does that 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 131 of 224 
 
actually conflict at all with the proper execution of the role 
of the Speaker? 
MS MODISE:   Chair, I am a member of the majority party.  
That has never deterred me from the time I was a 
Provincial Speaker to take a decision which I think is the 
proper one.  If it means sometimes I get into trouble with 
my party for saying what I believe at a particular moment is 
a right decision for The House Honourable, then so be it. 
 
But also, studies have not shown us that being a 
member of the party and being a speaker automatically 
10 
makes you biased towards.  I do attend some caucuses of 
my party.  When I am presiding – I do not want to speak for 
other presiding officers – I am very clear that each member 
is given exactly the same beating as the next one and the 
same rights as the next one because when I was sworn in, 
I undertook to try and be impartial. 
 
And it is important for a presiding officer not to 
be seen to be biased because if you are seen to be biased 
then you lose respect of your house, you will lose the 
constituencies out there.  So it is important for us to as 
20 
much as possible, and we fail sometimes because we are 
just human, but it is important, Chair, for us to apply the 
rules very blindly. 
 
It is important for us not to favour the Executive 
over the non-executive members, nor should we suppress 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 132 of 224 
 
the Executive in favour of those who are not known.  
Personally, the people who I think I should protect more 
are not the Executive.  It is the person in the street.  That 
one who cannot talk here.   
 
This Executive of Parliament can tell you I have 
been at their back since 20114, forcing them to even take 
up – what do you call it – Pro bono work to help 
communities because I was saying, when communities 
approach us, sometimes it is because they do not know 
where to go. 
10 
 
So sitting there in the air-conditioned offices in 
Parliament when you have done all your work and doodling, 
it does not work for me.  If you can go out in the 
community and go and help, go and help so that honestly 
we can build a country we can be proud of.   
 
So, for me, impartiality is not difficult, at the height 
of violence here, I was talking to the Inkatha Freedom 
Party women, we did our thing and we got to where we are 
today because I have always been able to struggle but not 
lose what I believe in inside myself and I believe that 
20 
South Africa can be better if we talk, if we listen to one 
another and being the Speaker is just that, to allow people 
to talk.  If it is tough, you mediate. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Just on a point of fact, is it the 
practice for the Speaker of the National Assembly, when a 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 133 of 224 
 
division is called, to vote? 
MS MODISE:   Nothing precludes the Speaker of the 
National Assembly to vote.  It is also practice that 
opposition parties do not vote at all for the budget.  It is 
also practice that if you do not get a certain number of 
votes that budget will not go.  So when a Speaker 
sometimes votes it is because we are not focusing on the 
[indistinct] on the floor, you are focusing on the need for 
this budget to go and do good somewhere there and that is 
why when you are a Speaker you also want to fight 
10 
corruption because it disturbs this train, this route where 
the money should go.  So, for me, I have voted if I am not 
on the chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If you are not on the chair? 
MS MODISE:   If I am not on the – when I am on the chair I 
do not vote. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And would that be the practice, so far 
as you know, the tradition of the South African legislature? 
MS MODISE:   The rules would allow, Chair for the 
Speaker – sometimes you have the casting vote and we 
20 
read the exercise that because you allow the members of 
the house to decide on the matter.  I do not remember ever 
doing the casting vote but I do know that all of us will vote 
for the budgets to go because people are waiting for it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, thank you, I have no further 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 134 of 224 
 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the one thing I would like to ask 
you is whether having regard to the submissions and 
whatever else, whether you are able to just summarise and 
give me maybe three, maybe four, maybe five – maybe five 
is too much, give me some things that you say if you look 
at 
how 
parliament 
has 
been 
handling 
the 
issue 
of 
oversight, holding the executives accountable in the past - 
and of course you have the advantage that you have been 
in the NCOP, you are in the National Assembly now – here 
10 
are the things that you think may have contributed 
significantly in certain things not being done the way they 
should have been done in terms of oversight and holding 
the executives accountable and going forward, if these 
things could be fixed there is a good chance that if the 
same things that happened were to happen again they 
would find parliament in a better position, make sure that 
the damage has been done to the country does not repeat 
itself and in the process maybe say if parliament would get 
this, that and that or if this and that and that can be 
20 
recommended, I think it would go a long way.  If you are 
able to, just in summary.   
 
Even if – you can draw your experience in other 
jurisdictions if you want to say well, Commission must 
consider this, consider that and so on. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 135 of 224 
 
MS MODISE:   Chair, if I could, I would really get 
resources to enable a member of parliament to really 
understanding the portfolios they are overseeing.  In other 
words, if it means because of our history, in other 
countries they do not have the disadvantage of education 
that we have.   
So with us we have a responsibility to enable this 
elected person to do the job.  So if I could, I would 
increase capacity around the member, enable this member 
to have at their fingertips the things that would enable 
10 
them to understand and to apply their mind.   
 
I would actually in that process try to make sure 
that the legislative arms actually gets its fair deal.  We are 
unable to do this because we oversee and it is not 
argument that we want parliament to be given the same 
budget, for instance, as that of a particular department but 
everywhere else, except for a few countries, the process of 
parliament getting its budget is very different from here.  
They treat us like a sub-department and that has bearings 
because you cannot plan.  Then I would say that if you 
20 
could ensure that all political parties in South Africa try to 
retain as much as possible members when election time 
comes because what parliament does is that every five 
years you have to bring up at least 60% of these people to 
just an understanding and that is why the first two, three 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 136 of 224 
 
years are difficult. 
 
Then I would look at what system brings us to 
parliament and that is now water under the bridge because 
we are now looking at an electoral Act which we do not 
know how it is going to – it is going to give us more 
complications actually because the current one, with all its 
weaknesses has enabled us to bring a sensible quota of 
women into parliament and to try and even out the gender 
things.  If we go any other way we might end up actually 
losing the critical mass that we had built on public 
10 
representatives.   
So it is a mixed bag.  What do we do to ensure that 
you 
actually 
retain 
skills 
in 
parliament 
both 
in 
the 
administration and amongst the members themselves?  We 
are doing very well right now as the South African 
Development Parliamentary Forum, we are [indistinct] 
together but do my members carry the authority to take 
that which we have agreed to at a SADC level into their 
constituency without fearing that they will be accused of 
harassing or something.  So you do need to build up the 
20 
member. 
So, 
for 
me, 
any 
Speaker 
must 
worry 
about 
maintaining this person, growing this person so that even if 
this person does not come back, this person in the five, 
ten, fifteen they have been in parliament are employable 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 137 of 224 
 
somewhere and this usually happens with the black – the 
African members because they come in, in a popular 
electoral vote, they sit there, they go back, it goes bad.   
So I do not know, Chair, I would go that route.  I 
would looked at – we did some interesting this in the ‘90’s, 
for instance we looked at something like when the defence 
force is deployed, it was parliament that insisted that you 
will report [indistinct].  When we looked at the register of 
arms, it was parliament that created the guideline, it was 
not the executive. 
10 
So 
when 
you 
have 
retained 
enough 
of 
your 
members and they are confident enough they will be able 
to carry their own and they will be able to hold the 
executive to account but we do want to say that as matters 
are, it is always a matter of balancing resources.  What 
can parliament afford, what can parliament afford and 
therefore sometimes when things fall between the cracks it 
is because your resources do not cover what you need and 
you are too ashamed, as the people’s representative, to be 
fighting too much because you understand that we need to 
20 
build clinics.  You understand that there is that need there.  
But I think there must come a time where there is a real 
serious discussion on these issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, thank you.  In terms of capacity, 
there are thinking about, among other things, obviously 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 138 of 224 
 
financial resources plus researchers… 
MS MODISE:   Researchers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And lawyers or certain professionals that 
may 
be 
needed 
in 
order 
to 
capacitate 
members 
of 
parliament. 
MS MODISE:   Enable members – sorry to interject, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MODISE:   To be able to draft. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS MODISE:   This parliament of ours is one of the few 
10 
that you depend on somebody else when you are dealing 
with legislation to draft for you.  Give them those skills so 
that in fact they can get by and be able to argue their ways 
out because sometimes the legal fundis come, they sway 
your attention this way, no, that is unconstitutional, you 
need to be able to create this person to be able to stand 
with or without legal advice.  They must be able to say 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, thank you.  Nothing arising? 
ADV FREUND SC:   May I just say this, Ms Modise, it was 
20 
indicated to me before you started testifying that you 
wanted to make an opening statement.  We overlooked that 
at the outset and then I said to you over the lunch break 
that if there is anything we have not covered that you 
wanted to deal with at the end you would be free to do so.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 139 of 224 
 
So if there is something that you feel you had wanted to 
raise, I do not want you to leave here feeling that you were 
deprived of the opportunity. 
MS MODISE:   Chairperson, it is perhaps two sentences.  It 
is that we also wanted to reaffirm our commitment to the 
Republic but also to say to you as parliament we will do 
everything in our power to follow up not only on corruption 
but on all issues, maladministration, make sure that we 
really do our job and that we will support this Commission 
to the best of our ability. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Thank you very 
much. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright, I will excuse you Ms 
Modise now and I think we will just need to take a short 
break and then Mr Masondo will then take the witness 
stand.  You are excused.  Let us take a ten minutes break 
and then we will not take it at four o’clock. 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, we will not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then we just move straight, ja. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   We will move through. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Clearly we need to finish sometime 
well before five o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, no, that is fine. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 140 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   But I do not think we should have 
difficulty in doing that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Freund, are you ready?  
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes, I am Chair.  Chair, you know that 
we have now Mr Masondo, the Chairperson of the National 
Council of Provinces.  I think perhaps if he could be sworn 
in? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Administer the oath or 
affirmation.  Okay, ja you may stand up.  Ja, thank you.   
REGISTRAR:    Please state your full names for the 
record?   
MR MASONDO:  My name is Amos, surname is Masondo.   
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MASONDO:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
20 
MR MASONDO:  Yes.  
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will get, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say 
so help me God. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 141 of 224 
 
MR MASONDO:  So help me God.  
AMOS MASONDO:  (d.s.s) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  Just in case Mr 
Masondo also wish to redact an opening statement, I am 
just making sure that you do not forget this time.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Mr Masondo, is there anything you 
would want to say by way of an opening statement or can I 
move on with my questions?   
MR MASONDO:  [indistinct] 
ADV FREUND SC:  Would you like to make some type of 
10 
opening statement or are you happy that I just ask you 
some questions? 
MR MASONDO:  No, just to very briefly say who I am and 
the background.  Without spending too much time on that 
and then we will move on to questions.  Just very briefly to 
say [indistinct] good afternoon to everybody.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Good afternoon, good afternoon Mr 
Masondo.  
MR MASONDO:  My name is Amos Nkosiate Masondo.  I 
am the current Chairperson of the National Council of 
20 
Provinces, the NCOP and in terms of my previous related 
experience I was a member of the National Assembly, NA 
from 2015 to 2019.  That I was also Chairperson of the 
Joint 
Committee 
on 
Members 
Interest 
and 
Ethics 
in 
parliament.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 142 of 224 
 
 
Later on, that was in ... until 2015 to 2018, 2018 to 
2019 I was the Chairperson of the Joint Committee on 
Intelligence.  I was also whilst at the National Assembly, a 
member of COCTA, that is corporative governance and 
traditional affairs.  Ja.  I was in Johannesburg from 2001 to 
2011.  
 
I also became Chairperson of SALGA, and earlier 
on I was a member of the Gauteng Provincial Legislature 
and MSFL in Gauteng in 1994.  I have lost a bit of my 
voice, so please bear with me.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that is fine.  
MR MASONDO:  Just a word or two without possible in too 
much detail.  To say that in the NCOP we have fewer 
committees.  There is committees and all in all they are 11 
in their cluster.  So instead of having a committee just 
dealing with one aspect, say for instance justice.   
 
Justice is linked to security as well and just to 
again say that the MP’s, sorry ministers are not members 
of the NCOE, and although they are also held accountable 
through questions, boards and so on, ja very very briefly 
20 
NCOP is somewhat different from NA.   
 
Although NA and NCOP constitute what is referred 
to as parliament in South Africa.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  May I then proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, you may proceed.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 143 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Just for the record Mr Masondo, if you 
look at pages 7 to pages 36, can you confirm that you are 
a joint author together with Ms Modise of this submission 
to this commission? 
MR MASONDO:  I confirm. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And also just for the record you have in 
fact been present throughout the evidence of Ms Modise 
today.  
MR MASONDO:  Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:  So I want you to understand that at any 
10 
time you wish to qualify something she said or disagree or 
react to something that she said you are free to do so, but 
I am not necessarily going to take you over all that same 
material.  
 
So if it occurs to you that you feel it is necessary 
for you to comment on something that you have heard 
today or that is even the submission, even if it is not 
specifically on the NCOP, even if it is not specifically in 
direct answer to a question I asked, you must feel free to 
do so, because really this is going to be the one and only 
20 
opportunity for this commission to get insight into the role 
of the NCOP on oversight.  
 
But perhaps let me start off by asking a few 
questions just to get the process going.  Now if I take you 
to page 38. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 144 of 224 
 
MR MASONDO:  Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Page 38 and 39. 
MR MASONDO:  Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:  You will remember that this is the first 
annexure.  It is Annexure A to the joint report and in this 
you have highlighted some of the main provisions that are 
relevant to the question of oversight and accountability.   
MR MASONDO:  Just give me some hot water, hoping that 
my voice may be better.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, no that is fine.  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  And if at any time you need a break you 
just let me know.  Mr Masondo, at pages 38 and 39, there 
is a summary of the provisions and it seems to me on a 
reading of the constitution, that the primary arm of 
parliament 
which 
is 
passed 
with 
oversight 
over 
the 
executive, and holding the executive accountable is the 
National Assembly, but it is also obviously true that the 
NCOP has a role to play. 
 
So what I would like to try to understand and I think 
these provisions might help you is how you see the role of 
20 
the NCOP in so far as it relates to oversight over the 
executive and holding the executive accountable because 
that is really the focus of this session.  
MR MASONDO:  Let me confirm that it is indeed true that 
one of the most important roles of the NCOP is to ensure 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 145 of 224 
 
oversight and accountability.  But what distinguishes the 
NCOP from the NA, is the fact that in the NCOP we put a 
lot of emphasis on linking up and building and deepening 
relations with communities in provinces and as well as in 
[indistinct].   
 
So what goes with the provinces and we look after 
provincial interest.  We work very closely with the South 
African Local Gambling Association. SALGA, and we really 
seek to ensure that parliament is brought as close to the 
people as is possible.  
10 
 
One of those aspects is to put a lot of emphasis on 
the 
work 
that 
we 
do 
in 
relation 
to 
parliamentary 
responsibility offices.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  Now if I can take you to page 
11.   
MR MASONDO:  Yes.   
ADV FREUND SC:  You will find from paragraph 13 to 
paragraph 16, some of what you have just been saying to 
the chief justice, but perhaps you would like to elaborate 
on these paragraphs and explain in more detail so that we 
20 
have a fuller understanding of the NCOP’s specific role.  
 
I have noted that you have already mentioned the 
particular attention to, as it were the interest of provinces.  
MR MASONDO:  Provinces.  
ADV FREUND SC:  And through that I assume the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 146 of 224 
 
relationship with local authorities.  That is something you 
touch on here, but I am really inviting you to use 
paragraphs 13 to 16 really to elaborate so that we get as 
full a sense as we can of the role played by the NCOP. 
 
How it sees its function in the, to the extent that 
that is relevant for present purposes.  
MR MASONDO:  Ja, maybe just to say that the NCOP like 
any legislature, is a platform to tolerate their own matters, 
and this debates range from the finances, the programs.  
They really centre on what we thing the NCOP is about, 
10 
which is we cannot talk of the NCOP outside of the people.  
 
It is the people that makes the NCOP relevant.  We 
also tend to pay a lot of attention in ensuring that in an 
ongoing way we are kept sensitised on issues that arise at 
the 
core 
phase 
of 
government, 
and 
that 
is 
local 
government issues.  
 
Either through interaction and engagement with the 
SALGA, the local government association, or the even 
really ensuring that SALGA thought it may not have 
evolved, the stern representatives continue to have a 
20 
voice.   
 
Maybe just also to add that the NCOP organises 
from time to time in our program what we refer to as taking 
parliament to the people, where we go to communities out 
there and ensure that we organise these mass meetings 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 147 of 224 
 
and gatherings where not only do we have the MP’s from 
the NCOP speaking, but you also get the presence office 
as well as ministers to raise a whole range of issues that 
relates to governance.  
 
We also have a local government which also 
provides a platform for local government to make the 
matters to be raised and ministers, the Minister of COCTA 
or related people who do government work and this 
includes the South African Local Government Associations 
and related stakeholders.  
10 
 
So the NCOP is a very pre-occupied with ensuring 
that the voice of people find an expression and that we 
provide a platform that engages on matters that are closer 
to the minds and hearts of honourable people. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Can I take you please to page 
26, and I draw your attention to paragraphs 82 to 89.  
These, this is under the headings motion, debates and 
subjects for discussion in the NCOP.  Now of course I 
understand that this submission to the commission is now 
focussing not on the general work of the NCOP, but on that 
20 
part of the work of the NCOP that has some relevance to 
this commission, because this is a commission into alleged 
State Capture, alleged corruption. 
 
So it seems to me it might be helpful to you to draw 
on these paragraphs 82 to 89, try to explain to the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 148 of 224 
 
commission instances or illustrations of work done by or in 
the NCOP that has relevance to these questions of State 
Capture or corruption. 
 
I am not confining you to these paragraphs, I am 
really trying to zoom in on the work of the NCOP in so far 
as it relates to the subject matter of this commission.  
MR MASONDO:  You are saying 82 to? 
ADV FREUND SC:  82 to 89.  You will see that is a set of 
paragraphs, all of which relate to motions, debates and 
subjects for discussion in the NCOP and a lot of them talk 
10 
about 
corruption, 
state 
owned 
enterprises, 
this 
very 
commission. 
 
I am really trying to help you to tease out in a 
practical way how you would illustrate the work done by the 
NCOP on oversight in respect of corruption, in respect of 
State 
Capture, 
because 
that 
is 
really 
what 
we 
are 
interested in today.  
MR MASONDO:  Maybe one should settle by saying that 
the subject of corruption is not anything new.  If you had to 
look at the resolutions and decisions taken by NCOP 
20 
whether in committees or in plannery, you realise that this 
matter would have surfaced from time to time.  
 
The stance that is generally taken by members of 
parliament, of the NCOP is that of being anti-corruption.  
Anti-corruption.  We have tendered to have debates that 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 149 of 224 
 
seeks to indicate that you should be building from what we 
know to be happening in communities.  
 
For instance the whole notion of wrong and right.  
That generally in communities people have that starting 
point, and these are things that one learns either from 
home or if you like from various institutions in society, 
religious organisations.  Churches and forums like that.  
 
To say that we need to build on this.  By basically 
judging as many people in our communities to reinforce 
these believes and understanding, and seek to build on 
10 
them, moving into the future.  Because when all is said and 
done, I mean the question of corruption is not something 
that is sustainable.  
 
Looting and abusing state resources and so on, of 
course I must say of course that corruption is not just 
limited to the problem.  The problem of corruption is not 
just limited to the public sector.  There is corruption in the 
private sector and so on.  
 
But in general this is what we have sought to do, to 
use the NCOP as the platform to educate, inform, to ensure 
20 
that corruption is opposed and that it is fought not only by 
members of parliament, by communities and the society. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  If I can take you then to page 
28.  You will see that we find from page 28 through to page 
32, or 31 a whole list of questions that have been put.  Ms 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 150 of 224 
 
Modise touched on but we did not deal in any detail with 
the question of questions.  
 
But if you look at page 28, you will see there is 
three examples of questions in the NA, in the National 
Assembly.  If you look at page 29, page 30, page 31, you 
will see a whole list of questions that had been put in the 
NCOP that have something to do with questions of 
corruption and the like.  
 
So perhaps you might like to refer to these to 
illustrate the way in which the capacity to put questions in 
10 
the NCOP serves as part of the effort to hold the executive 
accountable on the question of alleged corruption.   
MR MASONDO:  The question of corruption as I have 
already indicated, has been debated quite a number of 
times in the NCOP but one of the instruments that we have 
used at counsel, has been that of questions.  Questions 
come from the different political parties and they get 
directed ministers, deputy ministers, deputy president, the 
president. 
 
The questions serve a number of purposes.  I mean, 
20 
one of the purpose that it really serves to serve is to 
ensure that members of the public out there, because 
remember when these issues are being, when these 
questions are being raised at the NCOP, there 
are 
thousands 
and 
thousands 
of 
people 
out 
there 
in 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 151 of 224 
 
communities who follow the debates and therefore get 
enlightened, 
and 
indeed 
some 
of 
the 
questions 
are 
questions that come from constituencies that are raised by 
members of national counsel provinces, because they have 
been raised in their own constituency offices or in various 
meetings and gatherings in communities.  
 
So questions play a very, very important role as an 
instrument to debate the matters that are of concern in 
communities.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Now the, if I can refer you to page 35, 
10 
paragraph 112.  This is part of your joint submission with 
the speaker of the NA, page 35 paragraph 112.  You both 
say this.  You say: 
 
“While acknowledging that since the dawn of 
democracy 
parliament 
has 
put 
in 
place 
mechanisms to ensure that effective oversight 
is conducted over the executive and there is 
still room for improvement on our oversight 
and accountability systems, to ensure that the 
parliament’s oversight of the executive is more 
20 
robust, more effective and more meaningful.” 
 
Now what I am really interested to know is what 
room for improvement, what is it in your opinion that needs 
still to be improved, if the object is to be more robust, 
more effective, more meaningful, and in particular what 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 152 of 224 
 
within 
the 
NCOP 
in 
your 
opinion 
needs 
still 
to 
be 
addressed? 
MR MASONDO:  Well, my view is that it does not matter 
how good the organisation is, the platform is.  If you do 
well, of course we need to acknowledge.  But it does not 
really matter how you work and whatever improvement you 
make.  
 
There will still be room for it, so for me that is 
really a starting point, that in an ongoing way we need to 
be seeking to improve on the work that we are doing.  If we 
10 
are robust, can you be more robust and more [indistinct].   
 
If we are effective, can we take that to a higher 
level.  If we do things in a manner that is meaningful, can 
we do a bit better and so.  So it is the whole question 
really of saying there is room for improvement in relation to 
your question of oversight.  
 
We must learn ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:  Well ...[intervenes] 
MR MASONDO:  If the legislature that are doing some 
innovative work and so on, we must engage in that, them 
20 
and with the aim of course of ensuring that we improve for 
the better.  So what I am saying is that there is room for 
improvement in relation to oversight, and I am going where 
we need to engage the question. 
 
We need to be finding more innovative ways of 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 153 of 224 
 
doing this work.  Letting everybody else in government, 
from president to deputy president, to minister, deputy 
ministers 
and 
the 
departments 
in 
the 
state 
owned 
enterprises and so on, get all of them to pull up their socks 
and 
act 
in 
a 
manner 
that 
is 
[indistinct] 
with 
the 
expectations of communities out there.  
ADV FREUND SC:  Well, if I asked you just to look back 
with the benefit of hindsight, I know hindsight is 2020 but if 
one looks back with hindsight, whether you feel that in fact 
we have experienced a serious problem of corruption, and 
10 
if you do feel that we have experienced a serious problem 
of corruption and I am focussing for the moment in the 
public sector.  
 
If you feel that that is correct, whether you can see 
any fault in the manner in which the NCOP has dealt with 
that, in other words are there specific areas where in your 
opinion with hindsight the NCOP did not do as much as it 
should have, and if there are then we can start to talk 
about what if anything to be done to improve it.   
 
But let us start at the beginning.  Do you accept 
20 
with the benefit of hindsight, that the evidence before this 
Commission has demonstrated quite a serious problem that 
warrants concern in relation to corruption over an extended 
period. 
MR MASONDO:  Well the certain point that is that 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 154 of 224 
 
corruption is a real challenge, it constitutes part of a 
context if one talks about South Africa and South African 
legislature, and if that indeed is the face, and I believe it 
is, we need to say what is it that needs to be done to 
address the problem.   Some of the things are being done 
as we speak.  This Commission is part of that work, but the 
Commission alone I mean won’t really solve all the 
problems, so we need to address specific areas and just to 
mention a few of them.   One of them is really to ensure 
that we develop leadership in an ongoing manner, so 
10 
leadership is very critical. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Is that leadership within the NCOP? 
MR 
MASONDO: 
 
Within 
the 
NCOP, 
within 
National 
Assembly and so on.  We need to be spared in some of our 
resources in leadership development on an ongoing way.  
We need to ensure retention of MP’s and not lose the skill, 
so that people who come in they don’t ...[indistinct] to 
catch up and in the end the quality of work is not seriously 
undermining you and compromise. 
 
We also need to resource an institution like the 
20 
NCOP a bit more than is the case at the moment, when I 
say to you that we have cluster committees and we have 
done some work with the NCOP including the Speaker 
would agree with me that people in committees in the 
NCOP tend to do more work than MP’s in the National 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 155 of 224 
 
Assembly.  The numbers are smaller, the work is more 
intense, even the clustering, and so I would say that there 
are specific areas that we need to address.   The areas 
where we need a bit of an improvement, quite a few studies 
have been done, I have seen some reports that may be of 
assistance going forward on these issues. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am going to turn in a moment to the 
broader questions addressed in your joint submission, 
which really focus largely on the National Assembly.   Is 
there anything else that you would like to say or to 
10 
contribute at this stage in addition to what you have said in 
relation to the NCOP? 
MR MASONDO:  I think the Speaker covered a lot of 
ground and the joint submission speak to all the issues 
that we need to ...[indistinct]. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, well then let me just in 
conclusion give you the opportunity, you have at here, 
listened to the Speaker, you have been party to the 
preparation 
of 
this 
written 
submission 
and 
the 
supplementary submission.   Is there anything in particular 
20 
that you feel you either want to add or you want to qualify 
or slightly perhaps disagree this is your opportunity to 
make your contribution.   
 
I don’t want you to go home tonight and to say you 
know Mr Freund was very unkind to me, I was burning to 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 156 of 224 
 
say something, I never got a chance.  This is your chance? 
MR MASONDO:  No I think we have been properly covered 
and yes we would as the Speaker said would like to 
express the view that we are committed to assisting the 
Commission to do its work and any time we are required to 
step in to assist with information or just detail and so on 
we are very pleased and willing to do so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you.  I do also want to 
place 
on 
record, 
because, 
although 
it 
is 
on 
the 
documentation, I haven’t referred to this orally today, to 
10 
place on record, the appreciation of the Commission for the 
quite considerable assistance we have received from 
Parliament, from both Houses of Parliament in furnishing 
quite a lot of documentation and so forth, I am sure the 
Chair will join me in just placing that on record. 
 
Chair I have no further questions, I don’t know 
whether there is anything you would like to raise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that is fine, but before I also 
emphasize our appreciation I just have one question Mr 
Masondo.  Are you in agreement with Ms Modise that, 
20 
obviously you now talk about NCOP, in relation to the 
performance of their functions members of the NCOP 
should always regard the interests of the people of South 
Africa as trumped. 
MR MASONDO:  I can also just confirm Chairperson that 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 157 of 224 
 
we think the people are at the centre of what they are 
about.   And that we should everything to support the 
aspirations of the South Africa citizen and voter in general 
and that in whatever we do we should desist and avoid 
doing anything that seeks to undermine the ...[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No thank you.   I also do want to say, 
and I didn’t say it when Ms Modise was here but I am sure 
you will share with her my remarks, that I really appreciate 
the support and the cooperation that the Commission got 
from you and Ms Modise and the Parliamentary support 
10 
staff from Parliament that was designated to assist the 
Commission whenever it needed information, we really 
appreciate it and we thank you for that cooperation and 
that support. 
MR MASONDO:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will then now excuse you, I think Mr 
Freund it is twenty past four, but let me excuse Mr 
Masondo so that we don’t detain him when he has nothing 
further to say. 
 
Thank 
you 
very 
much 
Mr 
Masondo, 
you 
are 
20 
excused. 
MR MASONDO:   Thank you Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund what do you propose?  I 
guess Mr Mantashe would not be here at this time, or is he 
here? 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 158 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Not to my knowledge, he is only 
expected at five, but he may arrive a little before that but 
the arrangement was to do it from five o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  
ADV FREUND SC:   So subject, perhaps if it comes to my 
attention that Mr Mantashe is here earlier I can let you 
know or I can endeavour to let you know but otherwise my 
proposal is we should adjourn until five. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no I think we should just adjourn for 
five o’clock.   
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS   
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Mantashe. 
MR MANTASHE:   Good afternoon Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you for coming back, Mr Freund 
we may proceed, I think let us do the oath again, registrar 
if you could just administer the oath again. 
20 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MANTASHE:   My name is Samson Gwede Mantashe. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MANTASHE:   No I have no objection. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 159 of 224 
 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth, if so please raise your right hand and say so 
help me God. 
SAMSON GWEDE MANTASHE:  (d.s.s) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   You may proceed Mr 
Freund. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Chair at the outset if 
I could just mention that three points have been raised with 
me by Mr Naidoo who for present purposes serves as legal 
advisor to Mr Mantashe.  The first is in relation to Mr 
Mantashe’s evidence previously in relation to the Mr 
Mbalula incident, the incident at the NEC, it is common 
cause and accepted that it did take place in 2011 and not 
as originally stated in error in the affidavit of Mr Mantashe, 
I think no more need to be said about that.  
The second is that there is some controversy about 
20 
whether I correctly or incorrectly put what is to be 
established 
from 
the 
Amatole 
judgment 
and 
the 
arrangement that we have made is that you will of course 
consider the judgment yourself by reading the judgment, 
but that Mr Naidoo will be given leave, as it were to 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 160 of 224 
 
address the letter to you through us to the Secretariat and 
just indicating what the point of view that he wishes you to 
consider is, and you will take a view on that in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The third issue is this, I have just 
handed to you the original of an affidavit that I had only 
just received a copy of and it arises out of Mr Mantashe’s 
evidence last Wednesday about the Integrity Commission, 
and his evidence that it was also in his affidavit that in 
2013, the Integrity Commission called upon the then 
10 
President, President Zuma to step aside or to step down.  
And you will recall that you expressed a request to 
Mr Mantashe to find out whether it will be possible for the   
Commission to receive a copy of that.  In response to that I 
have now received an affidavit which actually clarifies the 
situation according to the deponent of this affidavit, it is a 
very short affidavit and with your leave. I would like it to be 
into the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So this is an affidavit of Uriel 
20 
Llewellyn Abrahamse, and he says this, he says: 
“I am an adult male and the facts contained herein 
are within my personal knowledge and belief, both 
true and correct.” 
I am going to leave out the paragraph numbers as I read it.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 161 of 224 
 
“I 
am 
an 
employee 
of 
the 
African 
National 
Congress, and my primary role is that of Chief 
National 
Presenter 
in 
disciplinary 
proceedings 
instituted by the organisation against its members.  
Since 
2015, 
I 
have 
been 
a 
member 
of 
the 
Secretariat of the Integrity Commission of the ANC. 
The Integrity Commission has its own administration 
and makes use of offices outside Luthuli House, the 
headquarters of the ANC. I am aware that the 
Integrity Commission heard a number of cases in 
10 
2013, involving members of the ANC.  However, the 
former President comrade Jacob Zuma was not one 
of 
them. 
On 
3 
December 
2016, 
the 
Integrity 
Commission under the Chairpersonship of comrade 
Andrew Mlangeni called former President Zuma to 
appear before it.  Each member of the Commission 
speaking in turn outlined the reasons why comrade 
Zuma should step down as President of the country 
and of the ANC. Former President Zuma after 
listening to all the Commissioners spend two and a 
20 
half hours elaborating on the decisions he made 
during his tenure as President, in response to the 
issues raised by the Commissioners.  The nature of 
his of his response was such that he requested all 
recording devices to be turned off, and that no 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 162 of 224 
 
minutes 
of 
the 
meeting 
should 
be 
kept. 
The 
Commission 
complied 
with 
this 
request, 
consequently, no written report was produced.  After 
listening to former President Zuma’s explanation, 
none of the Commissioners changed their position 
that he should resign.” 
And that is deposed on the 18 t h of April of this year, as I 
say by Mr Abrahamse.  Now that is his evidence that has 
now been made available to the Commission and perhaps 
arising out of that I might ask a question or two of Mr 
10 
Mantashe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is going to be necessary because 
firstly, Mr Mantashe there was Secretary General of the 
ANC at the time but also, because I see that Mr Abrahamse 
was not a member of the Secretariat of the Integrity 
Commission in 2013.  The only - on his affidavit he only 
became one in 2015.  So when he tells us about what 
happened in 2013, we are not sure how he knows about 
that, it may well be that the Integrity Commission keeps 
certain records and he has looked at those records, even 
20 
though he was not there at the time, and comes to a 
conclusion that no such thing happened in 2013.  
So it may be necessary that he clarifies how he 
comes to know what happened in the Integrity Commission 
at that time.  Maybe it is the records that are available to 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 163 of 224 
 
him or maybe there might be somebody who was there at 
the time who can definitely say, no such thing happened in 
2013. But I think Mr Naidoo who is listening so he knows 
what my concern is in regard to part of the affidavit. 
But otherwise, it will be proper for you to ask Mr 
Mantashe, certain questions arising out of it, whether it 
changes anything in terms of what he had said. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes if I might do that and Mr Mantashe 
if I might refer you to your own affidavit in bundle 1 at 
page 100.41. 
10 
MR MANTASHE:   Page 100. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Point 41, four, one. 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes, I have got that. 
ADV FREUND SC:   At paragraph 144, and I think you will 
– can remember, Mr Mantashe that when you testified last 
Wednesday, you gave an opening statement, in which you 
referred to the Integrity Commission recommendation in 
2013, the former President Zuma should step down and 
there you were repeating what you had said in your 
affidavit as we are now reading at page 100.41.  And you 
20 
will recall that I specifically asked you whether when that 
committee - when that recommendation was made, and 
whether you were saying was made in 2013, and you said 
yes you were.  
Now we have an affidavit from Mr Abrahamse, 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 164 of 224 
 
saying there was no such recommendation in 2013.  I 
wonder if you can enlighten us as to what you know and 
what you do not know in this regard? 
MR MANTASHE:   No, there was such a recommendation, 
that 
is 
why 
if 
you 
read 
the 
affidavit 
it 
says 
a 
recommendation was made and former President was 
invited 
on 
the 
3 r d 
December 
2016, 
under 
the 
Chairpersonship of Mr Mlangeni and it says each member 
of the Commission speaking in turn outlined the resolution 
because this called for him to stand down came back from 
10 
2013 but only on 2016, did they call him in a physical 
nature. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh so, what you are saying is, you did 
not make a mistake when you said in 2013, there was such 
a recommendation, indeed you say there was.  But in 2016, 
there may have been another engagement between him and 
the Integrity Commission. 
MR MANTASHE:   In 2016, there was a physical meeting 
between 
the 
Integrity 
Commission 
and 
the 
former 
President. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
in 
2013 
they 
made 
a 
recommendation without any physical engagement, or what 
was the position as you understand it? 
MR MANTASHE:   It is exactly that happened that is why 
they 
say, 
after 
listening 
to 
the 
former 
President 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 165 of 224 
 
explanation, none of the Commissioners has changed their 
position that he should resign. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now in fairness to you Mr Mantashe, if 
you read paragraphs 6 and 7 of Mr Abrahamse’s affidavit 
he says in paragraph 6: 
“On 3 December 2016, the Integrity Commission 
under 
the 
Chairpersonship 
of 
comrade Andrew 
Mlangeni called former President Zuma to appear 
before it.” 
10 
And then paragraph 7: 
“Each member of the Commission speaking in turn, 
outlined the reasons why comrade Zuma should 
step down as President of the country and of the 
ANC.” 
In other words, on Mr Abrahamse’s version, he would agree 
with you that that the committee members all had already 
taken a view that he suggested they first did that on the 3 r d 
of December 2016.  
I understand your evidence to be that whatever 
20 
happened in December 2016, you know, that in 2013, the 
Integrity Commission had already recommended that the 
President should step down.  
MR MANTASHE:    Yes, that is why we refer to 2013 
because when there was that recommendation, there was 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 166 of 224 
 
chaos almost in every ANC meeting referring to this, 
because the NEC members began to express their views on 
the matter and there were actual physical calls in the NEC 
for the President to step down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the light of the recommendation. 
MR MANTASHE:   In the light of the recommendation of the 
Integrity Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and that would have - well, it may 
be that that debate went on for some time in the NEC 
between 2013 and 2016. 
10 
MR MANTASHE:   It went on for some time between ‘13 
and ‘16 and beyond 2016.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTASHE:   And beyond 2016 that debate continued.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, and in fact, Mr Mantashe just to 
support what you have said, when you testified previously, 
you linked in your own mind, the Waterkloof landing 
incident, which was a 2013 issue.  
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the way I understood your issue, 
your 
evidence 
on 
the 
last 
occasion 
was 
from 
2013 
onwards. 
There 
was, 
as 
you 
said, 
in 
the 
affidavit, 
instability because of this leadership issue and from 2013, 
you are clear that there was an Integrity Commission 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 167 of 224 
 
recommendation that the then President should step down. 
MR MANTASHE:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, I do not…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I do not want to say anything 
because Mr Abrahamse might or might not supplement his 
affidavit. But as I said, he was not a member of the 
Secretariat of Integrity Commission in 2013.  So that is 
why I was saying, you know, I am interested to know, from 
somebody who was there.  
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, Mr Mantashe, was a member of the 
NEC, he was the SG of the ANC.  So he has a good chance 
of knowing that as well. 
MR MANTASHE:   No, I know that from 2013, there was 
chaos at the ANC, all the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, arising…[intervene] 
MR MANTASHE:   Around the question of asking the 
President to step down.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and the 2013 recommendation of 
the Integrity Commission, as you remember, was for him to 
20 
step down both as President of the country and as 
President of the ANC or only one of those? 
MR MANTASHE:   You see the main interest was on 
stepping down as the President of the country.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the country, okay. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 168 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
MR MANTASHE:   And if you recall that it was time that 
there were merges, you know, by building by many, many 
formations, demanding that the President step down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now it appears that Mr Mlangeni was 
Chair of the Integrity Committee by 2016.  Do you recall 
who was the Chair of Integrity Committee back in 2013? 
MR MANTASHE:   It was Dada Mlangeni.  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mlangeni, and do you recall any other 
members of that committee in 2013? 
MR MANTASHE:   You can get the record of it whether it is 
Sindiso Finyana, there were quite a number of them, of the 
people of the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that can be obtained? 
MR MANTASHE:   We can give you the right information. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, well then through Mr Naidoo 
let this be considered a request just for the identities of 
the membership at that committee at that time.  I had not 
20 
really intended to deal with this issue at all until I received 
just a few minutes ago, this affidavit of Mr Abrahamse, so 
let me now take you to where I had intended to start.  If I 
can take you to the same affidavit of yours at page 100.7. 
MR MANTASHE:   Point? 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 169 of 224 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   7, and I want to take you to paragraph 
7 of your – this is your own affidavit.  I am just taking the 
paragraph 7 of your own affidavit as a foundation for all 
the questions which are going to follow.  You say there, do 
you have the right page? 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes, I have. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You say there: 
“I have read the affidavit of comrade Magashule and 
adopt and confirm the position in his affidavit on the 
recommendations 
to 
strengthen 
Parliamentary 
10 
oversight and accountability.” 
MR MANTASHE:   Alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that affidavit, I just want to check 
for the record is right at the beginning of this file, it is in 
fact, the very first exhibit that has anything to do with 
Parliamentary oversight.  It starts, am I correct at page 4 
and it runs through to page 45, is that correct?  
MR MANTASHE:   Correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you are really doing is 
saying, 
although 
this 
evidence 
was 
to 
have 
been 
20 
given…[intervene] 
MR MANTASHE:   To page 26. 
ADV FREUND SC:   To page 26 did I make a mistake. 
MR MANTASHE:   26, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Sorry, I think you are quite right, I did 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 170 of 224 
 
make an error or when you say 26, you mean 26 at the foot 
of the page, which is 29 at the top left. 
MR MANTASHE:   29, at top left. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So we use those numbers on the top 
left, and you are quite correct I have also made an error.  
It is from pages 4 to 29 of the Commissions pagination 
system. That is an affidavit given by Mr Magashule one 
that have been testified to by him to this Commission.  
But as we discussed, on the last occasion, a 
decision was taken that instead of him talking to this 
10 
affidavit you would represent the African National Congress 
in relation to the content of this affidavit. 
MR MANTASHE:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, now, the affidavit speaks for 
itself.  I am not going to take you through all of it but I am 
going to take you to certain aspects that strike me as being 
of particular importance and perhaps if we could start at 
page 11. 
MR MANTASHE:   I got that. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You will see in paragraphs 33 and 34 
20 
there is a reference to the oversight and accountability 
model.  That is a model developed by Parliament about 
which we have lots of evidence before this Commission, 
and against the background of referring to the oversight 
and accountability model. But Mr Magashule’s says and 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 171 of 224 
 
therefore 
what 
you 
now 
say 
is, 
here 
are 
some 
recommendations 
and 
that 
starts 
at 
page 
12, 
just 
immediately before paragraph 36.  
So that is where I would like to start off, and am I 
correct 
in 
understanding 
that 
this 
affidavit 
by 
Mr 
Magashule which you are adopting and speaking in support 
of, actually contains a set of - would you say this, the party 
says this: 
“The 
ANC 
will 
support 
the 
undermentioned 
recommendations contained in the model and which 
10 
are yet to be implemented by Parliament.” 
So there what is being referred to is the oversight and 
accountability 
model 
back 
from 
2009 
as 
various 
recommendations, some of which have not yet been 
implemented but to the extent that is set out in this 
affidavit, the ANC now supports implementing those as yet 
unimplemented recommendations.  Do you agree with what 
I have said Mr Mantashe? 
MR MANTASHE:   I do not agree with that you used the 
word now. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright. 
MR MANTASHE:   The ANC always supported those 
recommendations. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, but some of them to this day are 
not in place. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 172 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:   Because Parliament is an institution, he 
has a responsibility to execute not the ANC. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, I am not going to quibble about 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am also thinking about it.  Let me 
tell you what I was thinking I understand completely what 
you are saying but something says to my mind, that you 
are able to go to Parliament and say to your members, this 
is what you must do. 
MR 
MANTASHE: 
 
 
No, 
that 
is 
not 
how 
it 
works, 
10 
Parliamentary structures work on their own under the 
leadership of the Chief Whip.  So the ANC from Luthuli 
House does not walk to Parliament every week to say do 
this, do that.  That is why there are various Parliamentary 
Committees environment, they execute. So we do not have 
this authority or arbitrarily of walking to Parliament and 
say do X, Y, and Z they are working independently of the 
ANC.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess, we should say, at least based 
on your evidence that would be reserved for the motions of 
20 
no confidence in the President. 
MR MANTASHE:   More than that, we said that is reserved 
for issues that are more political in content and impact on 
the body of the party. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On operational matters you leave that to 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 173 of 224 
 
them. 
MR MANTASHE:   Operational matters, we do not interfere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But nonetheless, Mr Mantashe and 
accepting the distinction you draw in the Secretariat on the 
one hand, and the ANC deploys to Parliament on the other 
hand, the ANC deploys to Parliament would have been in 
support in 2009 of the oversight and the accountability 
model and its recommendations.  
Yet, as we sit here in 2021, having the majority 
10 
representation in Parliament, they have not as yet made 
these changes and that is why Mr Magashule’s is saying 
the ANC supports this and it still remains necessary more 
than 10 years later, to actually implement part - there are 
parts that clearly have been implemented, but we are 
focusing on the parts that have not been implemented. 
MR MANTASHE:   If you understand, you want to 
understand that in detail and proper context, is that we are 
a young democracy even the concept of Parliamentary 
Committees, 
Portfolio 
Committees 
in 
Parliament 
is 
a 
20 
concept of the new administration.  It was not there in the 
old administration. So it is a process of growth of the 
democratic model of the country.  So it is not going to grow 
in one day, it will grow as it is unfolding, and other things 
that are corrected as we go but that framework was 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 174 of 224 
 
supported by the ANC then it is supported now, aspects of 
it if you can interrogate it have been implemented, other 
aspects have not. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I think we are in agreement on 
that.  Now, the first feature, a specific feature that catches 
my eye, is what I see in paragraph 38.  We had a debate 
this morning with the present Speaker of Parliament, Ms 
Thandi Modise about the question of should there be any 
Parliamentary 
Committees 
that 
have 
amongst 
their 
responsibilities, oversight over the Presidency itself?  
10 
Now, this paragraph 38 does not deal with that but 
it seems to me it might be relevant, because what Mr 
Magashule says and what you endorse is this: 
“The ANC also proposes the establishment of a joint 
Parliamentary Oversight and Government Assurance 
Committee, whose main purpose and mandate will 
be to consider and deal with broader transversal 
and cross cutting issues. This committee will further 
pursue 
all 
assurances, 
undertakings 
and 
commitments given by Ministers on the floor of the 
20 
houses and the extent to which those assurances 
have been fulfilled.” 
But my first question to you is, if you could perhaps 
elaborate a little on this proposed establishment of a joint 
Parliamentary 
Oversight 
and 
Government 
Assurance 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 175 of 224 
 
Committee.  What is the reason why it is believed it would 
be a good idea and what would be its primary function? 
MR MANTASHE:   I think is outlined in the affidavit itself, 
that whole purpose and mandate will be to consider interior 
project transversal and cross cutting issues.  The reason 
that those were the views is because almost every 
Ministerial scope, has a Portfolio Committee in Parliament 
but they work almost in isolation and in silence. 
And what is proposed is that, there must be an 
attempt to pull them together and destroy the silence and 
10 
make 
them 
integrated 
into 
a 
government 
machinery 
environment. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And part of that is to - as we see in 
the last sentence of paragraph 38: 
“To 
pursue 
all 
assurances, 
undertakings 
and 
commitments given by Ministers.” 
And I fully understand the sense of that, and the wisdom of 
that.  But I want to ask a question, nonetheless because I 
want to continue a debate we were having this morning. 
The – what Ms Modise says is - and she is of course, 
20 
correct. She says: 
“The President delegates to Ministers, responsibility 
within their domain, and so there were a lot of work 
that was President is responsible for is in fact 
handled by the Ministers and those Ministers in turn 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 176 of 224 
 
deal with specific Portfolio Committees.” 
And that thus far, I had no difficulty with what she says.  
But the question I raised with her is whether there is not a 
bit of a gap and that relates to oversight over the 
Presidency itself.  Whether there may be issues, and it 
may be that our experience over the last Parliament is that 
issues pertinent to the Presidency itself, falls through the 
cracks, there is no Portfolio Committee that in any way is 
responsible for monitoring the Presidency, and dealing with 
the Presidency.  
10 
 
So what we are left with is things like votes of no 
confidence, questions in the National Assembly, but no 
other mechanisms to control or to exercise oversight over 
and to receive accountability from the Presidency itself.  
And I was wondering whether you would comment 
on whether this proposed joint Parliamentary Oversight and 
Government Assurance Committee might perhaps wisely be 
vested with some authority also on the question of 
oversight over the President himself? 
MR MANTASHE:   My understanding is that all the work of 
20 
the Ministers are upwards to the work of the President.  We 
had a discussion recently, somebody said, the economic 
reconstruction recovery is not a plan, it is a vision.  We 
interrogated that statement, and came to a conclusion that 
there is nothing wrong with the President having a vision 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 177 of 224 
 
and then the Ministers developed implementation plans and 
execute on the vision of the President.  That is why every 
Minister has a performance agreement with the President 
and the President is overseeing on the basis on the 
promise of those Ministers.  
Another complication would be the President by the 
way is not an MP, he is an elected President but he is not a 
member 
of 
Parliament. 
 Therefore, 
the 
responsibility 
remains in Parliament, for the oversight of the executive 
and that executive is a collective description of all the 
10 
work 
of 
the 
Ministers 
under 
the 
supervision 
of 
the 
President.  
And the point I am making is that, if oversight is 
strong on Ministers you going to see that there is no need 
to have a committee overseeing the President because it 
would have no particular responsibility to oversee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, apart from this that Parliament 
has a constitutional duty to exercise oversight over the 
executive. 
MR MANTASHE:  Yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  And the President is the head of the 
executive. 
MR MANTASHE:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And our experience I want to put to you 
for your comment our experience shows us that sometimes 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 178 of 224 
 
problems can be particular to the President and they do not 
get properly addressed precisely because they are particular 
to the President and that is a gap in our oversight system 
that is what I am putting to you. 
MR MANTASHE:  I do not know if you have followed the 
practice in Parliament.  One of the things you go and answer 
questions openly in Parliament is the President. Ministers 
have short sessions to answer a few questions but the 
President is given the whole day of the sitting to deal with 
questions directed at him.  That is the Parliamentary 
10 
Oversight over the President that is followed by other 
questions to the Deputy President which is actually taking 
forward the oversight over the Presidency. 
 
And even not to those questions they cut across the 
Ministerial responsibilities but after he has done that 
Ministers take up specific responsibility that are relevant to 
the Ministers.  But that oversight role is clear of Parliament 
over the President or deliver of the State of the Nation 
Address it is a Joint Sitting.  President get summoned to the 
Provincial 00:01:36 of Provinces.  That is the oversight of 
20 
Parliament over the President and the President cannot say 
no I do not want to come he goes every time he is required 
to go and answer questions in Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess the… 
MR MANTASHE:  But the proposal other than a committee 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 179 of 224 
 
for the President has been coming in and out of Parliament 
particularly from the opposition and our argument is that 
where he has done – he has no Ministerial responsibility.  
The responsibility is with all – with all those Ministers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess that the – the question that – this 
question raises is the inadequacy or otherwise of the current 
oversight mechanism Parliamentary Oversight mechanisms 
in relation to the President.  You are right in saying when the 
President goes to Parliament to answer questions that is part 
of oversight and being held accountable when he has given a 
10 
State of the Nation Address and there are questions that is 
part of that.  But Mr Modise told me and you may have said 
the same thing also last time that Portfolio Committees that 
is where the real oversight work gets done. 
 
So the question then arises whether if you leave out 
the Presidency in terms of not giving it – not giving a 
Portfolio Committee the responsibility to do what other 
Portfolio Committees do in relation to other departments 
whether that does not have the effect that proper and 
effective oversight over the President does not happen. 
20 
 
Ms Modise herself was took the position that she in 
effect has reservations about the proposal – she made the 
point you make also that that proposal has been you know 
raised from time to time and she made the point that well the 
work of the Presidency is largely given to Ministers and then 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 180 of 224 
 
if you have a special Portfolio Committee relating to the 
Presidency there might not be much for it to do. 
 
So – but of course one of the issues may well be 
whether the time that is provided in a big order such as the 
National Assembly when the President answers questions 
whether that is adequate or whether you might require a 
smaller body which is more focussed on the President or not. 
 
So – so there are those questions and I was – I 
raised the question with Ms Modise I said well if you have a 
President 
who 
is 
for 
example 
not 
exercising 
proper 
10 
supervision on the Ministers and the Ministers are not doing 
their 
work 
properly 
and 
maybe 
Parliament 
in 
various 
Portfolio Committees you know complain about certain things 
and Ministers do not really cooperate and so on it may be 
that such a committee would be able to say to the President 
but President what is happening – you are not in control – 
your Ministers are doing as they please as far as government 
is concerned.  Of course they can say that in the National 
Assembly as well but the question is simply whether the 
environment of a big body such as the National Assembly is 
20 
– is more suitable for that or you need a more focussed 
smaller body. 
 
But as I understand you – you are not saying no to it 
– to the idea you are simply saying there are certain 
question marks about whether it would be necessary or not. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 181 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:  No.  The first issue is that the President 
has no Portfolio.  Portfolios are with Ministers and the 
committees in Parliament are called Portfolio Committees 
they oversee Portfolios that is why if it is in my portfolio 
Mineral Resources they visit mines.  If there is a problem in 
a particular mine Portfolio Committees go there and they call 
us to go and account that they found this gap in the work we 
are doing and we go back and account to them because 
there is a Portfolio that they are looking after. 
 
But with the President there is no Portfolio.  The 
10 
Portfolio is with the Ministers.  So Parliament has oversight  
over all portfolios – all the portfolios without exceptions – all 
of them and those portfolios go and account to the President 
from time to time on the performance of that particular 
Minister accounting for the portfolio to the President. 
 
But if you want to recommend to oversee a President 
well no portfolio after 00:07:49 be given a name it is not a 
Portfolio Committee.  The President has no Portfolio he is 
overseeing Ministers who account to the President.   
 
So I always never understood the rationale of 
20 
wanting a Portfolio Committee for the President who runs no 
portfolio. 
 
I want to Nigeria one time Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe it should not be called Portfolio 
Committee but it should be a committee never the less. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 182 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:  I do not know that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTASHE:  What will it do? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 
MR MANTASHE:  The content of their work must be defined 
but wanting it because you just want to have people who can 
call the President any time then does not maybe defeated in 
the course of execution. 
 
When I went to Nigeria one time Mr Chairperson the 
Minister of Energy in Nigeria is the President and they 
10 
appoint the Minister of Trade for Energy but if as a Minister 
of Energy I visit Nigeria to discuss Energy matters I talk with 
that Minister of Trade but ultimately I meet the President 
which give me a value of any Ministers that I must meet the 
President because my 00:09:03 in South Africa there is no 
such an arrangement where there is a Portfolio which is in 
the Presidency.   
 
So if the debate is introduced it should not be 
narrowly just putting people into a committee that 00:09:22 it 
– maybe it is a debate about whether they should be a 
20 
portfolio in the Presidency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes I want to come back to this but I 
want to digress before I come back.  You would be aware 
from Mr Magashule’s affidavit that before Parliament adopted 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 183 of 224 
 
the oversight and accountability model back in Dr 00:09:45 
day in the First Parliament Professor Corder was appointed 
to do a report on Parliamentary Oversight and he made 
certain recommendations and you address that or Mr 
Magashule addresses that from page 19 onwards.  So if you 
could turn please to page 19.  Now Professor Corder has 
testified to this commission and as is reflected in this 
affidavit Professor Corder made certain recommendations 
which you see summarised in paragraph 67.  
“67.1 
Legislation 
in 
the 
form 
of 
an 
10 
accountability 
and 
independence 
of 
constitution’s Act.   
67.2  Amendments of the Rules of the 
National Assembly and NCOP for regulation 
of reporting to Parliamentary Committees.   
67.3 The establishment of Parliament of a 
Standing 
Committee 
on 
constitutional 
institutions.” 
 
Then this affidavit continues as follows: 
“The ANC proposes the recommendations of 
20 
the Hugh Corder report. He considered to 
further strengthen Parliament’s accountability 
and oversight model.” 
 
So far so good and may I say I have no difficulty with 
this.  And then it continues. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 184 of 224 
 
“In particular a key recommendation that 
accountability 
– 
you 
will 
remember 
the 
constitution 
talks 
about 
holding 
accountability.  Accountability also requires 
that a person in addition to explaining and 
justifying decisions and actions.” 
 
So 
if 
we 
consider 
for 
example 
a 
Minister 
accountability requires that a Minister explains and justifies 
decisions and actions and then the important point. 
“Goes on to make amends for any fault or 
10 
error and takes it to prevent its recurrence in 
the future.” 
 
In other words accountability is not satisfied by 
simply saying this is what I did and why I did it.  It is the 
overseeing body Parliament says yes that is what you did we 
understand why you did it but we have a concern.  This is 
our concern and our proposal is that in order to address this 
concern something needs to be done that resolves the 
problem.   
 
What Professor Corder is saying and what Mr 
20 
Magashule’s affidavit which you are endorsing is saying is 
sometimes accountability requires that amends be made – 
that the problem be right and I am assuming because you 
have confirmed this affidavit that you accept that – that basic 
proposition, am I right, you agree with that? 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 185 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:  Yes pending on what do we establish that 
to mean? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well fair enough but let us for the 
moment focus on the principle.  That the principle is if 
Parliament’s committees have concerns having heard the 
report of the Minister that there remains a problem that has 
not been satisfactorily addressed to its – to its – in its 
judgment and it wants the problem resolved and it makes 
recommendations as I understand it what typically happens 
is that that Portfolio Committee’s report is then referred to 
10 
the National Assembly for consideration and usually not 
necessarily always usually the National Assembly adopts 
that report and then through the Speaker as I understand it 
communication then takes place with the affected Minister 
and the Speaker will say you will see from this report that it 
has been adopted by the – by the National Assembly that the 
National Assembly is concerned about XY and Z problem and 
would like XY and Z to be done and please you know can we 
have a report within X period on XY and Z. 
 
Now let us stay away from the problem for the 
20 
moment and what XY and Z is that is a problem all on its 
own.  But the point is that is the way the system works. 
 
Now against that background if we can come back to 
the debate we have just been having.  The debate we have 
just been having… 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 186 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:  Can I – can I make a minor correction? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Of course. 
MR MANTASHE:  The formulation assumes that Ministers 
are not part of the National Assembly.  When a report of a 
Portfolio Committee is tabled to Parliament Ministers are 
sitting in Parliament and actually a part of that report to 
Parliament and half the time whenever that debate is 
concluded Ministers are given an opportunity to react in 
Parliament and then you respond to XY and Z that was 
raised in the debate.  Few Ministers 00:14:32 because we 
10 
have another time to respond. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes and I do not take issue with what 
you have just said but nonetheless and I have understood 
this 00:14:40 to be completely uncontroversial if we go back 
for example to Mr Gordie’s evidence but it has been explored 
with subsequent witnesses. 
 
It happens not infrequently that the reports adopted – 
reports emanating from Portfolio Committees having been 
adopted by the National Assembly contain requests or 
proposals to Ministers to please address X problem.   
20 
 
So it might be if we are dealing with PRASA and – 
and irregular expenditure and a repeated problem of a 
certain type it might be this has got to be sorted out and we 
need to know how you are going to sort it out and we need to 
know in X time how you are going to sort it out.  And I 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 187 of 224 
 
understand that it is not been controversial thus far that that 
type of thing happens from time to time.  That type of – that 
type of communication from Parliament to the executive 
happens and that is the very reason why as you deal in this 
affidavit with the need to track and monitor to find out well 
what happened in response and was it adequate and as I 
understand your affidavit you accept that there does need to 
be some tracking and monitoring of whether there has been 
adequate response to these reports that Parliament have – 
have conveyed to the affective Minister through the Speaker.  
10 
Do we – are we on common ground?  Do you accept what I 
am saying? 
MR MANTASHE:  Except that that report goes to Parliament 
but the actual responsibility to actually follow it through with 
the Minister is the Portfolio Committee.  That is why there is 
always a contradiction between the work of the Portfolio 
Committee and the executive.  Because sometimes the 
Portfolio Committee wants the Minister to go and account to 
the Portfolio Committee during the time of an executive 
meeting in Cabinet.   
20 
But I do not remember once a Minister who says my 
Portfolio Committee has invited me told by the 00:16:46 you 
cannot go.  Because everybody except that the Portfolio 
Committee have the responsibility of oversight over the work 
of the executive.  
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 188 of 224 
 
So the Portfolio Committees follow through the 
reports and the recommendations that you said in here X you 
will do XY and Z but that has not happened what is the 
issue?  Then that means they must make new commitments 
to the Portfolio Committee and try to execute. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTASHE:  So the actual responsibility is not in 
Parliament – Parliament receives the report but the Portfolio 
Committee does oversight work and chases Ministers to 
execute their commitment. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so it seems to me that you do not 
have any difficulty with the proposition with what Mr Freund 
was saying you were simply clarifying that at least as far as 
you understand the position after the National Assembly has 
adopted the report the Portfolio Committee – it is the 
Portfolio Committee’s responsibility to monitor and track 
what is happening and call upon the Minister if necessary to 
report back on what they have done to address the issue in 
the province.  That is what you are saying and you are 
simply saying Portfolio Committees should try and not call 
20 
upon the Ministers on the days when the Ministers are 
having a cabinet meeting, is that right? 
MR MANTASHE:  No I am not saying that I am saying it 
happens now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 189 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:  The Portfolio Committee sits on the same 
day as the executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MANTASHE:  They call upon the Minister to come. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Ministers go. 
MR MANTASHE:  In all the cases the executive releases that 
Minister to go to the Portfolio Committee because what we 
are conscious of is that the Portfolio Committee is an 
oversight structure over that Minister. 
 
Sometimes serious actions between the Minister and 
10 
the Portfolio Committee from time to time it happens 
because that is oversight you see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I think the bottom line is unless I 
have misunderstood something you do not take any issue 
with what he is saying because I think what he is saying is 
not inconsistent with what you are saying. 
MR MANTASHE:  What is that proposal that I do not 
understand? 
ADV FREUND SC:  I have not got there yet.  I am just trying 
to lay a foundation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So what seems to be accepted by you 
and I must say I accept it is that the process and the concept 
of oversight can require identifying problems, proposing 
solutions and an on-going engagement over whether the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 190 of 224 
 
solutions have been found which is an on-going process.  
Now I think you would accept that. 
MR MANTASHE:  Yes it is. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright now… 
MR MANTASHE:  Can I add? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTASHE:  00:20:06 that is where I want to add is that 
if a Minister also go and report to the Portfolio Committee on 
their work even if they are not questioned about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MANTASHE:  Even 00:20:22 you go and account or do 
you in this area we are doing XY and Z, in this area we are 
doing XY and Z and the Portfolio Committee takes that as a 
commitment that the Minister is doing.  They will call you for 
the down the line and say on the meeting of date X you 
made the following commitment how far are you?  Then you 
are required to come and account on the progress on that 
particular commitment. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And the position of the Portfolio 
Committee may be we are as yet not satisfied with what the 
20 
Minister has done to resolve this problem but that does not 
mean to say that we believe that Minister must be fired it just 
means that there is further pro – there are problems that 
need to be addressed and we need to engage with each 
other in an on-going process to address the problem.  You 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 191 of 224 
 
follow what I say? 
MR MANTASHE:  Yes what you – the emphasis on that the 
relationship between a Minister and the Portfolio Committee 
is not required to – 00:21:31 and dispute it.  That is not the 
relationship.  Actually a Minister works better when the 
relationship with the Portfolio Committee is got here but 
tough but when there is hostility that slows down the work of 
both the Minister and Portfolio Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right now I took this digression but I 
said I wanted to come back to where we were when we were 
10 
talking about oversight over the Presidency.   
 
Because what I want to put to is this.  There is of 
course always the nuclear option. The nuclear option is for 
Parliament to a vote of no confidence to try to remove the 
President and we have heard your evidence on that.  We 
know where you stand on that.   
 
But short of that it seems to me there is no 
institutional 
mechanism 
or 
a 
comparable 
process 
of 
engagement with the – with the Presidency – the President 
and saying we have a problem with X can you tell us about Y 
20 
we think Z needs to be done can you come back to us? Can 
we monitor and oversee in the way that we do with the 
Minister there is no parallel for the Presidency and if that is 
corrected there is not is there not a need for that? 
MR MANTASHE:  The President gets called to Parliament 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 192 of 224 
 
regularly 
and 
cross-examined 
on 
a 
number 
of 
issues 
regularly.  Is the most regular invitee of Parliament and ask 
any questions put on anything.  I can also submit that half 
the time 
you 
will sit there 
you 
watch the President 
sometimes ...[indistinct] half the time insulted by people – 
yes insulted.  But he must take that on his stride you know 
as a President.  Then we have to be – need to say this is not 
enough – this is what needs to be added for that proposition 
to be – to be heard.   
At this point in time we are saying the President has 
10 
no portfolio.  All portfolios are with the Ministers and 
therefore functionally he has access and oversight on the 
executive over all the portfolios and then it is seen the 
National Assembly and the NCOP have oversight over those 
portfolios.   
And when it goes to the NCOP or the NA the 
President answers a whole range of questions regularly. So 
if there is a need for a Portfolio Committee over the 
President maybe it is a nice to have but it will have no 
practical work to do on a day to day because the President 
20 
has no portfolio. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright now let us just take a hypothetical 
example.  Let us assume that the concern that is harboured 
is that there is undue influence over the President himself.  
A hypothetical example and that that is to the detriment of 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 193 of 224 
 
the country.  That there is undue influence in relation to 
appointment processes, in relation to access to contracts 
and the type.   
Assume that there is a concern about that.  Assume 
that nobody in Parliament can know for sure whether those 
concerns are well founded but there is reason to be 
concerned – there are allegations out there.  What I want to 
put to you is that we really do have an adequate institutional 
mechanism for dealing with concerns of that type.   
As you yourself have said when the President comes 
10 
and faces question time he gets a barrage of – of as it were 
partisan criticism but a process to properly investigate are 
these concerns legitimate?  If so we have a problem that has 
to be addressed does not seem to exist and if it does not 
exist does it not need to exist? 
MR MANTASHE:  It does exist Mr Chairperson because 
whatever misdemeanour happens it will be in a portfolio.  
That Portfolio Committee has the authority to investigate that 
things.   
That is why with all the witnesses and the problems I 
20 
still make the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises had 
to investigate issues of around Eskom that too because they 
happened within the jurisdiction of that Portfolio Committee.  
If there is something about PRASA the Portfolio Committee 
on Transport have the responsibility to investigate issues 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 194 of 224 
 
about PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can it call the President to their committee 
about PRASA? 
MR MANTASHE:  Yes it can because it will submit a report to 
Parliament.   Parliament is still trying to summon the 
President to Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that answer does not support – that 
explanation does not support the answer that it can because 
what your explanation means is the National Assembly will 
call the President. 
10 
MR MANTASHE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To deal with those questions. So it is not 
the committee whereas when it comes to a Minister the 
committee can call the Minister to the committee and deal 
with and ask him what – why is this happening?  Is this 
happening is it not?  In the case of the President where 
there are concerns such as the concerns that Mr Freund 
makes there are concerns all over in the media and to say 
the President is – is being dictated to by people outside of 
government to make certain appointments or to fire certain 
20 
people you need to ask the President himself.   
You know the Ministers are not going to maybe assist 
you much about that.  One need to ask the President.  Now if 
there was a Portfolio Committee that could call him to the 
Portfolio Committee it would ask him pointedly but you – 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 195 of 224 
 
what you were saying is well the Portfolio Committee and I 
do not know whether there would be a Portfolio Committee 
for that kind of thing in the National Assembly he can be 
called and he can be asked the same questions.  So I – I am 
just wondering about whether the focus. 
MR MANTASHE:  Let me not go to war about Portfolio 
Committee of a Presidency.  But my worry is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MANTASHE:  An assumption that says inherently 
President will be corrupt for example.  So they will be 
10 
dictated to by people outside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
MR MANTASHE:  That assumption will be a dangerous 
assumption for society. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but that is not – that is not – that is 
not an assumption.  Remember you would have heard this 
that when you – you make a constitution or you make a law 
you have to think about the worst scenario you know.  You 
must not think of the best President that you are going to 
have because you could have the worst.  You have got to say 
20 
in case we get to a very really bad situation – in case we get 
a really bad President if he or she tries to do this and that 
and that which is against the interests of the country do we 
have adequate mechanisms that will make sure that he will 
not or she will not harm the interests of the people because 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 196 of 224 
 
if you always think that all Presidents that – should South 
Africa have for the next five hundred years will be the best 
Presidents you know.  So you have got to say look, we are 
not going to assume that everyone will be bad but we must 
put in place mechanisms that in case somebody is not the 
right person, there will be mechanisms that will ensure that 
the interest of the citizens are taking... 
MR MANTASHE:   Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MANTASHE:   Our democracy is like America.  They do 
10 
not elect the same calibre(?) of presidents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I agree. 
MR MANTASHE:   But the constitution of the land assumes 
that a president must be of a particular calibre or so it 
assumes.  When it falters, you will have a president who 
will come and occupy the seat of government and try to say 
I am not going.  It happens in all democracies.  So the 
effort to try and put on the President the mechanisms of 
actually almost sitting on the President on day to day basis 
is an assumption that we are not intending to have the best 
20 
presidents all the time.   
 
But even if we have the wrong president, it will 
be a wrong president in the process that was intended to 
elect the best president and then ...[indistinct] that as far 
as the Constitution we will give the prerogative to appoint 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 197 of 224 
 
ministers to the president.   
 
It does not assume that sometime a president 
will appoint friends and not look at competence because 
you 
give 
that 
board 
to 
the 
president 
because 
the 
Constitution assumes that the president will be having the 
intelligence to do the best for the country, not always 
happening, not always happened. 
 
Now should then the rules on the date of 
acception of a country rules on what should be the 
constitutional obligation in the country that is put on the 
10 
president.  My own view is that is where the Portfolio 
Committee on the president.  We can have him to work on 
12-hours a day, it is fine with me.  That we will work 12-
hours a day because it is dealing with no portfolio. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But maybe – and again, you see, it is 
important 
to 
deal 
with 
these 
issues 
because 
both 
Mr Freund 
and 
I 
are 
not 
in 
Parliament, 
not 
in 
the 
Executive. 
 You 
are 
in 
Parliament, 
you 
are 
in 
the 
Executive.  So it is important to get a perspective from 
somebody who is there.  That is why it was useful to have 
20 
Ms Modise and Mr Masondo as well. 
 
But it may well be that one does not need to 
have a separate standalone Portfolio Committee.  Maybe 
let us remove this Portfolio Committee which will do this 
oversight of the President.  Maybe one of the existing 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 198 of 224 
 
committees can get given additional responsibility apart 
from what they normally do.  That might be another way of 
looking at it but – I mean, we certainly are not pushing a 
particular line but we are just exploring what is possible. 
MR MANTASHE:   In politics there is nothing as dangerous 
as in allocating responsibility without assessing it because 
you give a Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and 
Energy 
additional 
responsibility 
to 
be 
an 
Oversight 
Committee on the President.  All the committees are 
always seen as a super committee and there will be 
10 
tensions on day one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Well, I have heard you sound 
like a super DG.  [laughs] 
MR MANTASHE:   [Indistinct] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A super general.  [laughs] 
MR MANTASHE:  Chairperson for example whether and 
particularly if you do work it must – you must get 
concurrent from Minister X and Minister Y.  The feeling is 
that these are super ministers.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MANTASHE:   So I cannot move without them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR MANTASHE:   But is how the system works. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
MANTASHE: 
 
 
In 
government, 
I 
can 
tell 
you, 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 199 of 224 
 
Mr Chairperson.  It does lead to you to serious tensions.  
Most of the time unnecessary.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTASHE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Or you could even have maybe a 
particular minister being seen as if he or she is prime 
minister or something.  [laughs] 
MR MANTASHE:   ...a minister in the presidency who deals 
with monitoring and evaluation.  Man, you do not know 
what is... [laughs] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes.  I only have one final question on 
this line because we have spent a lot of – well, a lot more 
time on this issue than I have expected.  You will recall 
where I started with this conversation, I was at page 13, 
paragraph 38 and that was the paragraph where your party 
...[intervenes]  
MR MANTASHE:   Wait, wait, wait.  Page 13? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Page 13, one three, paragraph 38.  
And you will recall that was where your party proposes – 
20 
and it seems to me to have a lot of sense – the established 
of 
a 
joint 
parliamentary 
oversight 
and 
Government 
Assurance Committee and I just wanted to put to you again 
and for a final time that if there were to be any wisdom in 
allocating to committee amongst its responsibilities where 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 200 of 224 
 
necessary, and you would hope it would not often be 
necessary, some oversight over the presidency itself.   
 
It might well wisely be located in this particular 
committee.  Now I did ask you that before.  I think your 
answer was somewhat negative to the idea.  I am just 
wondering in the light of the further debate we had whether 
you have shifted your position, whether you think there 
might be some wisdom in that. 
MR MANTASHE:   No, I have not shifted but I support this 
but it must be thought, there must be a well thought out 
10 
concept otherwise you will have it and it will create a new 
problem that did not exist before.  That is all I am 
submitting. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Let me move on.  I think we 
have explored this issue quite thoroughly.  I want to move 
onto something much more prosaic but important.  You will 
see at the next page, page 14 there is a section headed 
Oversight Advisory Section.   
 
And what paragraphs 44 through to 50 really say 
is that there is the need for the establishment of a section 
20 
within Parliament, an Oversight Advisory Section which will 
have these functions of: 
- Providing information and advisory support 
- Tracking and monitoring executive compliance 
- Assisting 
with 
coordinating 
all 
oversight 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 201 of 224 
 
related information 
- Monitoring 
and 
tracking 
executive 
compliance with House resolution 
 
And paragraph 46, the affidavit says: 
“The 
ANC 
proposes 
that 
the 
Oversight 
Advisory 
Section 
be 
prioritised 
and 
implemented 
by 
Parliament 
within 
12-
months...” 
 
There seems to be consensus.  I do not think we 
have had a witness yet who does not support this idea and 
10 
I presume that you can confirm that this is – this remains 
the position of the African National Congress.  We need to 
do this. 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes.  Except that the devil is always in 
the detail of what you want to do because with good 
intentions you create a nightmare with good intentions.  All 
I am saying is that ...[indistinct] that work of Parliament 
must be scrutinised that we accept but the nature of the 
animal you put in place to do that scrutiny becomes very, 
very important. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   H’m.  And I agree with that.  And I also 
agree that this afternoon is not the occasion to debate the 
detail of that. 
MR MANTASHE:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is a matter that will have to be 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 202 of 224 
 
considered by Parliament in its wisdom and work out how 
to do it.  Now you make certain comments or Mr Magashule 
makes certain comments in this affidavit about certain 
legislative changes which are aimed at, as it were, typing 
out our laws on corruption including where there should be 
unethical conduct by members of Parliament. 
 
I think these are sensible proposals.  They are 
not controversial.  I do not think – I do not propose to 
spend any time dealing with them now.  What I would 
suggest we spend a little more talking about is Section E 
10 
of this affidavit, starting at page 18 which talks about 
...[intervenes]  
MR MANTASHE:   Wait.   
ADV FREUND SC:   One, eight.  Eighteen. 
MR MANTASHE:   Oh, page 18.  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You will see from paragraph 62 
onwards, there is a section under the heading, Early 
Warning System to detect State Capture and Corruption.  
And as you said a moment ago, the devil is always in the 
detail.  It seems to be, it is perfectly sensible that if it is 
20 
possible we want an early warning system to detect state 
capture and corruption.  It is really what we are going on 
about at length here.  The question is how.  How would this 
work?  And I see the real nub of this seems to be 
paragraph 65.   
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 203 of 224 
 
“The ANC proposes that Parliament considers 
establishing 
a 
National 
Integrity 
System 
incorporating 
coordination 
and 
information, 
chairing 
among 
the 
builds 
early 
warning 
indicators into Parliament’s Accounting and 
Reporting 
System 
to 
arrest 
and 
prevent 
corruption...” 
 
Now I have from my perspective no difficulty with 
the principle but I am wondering if you could elaborate at 
all as to what suggestions you might have that would assist 
10 
in achieving this noble goal.  The goal is early warning 
systems 
that 
arrest 
and 
prevent 
state 
capture 
and 
corruption.   
 
I do not know if you have any ideas.  I mean, the 
one thing that seems obvious to me is that one uses the 
reports of the Auditor General which investigate the degree 
of 
deviation 
from 
applicable 
legislation 
on 
irregular 
expenditure and the like.  That seems to me to serve as an 
early warning system and we have had some evidence on 
that. 
20 
 
I am wondering whether that is it or whether 
there is anything else you can suggest because that really 
is the fundamental object of this part of this inquiry is to 
think about what can be done to avoid in the future the 
problems of the past and if it is possible to have early 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 204 of 224 
 
warnings systems that we attack this, then we are open, of 
course, to whatever suggestions may be made. 
MR MANTASHE:   The question we are going through 
maybe the ANC appreciates the need for early warning 
systems.  And then advocate about that is that AG, half the 
time come at the end of financial period and discover many 
things.  Then it becomes a high report done on early 
warning system.  Our view is that the National Integrity 
Systems in Parliament helps to strengthening the work of 
the Active(?) Committee in Parliament. 
10 
 
There is an Active(?) Committee in Parliament.  
Is to move one of the most relaxed committees in 
Parliament.  It should now – we say it should be strengthen 
to have integrity systems in that committee.  Then the 
Auditor General will compliment the work that is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, this of course deals with the matter 
from the angle of Parliament.  You are giving evidence on 
behalf of the ANC.  The other question that may be asked 
is.  What should the ANC itself put in place, as long as it 
mains the majority party or the ruling party, to put in place 
20 
that would give it early warnings signs.   
 
You gave evidence last week to the fact the 
ANC, as I understood you, the ANC takes time before it 
addresses certain problems.  You made an example of how 
members of the ANC, I think, were dismissed some years 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 205 of 224 
 
ago.  I do not know whether it was the seven to six years 
or something like that. 
 
In the context of allegation of state capture, you 
made reference – we made – reference was made to what 
Mr Mabula said in the MEC in 2011.  Reference was made 
to the Waterkloof landing of the aeroplane but, at least on 
my observation and on the evidence that one has heard, 
there seems to have been little or nothing done by the ANC 
in regard to what maybe it should have seen as early 
warnings of challenges maybe until quite a number of years 
10 
later. 
 
And then there is the issue of corruption in the 
SOE’s which has been rising and you also think that the 
ANC would have an interest in saying to the government, to 
the Executive, to its deployees:  We are – this government 
is an ANC government.  We cannot afford a situation where 
corruption is rising in this way and nothing is being done. 
 
And therefore the ANC might want to say:  What 
should we do when we see maybe early warnings that 
corruption is rising and so on and it is not being addressed 
20 
properly.   
 
So but in the question of alleged allegation of 
state capture, it might be important to say would there be 
early warning signs that the ANC would like to see before 
things get too far?  Should these things that have 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 206 of 224 
 
happened in the past happen again in the future?  And to 
the extent that it would want to arrest the situation what it 
could do. 
MR MANTASHE:   It is not always the case that people 
take five years or six years. 
ADV FREUND SC:   [laughs] 
MR MANTASHE:   Sometimes it takes very ...[indistinct].  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR MANTASHE:   And they are removed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MANTASHE:   But the point I am making is.  You know 
the concept of state capture developed in the ANC.  We 
never claimed it.  Actually, it did not start as state capture.  
It started as corporate capture and described corporate 
capture as when a company sponsors an individual leader 
in one form or another.  That is corporate capture.   
 
We expanded that concept and if you rising(?) 
the issue into state capture and we said it is when that 
where 
activity(?) 
to 
individual 
leaders 
now 
going 
to 
department in government in the state.  Then you see but 
20 
like a department doing things in a particular way and you 
can facilitates that corruption.  Then we said this is 
corporate capture.   
 
And the corporate(?) part was very vocal about 
this concept.  So it takes time because it is also important 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 207 of 224 
 
to also theorise the nature of the problem so that that 
theory must guide your reaction.  And given that the ANC 
there is no other party that has a conference resolution for 
the establishment of this Commission.   
 
The ANC theorise that it ultimately came to a 
resolution that there must be this Commission into state 
capture.  And many people came up and criticised the ANC 
and said this thing is going to work(?) in the ANC.  In the 
ANC the strong(?) is regarded as prevailed is that these 
exercises are going to help the ANC to come through 
10 
because you do not deal with that unless you want to have 
it. 
 
So what happens here is after a like that it will 
make the ANC wiser in dealing with these issues into the 
future but important of taking time is that you do not take 
decision on your feet just on your own and you take 
decisions and you commit more serious mistakes but now 
wherever in your process that time add to debt(?) and the 
sense(?) of that debt. 
 
The people who have not come before the 
20 
Commission, who – they have come across serious issues 
that are there, it will continue.  And we see that process as 
very fundamental because the crowd(?) is that it is always 
exciting(?) as we improve and growing leaps and bounds 
which has grown during day of covert by 18% called time. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 208 of 224 
 
 
We will trace its problem from the cultural 
revolution and it goes throughout the point where it is 
today but it is where it is today where it says the 
corruption is an exception, functionality(?) is an exception.  
It is because it has gone through a very long process with 
tensions.  And unfortunately some ministers or some 
people who enlarged(?) in that process because that 
almost destroy everything that the revolution stood for. 
 
In South Africa sometimes there is impatience 
about addressing issues and everybody and one professor 
10 
in 
UNISA 
described 
our 
society 
as 
very 
noisy 
and 
impatient.  Mainly it is a good character but sometimes it 
pushes institutions to commit mistakes and those mistakes 
translating to more deeper problems... 
 
All I am saying is that the slowness, the time we 
take is quite important but there must be intention and will 
to correct the situation and I think we are in that situation 
now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you.  Now following on the 
20 
Chair ’s question about the ANC or what should be the 
ANC’s own attitude in respect of when these problems are 
perceived to emerge.  I want to take you to page 127. 
MR MANTASHE:   127. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Paragraph 97.  And I – you will 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 209 of 224 
 
...[intervenes]  
MR MANTASHE:   Come again? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Page 127...  Sorry, page 27, not 127.  
Page 
27, 
paragraph 
97. 
 
And 
you 
will 
be 
aware 
Mr Mantashe 
this 
is 
an 
affidavit 
deposed 
to 
by 
Mr Magashule on the 8 t h of October 2020.  Mr Magashule 
says this: 
“If credible information points to unethical 
behaviour 
by 
a 
public 
representative 
that 
representative should step aside from public 
10 
office and prove his or her innocence in the 
ordinary course...” 
 
You would support that I presume? 
MR MANTASHE:   It has been a resolution of the ANC not 
once – one from one conference to the other. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then what he says and what he 
endorses ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  The slowness, Mr Mantashe, 
I mean you say that this has been the resolution of the 
ANC from one conference to another. 
20 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in terms of how often that has 
happened ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTASHE:   It has happened regularly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has it happened regularly? 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 210 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:   Regularly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTASHE:   I can remind you of the Minister of 
Communication who stepped aside without a noise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTASHE:   I can give you a long list of people 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
MR MANTASHE:   ...who has stepped aside. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay, 
okay. 
 
Maybe 
I 
was 
just 
10 
unnecessary. 
MR MANTASHE:   Ja.  The only problem is that when there 
is an allegation that are revolving around the President, 
everybody takes an interest.  When issues revolve around 
the Secretary General, everybody takes an interest and 
ignore many people who stepped aside because of this 
resolution. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And then what Mr Magashule says and 
you endorse.  He says at page – at paragraph 100 on page 
20 
28.  He says: 
“On behalf of the African National Congress, I 
give an unconditional undertaking that the ANC 
has the political will to make Parliament work 
and 
to 
ensure 
effective 
oversight 
and 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 211 of 224 
 
accountability...” 
 
I take it – I presume I can take it ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You endorse that sentiment? 
MR MANTASHE:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now as admirable as that may be and 
it is admirable, the question that I want to put to you is.  
Well, where have been in the last ten years?  Is it your 
view that throughout that period that that political will has 
been in existence to make Parliament work and ensure 
10 
oversight 
effective 
– 
ensure 
effective 
oversight 
and 
accountability?  And if not, why must we take this 
assurance of the ANC?  What is the context and the 
background to this? 
MR MANTASHE:   My answer will be yes.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, it has always been the position? 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   In other words, we must read this 
assurance of saying it has always been our position that 
we have the political will to make Parliament work and 
20 
ensure effective oversight and accountability?  That is your 
position? 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, I thought you said the other day, 
in fact, I thought you said in your own affidavit that there 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 212 of 224 
 
was weaknesses, confusion, division, failure to do what 
should have been done.  I thought that is what we agreed 
on in your last evidence. 
MR MANTASHE:   No, I think we should understand it this 
way.  The problem with social silence is that it does not 
work like natural silence where you mix water and cereal 
when you are going to pour and to drink.  It does not work 
that way.  The commitment requires repetition of activity 
and consistence of obligation which does not always 
happen even if the desire and the will is there.   
10 
 
And then we must appreciate it that is that and 
number two, you must also appreciate the fact that – the 
social 
science 
is 
because 
when 
you 
deal 
with 
and 
institution of human beings a good intention may be 
resisted and that institution must deal with that resistance 
and that resistance tampers with the way and therefore for 
people who are seen from outside they say that there is no 
political will but there is political will.   
 
There is also very strong resistance that the 
organisation find it difficult to go through but it must 
20 
repeatedly and consistently try to deal with that resistance 
until it makes a breakthrough.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  I see.  If I can take you to the 
next paragraph, paragraph 111?  Mr Magashule says, you 
agree: 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 213 of 224 
 
“Of this political will to translate into action, 
all members of the ANC who are deployed to 
Parliament 
as 
public 
representatives 
are 
expected, 
not 
only 
to 
oversee 
Executive 
Authority but to scrutinise the action of the 
executives as is required by Section 42(3) of 
our country’s Constitution without fear, favour 
or prejudice and to take the Oath of Office 
very seriously, namely, that they will be faithful 
to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, 
10 
respect and uphold the Constitution of the 
republic and perform their functions to the best 
of their ability...” 
 
I take it that you agree with that sentiment? 
MR MANTASHE:   I agree with that. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, I want to do and I do not want to 
belabour this because we have travelled over this material 
on the last occasion in some detail but what I want to put 
to you for your comment, your final comment, as far as I 
am concerned is, whether there is not a conflict between 
20 
this sentiment on the one hand and the sentiment on the 
other hand that there are no circumstances in which should 
be acceptable for a ruling party MP’s to support a vote of 
no confidence of the President.  That one simply cannot be 
reconciled with the other. 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 214 of 224 
 
MR MANTASHE:   No.  That issue – we have dealt with this 
issue over and over.  It is a typical example of where 
politics and law are in conflict.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MANTASHE:   It happens from time to time that 
politically how does this help to be handled?  But in terms 
of the framework, we agree that that sentiment is correct.  
And I want to emphasise this thing of an expectation that 
the ANC should actually be a willing one to expel his 
president.   
10 
 
I think it is a dangerous proposition to the ANC if 
we get defeated in that vote of no confidence and the 
President of the ANC is removed it will happen maybe one 
day.  But this explanation that the ANC must champion a 
vote of no confidence on its president is an expectation 
that is out of this world because the ANC must interact 
[word cut] to say but if this behaviour is in conflict with the 
commitment and the oath you have taken.  We do that – I 
would not in public, we do not call a press conference, we 
do that all the time.  I wish you could attend some of the 
20 
NEC meetings where they were discussing about very 
serious matters, whether it is the question of Nkandla or 
the Public Protector ’s report for this.  The NEC, when it 
deals with those issues, actually almost tear itself apart.  
That does not reflect lack of political will, it reflect 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 215 of 224 
 
contradictions intraparty, in the party itself, there are 
contradictions in the party itself and the ANC must 
navigate 
through 
those 
contradictions, 
that 
is 
not 
a 
question that says we are not having the political will and 
therefore, we disagree with the constitution.  No, that is 
not the issue.  It is the issue of an institution of human 
beings. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If I can just follow up on that? 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Because the record will bear me out, 
10 
we get a transcript of the evidence. 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But I am not sure that I heard you 
correctly, that is why I want to just check.  What I thought 
you said at the beginning of that quite long answer is that 
in this situation, the situation of the vote of no confidence 
and the alleged conflict in the constitution and the oath, I 
thought I heard you to say that this is a situation which 
politics and the law are in conflict. 
MR MANTASHE:   In the operation, yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you really are saying is that 
politics must trump the law. 
MR MANTASHE:   That is why at the end of the day 
political contradiction and in court – political contradiction, 
how did that end up in court because sometimes political 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 216 of 224 
 
decisions that are taken are in conflict with the law and we 
end up in court and sometimes the court rules us that no, 
listen, thou shall do as follows and every time that 
happens to us we comply including nullifying outcome of 
conferences of the ANC.  We comply all the time because 
the political is in conflict with the law and we end up in 
court and the court give the... 
ADV FREUND SC:   Ja, I do not dispute that what you have 
just said is factually correct but I do have and I have to put 
to you a real concern about what you have just told me 
10 
because what you seem to be saying is – well, let me put it 
this way, the Constitution Court has used a German term to 
summarise our Constitution, we are a regsstaat, we are 
state founded constitutionally in law and what I hear you to 
be saying, unless you correct me, is that if there is a 
conflict between the political imperatives that deal with the 
interests 
of 
the 
African 
National 
Congress 
as 
an 
organisation on the one hand and the law on the other 
hand, they law will take care of itself later, for the 
meantime politics must be superior. 
20 
MR MANTASHE:   No.  The point I am making is that there 
is a political organisation called the African National 
Congress 
with the primary responsibility to run that 
institution.  When you are Secretary General that is your 
primary task and because the union of the ANC is not in 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 217 of 224 
 
conflict with the constitution of the Republic, it has never 
been found to be in conflict with the constitution of the 
Republic, we do that.   
 
Now in the process of executing political work you 
may be seen to be acting in conflict with the law.  Half the 
time we end up in court for that and when the court gives a 
judgment we comply. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, we discussed this last time but you 
may or may not have heard that when Ms Modise was here 
I raised the issue and I said when you are coming back 
10 
later we will revisit it.  It is important that what you say 
about this issue is understood the way you intend it to be 
understood because there will be members of parliament 
who are members of the ANC who are watching or listening 
but also just the public because the ANC is not just 
another 
political 
party, 
it 
is 
the 
majority 
party 
in 
parliament.  Okay.  Now I was – I remained with the 
concern last time because I understood you in effect to say 
– and you might say I misunderstood you.  I understood 
you in effect to be saying look, when it comes to the vote 
20 
of no confidence in the President or a President of the ANC 
who is President of the country on a motion put in by an 
opposition party, no member of the ANC should – no 
member of parliament who is an ANC member should ever 
vote in support of that motion.  I think I must add no matter 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 218 of 224 
 
what the circumstances are.  That is how I understood it 
and I had a concern with that.  
 
I think in part you explained it by saying that could 
create all kinds of problems for the ANC and I understood 
you to say it could end up in the destruction of the party 
when you remove a President of the country, as a 
President of the ANC in that way and I was concerned 
about 
that 
simply 
because 
the 
mere 
fact 
that 
the 
constitution does contemplate that members of parliament 
can vote on such a motion and does not say only members 
10 
of the opposition can vote and the mere fact that the oath 
of office of all members of parliament is to the effect that 
they are going to be faithful to the Republic seems to 
suggest to me that there may well come a time where a 
member of parliament, who is a member of the ANC, truly 
believes that to be faithful in the Republic in a particular 
case with regard to a particular President at a particular 
time would mean that he or she must vote in support of 
that motion and on my understanding of what you were 
saying, it seems that there would be consequences for a 
20 
member of the ANC who would ever do that and yet he or 
she would be complying with the constitution of the 
Republic which the ANC supports.  So I had that concern 
which I wanted to raise and when Mr Freund raises the 
question again I think it is an opportunity to make sure that 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 219 of 224 
 
one does not I misunderstand what you have said. 
MR MANTASHE:   You see, Chairperson, you are using a 
word that changed the context. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you must correct this. 
MR MANTASHE:   One word, one word, you changed the 
context altogether. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must correct that. 
MR MANTASHE:   You say ANC, the majority party, 
members will ever vote – will ever, you see?  You put ever. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, yes, yes, yes. 
10 
MR MANTASHE:   Ever vote with the opposition. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR MANTASHE:   Now that ever… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Changes. 
MR MANTASHE:   You are putting the words and going to 
change the context. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTASHE:   And changes the reality that in one vote 
of no confidence – I said nine members voted with the 
opposition.  When I came out of here I was corrected by 
20 
another MP, said no, we are actually 35.  Okay?  So if 35 
members of the ANC voted with the opposition, therefore 
“ever” cannot apply.  Okay?  The party may require to 
consolidate its votes as a party but the reality is that 
voting happens in parliament, they would want a secret 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 220 of 224 
 
ballot and we allow the secret ballot.   
Once we allow the secret ballot, immediately the 
word “ever” collapses, does not apply.  And people voting 
one vote of no confidence, 35 members of the ANC voted 
with the opposition, okay?  Now so – and meaning that we 
did not investigate who they are, tell you the story of our 
faithfulness to the constitution.  We proceeded that line 
with them but a person who runs a party always seek to 
have maximum unity in the party.   
 
That is why I made an example last week of I have 
10 
never 
seen 
– 
I 
cannot 
[indistinct] 
10.28 
experience 
[indistinct] 10.30 for a man of my age, it is a lot of 
experience.  Three years is a lot of experience.  Now with 
those years I have never seen opposition parties having a 
divided vote on any issue but I have never had, equally, 
any pressure put on them for this faithfulness to the 
constitution.  Never.  It is put on the ANC and our 
understanding is that it is desirable for the ANC vote to be 
divided.  And the question is why is it desirable for the 
ANC vote to be divided?  That is the issue.   
20 
It is not the faithfulness on lack thereof to the 
constitution, it is a question of the party system we have 
adopted.  We have elected a political party system.  Every 
member of parliament is on the list of the ANC and it is the 
job of a Secretary General.  I am no longer one and I 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 221 of 224 
 
always sympathise with SGO of the ANC to keep the ANC 
united.  That is the issue.   
And in driving for that unity, does not reflect lack of 
faithfulness to the constitution, it seeks to have optimal 
operation of the party because if we can have a list of the 
ANC and you say when you arrive at parliament you are 
free agents, we will have no party and therefore our role in 
supporting the constitution will be much weakened when 
the party collapses.   
So it is not the party or the Republic, it is gathering 
10 
the ANC so that its faithfulness to the constitution is 
exercised with responsibility.  That is the reality of the 
matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I do not have at my fingertips the 
newspaper article but I think we discussed on the last 
occasion that you personally not only encouraged members 
of the African National Congress party caucus to vote 
against the last two votes of no confidence but you have 
said to them that to support such a vote would be the 
20 
highest form of betrayal.  Am I right?  Is that what you 
said? 
MR MANTASHE:   Let me talk about betrayal.  My second 
language is Sesotho, Mr Chairperson, in Sesotho betrayal 
is called u hlaba ka liphio, that means stabbing you on the 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 222 of 224 
 
kidney and you cannot stab anybody on the kidney unless 
you are close enough and therefore, breaking a position of 
the party is betrayal of the party position.  You are 
stabbing the party on the kidney because you say to the 
party yes, you are a majority but it does not matter, here 
we are free agents, we can, with the majority of us, vote 
against the portion of the party.  Then that undermines the 
party system.  We do not have a political system, we have 
a party system, party political system.  It means that that 
party is a majority in theory but in practice it is never a 
10 
majority because it is a party of free agents.  I think you 
should understand that politically what does it mean, to 
have a party of free agents?  It means that you no party 
actually. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess your answer is you are not 
denying that you said what was attributed to you. 
MR MANTASHE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are giving a certain context. 
MR MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  There is a great 
more I could deal with but my view, the affidavits speak for 
themselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no, that is …[intervenes] 
ADV FREUND SC:   And unless there are other issues you 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 223 of 224 
 
would like me to raise, I have no further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think we have covered most of what 
I also wanted to be dealt with.  No, no, I think if we have 
no further questions then we are done, yes.  Yes.  Mr 
Mantashe, I am going to excuse you unless you have some 
issue that you want to deal with before I excuse you. 
MR 
MANTASHE: 
 
 
No, 
I 
have 
nothing 
to 
express.  
Expressing 
my 
gratitude 
that 
I 
was 
invited 
to 
the 
Commission, I was given time to express my views even 
where there is apparent disagreement.  I did not have a 
10 
sense of hostility.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MANTASHE:   And to me that was important, it made 
our submission to be optimal.  Thank you very much for 
inviting us, we are looking forward to further investigation 
of the ANC.   
The ANC supports this Commission and it wishes 
that this Commission finishes its work and come with a 
report.  We will read that report with interest, what the 
outcome is and that is it.  I am quite grateful that I was 
20 
invited here and I am hoping that our contribution as 
various players from the ANC made the work of the 
Commission real and [indistinct] 16.26.  Thank you very 
much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, thank you very much, Mr Mantashe.  I 
19 APRIL 2021 – DAY 377 
 
Page 224 of 224 
 
can say that the contribution that the ANC has made 
including 
your 
contribution 
in 
your 
affidavit 
and 
the 
contribution in Mr Magashule’s affidavit which you have 
confirmed, they include some recommendations that are 
quite attractive that should be looked at quite carefully by 
the Commission.  It seems that there is a desire to try and 
put some recommendations on the table to assist the 
Commission in whatever contributions it makes.  Thank you 
very much we appreciate the contribution of the ANC.  
Thank you very much, you are now excused.   
10 
 
We are going to adjourn and just for the benefit of 
the public, tomorrow the Commission will continue to hear 
evidence, the evidence of Mr Montana, the former Group 
CEO of PRASA.  That is during the day session and in the 
evening session tomorrow, the Commission will hear the 
evidence of Dr Dintwe, the Inspector General.  Ja, okay, 
we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 20 APRIL 2021 
