 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
17 MARCH 2021 
 
 
DAY 362 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 153 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
17 MARCH 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 3 of 153 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 17 MARCH 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Soni, good afternoon 
everybody. 
ADV SONI SC:  Good afternoon Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are we ready? 
ADV SONI SC:  We are.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson just one or two housekeeping 
matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  We are continuing the evidence of Ms 
Peters you will recall that we did not finalise her evidence 
on the 23 r d of February so we want to finish it today.   
 
I also want to place my indebtedness to my learned 
friend and Ms Peters for making themselves available.  We 
had originally scheduled on account of sittings earlier 
today or scheduled sittings that Ms Peters would come in 
at five but this slot became available and 00:01:05 my 
learned friend Mr Majabu and Ms Peters have been most 
accommodating in saying we can start at two o’clock.   
20 
 
I just wanted to express my gratitude to them 
Chairperson; 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I also want to do that and good 
afternoon Ms Peters and Mr Majabu.  I have been given 
feedback about your cooperation with the commission in 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 4 of 153 
 
terms of making it possible for us to sit earlier than had 
been planned and I just want both of you to know that we 
appreciate that cooperation. 
ADV SONI SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chairperson there is one 
more housekeeping matter.  You will recall that there were 
certain disputes between Ms Peters and Mr Molefe and 
both had agreed that they will file further affidavits.  
 
Mr 
Molefe 
made 
his 
affidavit 
– 
delivered 
his 
affidavit earlier today.  We made that available to my 
learned friend Mr Majabu but it is too soon.  So the 
10 
arrangement we have reached Chairperson is that in 
respect of all matters and they may be related to some of 
the matters now are dealt with in Mr Molefe’s affidavit and 
Ms Peters will file an affidavit in about ten days and then 
we can deal with it once we have considered it in 
consultation with my learned friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is – that is fine.  That is fine.   
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  And I guess the Registrar can just 
administer the oath again? 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS PETERS:  Elizabeth Dipuo Peters. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS PETERS:  No. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 5 of 153 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MS PETERS:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV SONI SC:  Ms Peters on the previous occasion when 
10 
you had your mask on the machine was not able to record 
that – thank you.  Ms Peters in fairness to you we 
interrupted your evidence but I just want to take you back.  
You might remember we were dealing with four topics and 
the one we had now reached – well if I could just go 
through those again? 
 
The first topic is the non-appointment of the CEO. 
 
The second topic is the stopping of the inquiry. 
 
The third topic is the – the dismissal of the board 
and  
 
20 
 
The fourth topic is Mr Letswalo. 
 
We have dealt with 1, 2 and 4 the one we are 
dealing with at present is the dismissal of the board and I 
– I just need to put the context again because of the time 
period that has elapsed since you were last here. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 6 of 153 
 
 
I said to you that there seems to be an indication of 
what was going to happen when one looks at what 
happened in Parliament and you remember on the last 
occasion we were dealing with – and I know you were not 
there but I am – I am placing that as part of the context. 
 
We 
were 
dealing 
with 
what 
happened 
at 
the 
Portfolio Committee meeting of the 31 s t of August and if 
you look at Parliamentary Bundle 3 page 383 is where we 
stopped. 
 
So I will just tell you what I am going to do in the 
10 
early part of the questioning today Ms Dipuo Peters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to make sure we have got that 
correctly reflected on the transcript. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The bundle is Parliamentary Oversight 
Bundle 3. 
ADV SONI SC:  Bundle 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say … 
ADV SONI SC:   Exhibit ZZ12. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We go to ZZ12 – Exhibit ZZ12 and we 
20 
find it at page? 
ADV SONI SC:  At – we at page 383 that is – that is where 
we are today Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Just to remind Ms Peters in case 
she has forgotten we use the black numbers at the top. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 7 of 153 
 
ADV SONI SC:  At the top. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Left hand corner ja. 383 I have got it. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you … 
MS PETERS:  As you 00:06:19 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 383 top left corner in black 
numbers and not – disregard the red numbers.  It is 
somewhere in the middle of the bundle. 
MS PETERS:  33? 
ADV SONI SC:  383. 
CHAIRPERSON:  383.  383.   
10 
ADV SONI SC:  If you – you do no need to go to it but on 
page 
382 
you 
will 
see 
that 
that 
records 
what 
has 
happened; what happened at the Portfolio Committee 
meeting of the 31 s t of August. 
 
Now... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just again Mr Soni I am sorry just to let 
the public know her evidence relates to PRASA. 
ADV SONI SC:  Indeed Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  And that is the reason why we are dealing 
20 
with the Portfolio Committee on Transport in Parliament Ms 
Peters.  
 
Now of course as Minister of Transport one of the 
entities that reported to you was PRASA, that is correct is 
it not Ms Peters? 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 8 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright but let us just – I just want to go to 
page 383 you might remember the issue arose from the 
fact that on the 24 t h of August Mr Molefe had filed an 
affidavit in which he had indicated that Mr Mashaba had 
said to him that he had been asked to make certain 
donations to the ANC.  You might remember that.  I am 
only saying that that is what the evidence was. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright.  Now I want you to look at the third 
10 
paragraph on page 383 and you will see – I will just read it 
out and I am going to only just read the relevant parts out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Again Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to make sure we are on the same 
page this document that you are going to read from you 
need to just say what it is and it is not minutes is it not? 
ADV SONI SC:  No it is not minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it summaries – it is summaries of 
discussions at Portfolio – of the Portfolio Committee on 
20 
Transport as provided by the Parliamentary Monitoring 
Group.  Is that the correct name? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think PMG. 
ADV SONI SC:  PMG yes. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 9 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So that is what you will be reading – 
you are reading from?  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  And of course Mr De Freitas the DA MP’s 
recollection of what happened during these. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay yes.  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  So on the 3 r d of – oh sorry on the 4 t h 
paragraph he records that Mr De Freitas Ms Masangwane 
stated that Mr Molefe has insinuated that the ANC had 
10 
received R80 million from PRASA and then thereafter at 
the end of that paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh – sorry.  Mr Soni you will have to 
forgive me I am terribly sorry. 
ADV SONI SC:  No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I may have given wrong information.  We 
must just make sure that at 383 whether it is Mr De Freitas’ 
recollection on what happened. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As opposed to the PMG’s summary. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  PMG – yes.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  It is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is Mr De Freitas’ recollection. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 10 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson has been asked if we could 
for technical reasons adjourn for five minutes because the 
– we cannot – we are not recording live on TV at the 
moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so they just want to attend to that 
technical problem? 
ADV SONI SC:  It is – assess smart checking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  We will take a short adjournment.   
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  As you please, Chairperson and 
I apologise for interruption. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no.  It is something beyond our 
control. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ja.  Now, Ms Peters, this – what we 
20 
have 
been 
through 
is 
what 
we 
did 
already 
on 
the 
23 r d of February.  I am just refreshing your memory.  Can I 
then go up to page 384 where, at the top of the page, it is 
said the meeting – this is, of course, the meeting of the 
Portfolio Committee of the 31 s t of August: 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 11 of 153 
 
“...was 
concluded 
with 
the 
Chairperson 
expressing anger towards the board, saying 
that they should be thrown out, lock-stock-and-
barrel, because it had been disrespectful to 
the committee. 
Mr Maswanganyi echoes the anger about the 
allegations in the media about the ANC getting 
R 80 million...” 
 
Now 
again, 
I 
need 
to 
put 
this 
in 
context 
Ms Peters.  You were not.  I am not asking you to confirm 
10 
the correctness.  I am merely saying that prior to the 
dismissal of the board, this is what was going on in the 
Portfolio Committee, as part of the background, I am just 
painting that picture.   
MS PETERS:   This is what I pick up here in terms of the 
recording of the honourable member that the chairperson is 
said to have said at that committee meeting.  Incidentally, I 
do not even remember when I was part of the meeting and I 
am not a member of the Portfolio Committee. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I know that. 
20 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am just putting that in context.  
Then can I...  Okay, this you know.  The board is dismissed 
on the 8 t h of March.  Is that correct?  I see you shake your 
head.  That is correct, is it not? 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 12 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, 8 t h of March 2017? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now the announcement of the 
dismissal 
of 
the 
board 
was 
made 
at 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee that we were talking about and which had those 
deliberations on the 31 s t of August 2016.  That is correct, 
is it not? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I would not remember where 
the board, I mean the committee got the information about 
10 
the dismissal of the board. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay I am going to come to that. 
MS PETERS:   Oh, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But do you not remember that you 
sent your Deputy Director General to inform the Portfolio 
Committee that the board is dismissed.  Did you not 
remember that that has happened on the 8 t h of March? 
MS PETERS:   On the 8 t h of March, Chairperson, like I 
have indicated in my previous appearance before the 
committee, was during the time I was off sick.   
20 
 
And whether the Deputy Director General took 
the opportunity at the committee meeting to announce, I 
would not be able to connect the two because as the DDG 
who is – was the acting DDG at the time, he went to the 
Portfolio Committee.   
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 13 of 153 
 
 
So if he had information, I think it was correct 
for him to actually inform the committee, not necessarily 
that he was sent precisely to do that reporting there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Let us not deviate from the 
real issue.  The real issue is.  Before the announcement 
was made in the Portfolio Committee on the 8 t h, there was 
a debate on the 7 t h of March.  And can I ask you to, 
please, look at page 387 of that Parliamentary Bundle 3.  
And you will see right in the middle of the page it has the 
7 t h of March.  Do you see that? 
10 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Do you see that Ms Peters? 
MS PETERS:   Page 387, Chair? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   Yes? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It starts up with the 3 r d of March and 
then the next entry is the 7 t h of March.  Do you see that? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  I want you to turn now to the 
next page, page 388 because that is now a debate about 
20 
Mr Letsoalo and the salary he received.  That is not 
relevant for what we want but in the second paragraph on 
page 388, I am going to read to you what transpired in 
respect of that debate.   
“Mr Malutsi from the EFF and Mr G Radebe 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 14 of 153 
 
from the ANC called for the suspension of the 
corrupt board and a comprehensive inquiry 
into PRASA while Mr Sibande felt that the 
board and its various actions were in question, 
particularly, with regards to the fact that the 
CEO of PRASA had not yet been appointed...” 
 
Now that is what is recorded.  Do you accept 
that that is what happened or as according to Mr De 
Freitas, who gave evidence, incidentally, on these matters? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, that is the evidence of Mr De 
10 
Freitas. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I guess what you may be able to 
say is.  You are not in a position to dispute whether that is 
what happened.  You do not know if that is what happened 
because you were not there.  But if he says that is what 
happened, you are prepared to deal with the matter on the 
basis that is a version of what happened.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   I was not there Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now he came and gave evidence on 
20 
that.  That is all we are saying.  We need to accept when 
people take the oath, they would speak the truth.  If there 
is something that is different, then it will come out but that 
is the evidence before us at the moment.   
MS PETERS:   I take note of that Chairperson. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 15 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Then the next issue is this.  
Mr Ramatlakane of the ANC said that: 
“...that issue of Mr Letsoalo came himself, was 
a scapegoat.   
He claimed that Mr Letsoalo had refused to 
pay Werksmans Attorneys and that a Sunday 
Times article about Mr Letsoalo paying himself 
was without a doubt a sponsored(?) article...” 
 
Again, we accept you were not there.  Okay but I 
10 
am just putting the context because all of this is going to 
be important in relation to the questions I ask you.   
MS PETERS:   Noted Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Then in the next paragraph 
Mr De Freitas says: 
“Although I agreed with Mr Radebe that an 
inquiry should be lodged, our reasons for it 
were different. 
While I had been fighting for an inquiry into 
PRASA to expose the corruption in it and 
20 
identify the network and individuals therein, it 
is 
that, 
that 
made 
corruption 
possible, 
Mr Radebe 
and 
the 
other 
ANC 
members 
wanted to do the very opposite. 
They were angry with Mr Popo Molefe for 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 16 of 153 
 
speaking out about allegations of pay-outs to 
ANC coffers, a cardinal sin for the ANC. 
They also needed the attention diverted away 
from the corruptors and needed a distraction. 
Molefe who had dared to “betray” the ANC and 
his board, were the perfect scapegoats...” 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you can just say betray in inverted 
commas on the text. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, I beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  That is so.   
“The ANC also needed emotive issue to occupy 
the attention away from the looting of PRASA 
and the appointment of an expensive legal 
team by Molefe was a perfect issue...” 
 
Finally, on that day, I just want to record the 
following, as also said by Mr De Freitas.   
“The chairperson said that she would write a 
letter to the Minister with the President copied 
in the letter, explaining that the board had 
20 
been involved in dispute after dispute and thus 
an inquiry was necessary...” 
 
Those what is recorded there.  Can I just leave 
that out for a minute and ask you?  Did you get around the 
7 t h of March a letter from the chairperson saying that the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 17 of 153 
 
board had been involved in dispute after dispute? 
MS PETERS:   I do not remember Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And can I take you to the next page?  
On the 8 t h of March, and this is the day that is quite critical 
for the issue we are looking at, namely, the dismissal of 
the board.  Now in the second paragraph under the 
heading 8 t h of March, the following is recorded: 
“Members said there was a reluctance to 
answer questions by the PRASA Board...” 
 
Now this is a criticism of the PRASA Board.   
10 
“Mr Sibande of the ANC agreed with the 
request of Mr Hunsinger of the DA that an ad-
hoc Parliamentary Committee be formed to get 
firm details on the appointment of Werksmans 
and the reasons for their contract...” 
 
Then Mr De Freitas continues: 
“Mr Ramatlakane said that more work had to 
be done. 
He said that besides the formation of an ad-
hoc Parliamentary Committee, the Portfolio 
20 
Committee was empowered to conduct an 
investigation and suggested that a resolution 
to this effect be adopted. 
Mr Mashinghani suggested that the committee 
deal with the matter of the inquiry at its next 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 18 of 153 
 
meeting. 
He asked if the current board was under-
performing compared to the various board as 
there was only three months left of its term..” 
 
Now that is the point that Mr Mashinghani makes 
at the Portfolio Committee makes.  You understand that? 
MS PETERS:   I understand that Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Can I ask you then to look at 
page 390 and it is the second paragraph before the 
heading that says:  “Peter fires the board.”  Oh, sorry.  It is 
10 
the last paragraph before the heading.  And can I just read 
that into the record?   
“At the end of the second day of hearings, the 
committee unanimously agreed that it had 
undertaken an investigation into PRASA and 
the problems that it was currently confronting. 
The Terms of Reference and added details 
would be discussed in subsequent meetings. 
The motion to initiate an inquiry into PRASA 
was 
reconfirmed 
by 
myself 
at 
that 
same 
20 
meeting. 
The 
Parliamentary 
Communication 
Service 
released a statement echoing this...” 
 
Now the next paragraph then is under the 
heading “Peters...”, that is Minister Peters “...fires the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 19 of 153 
 
board”.   
“Just before the end of the meeting the 
Department 
of 
Transport 
acting 
DG, 
Mathabatha Mokonyama read out a letter that 
had been sent to the committee by Minister 
Dipuo Peters in which she dissolved the board. 
In her letter, Peters explained that she had 
been booked off by her doctor, as she claimed 
to be ill...” 
 
Now let us just put aside the claim of illness and 
10 
so on.  You did say you were ill.  That is correct, is it not? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And you did send the letter to the 
Portfolio Committee? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson.  Can I give context to it? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [No audible reply]  
MS PETERS:   This Portfolio Committee is an important 
stakeholder to the department and to the entities that they 
report to.  So it is important that if there is anything that is 
happening, you then inform the Portfolio Committee.  When 
20 
I informed the chair of the Portfolio Committee, I was not 
aware there was even a committee meeting that is sitting 
on that particular day.   
 
So the letter to the board to resolve that, gets 
copied to the DDG as well as to the Portfolio Committee for 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 20 of 153 
 
them to know the status as at that particular moment and it 
was in that instance that that happened.  And I think we 
are not in control of how processes turn out.  So it 
happens that on that day there was a meeting.   
 
And I think the acting DG took that opportunity 
to inform them because he then received it.  In the days of 
technology it is very fast for somebody to get information 
even if it is – as you are seated here, you can get an email 
that informs you about happenings that are – things that 
are happening outside here without you necessarily being 
10 
aware.   
 
So if it has relevance, then you inform the 
relevant stakeholders but I think true to the DG, if he 
receives that type of notice, it was just correct for him to 
inform the committee at that particular moment that 
incidentally, as we speak, there is this correspondence and 
it happened.   
 
And Chairperson, Honourable De Freitas says 
that I claim to be sick.  I was sick.  In my entire life, I have 
never wished anything negative on myself because I 
20 
believe that what you say will happen.  So I can never 
claim to be sick when I am not sick.  Thank you Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, if you cast your eye on it, 
you will see he makes that allegation and that is why I 
deliberately left it out because it is not relevant to the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 21 of 153 
 
issue we are discussing but I just needed to place that in 
context.  We are not dealing with that issue at all.  We are 
just dealing with the fact that it was announced at the 
Portfolio Committee.  You have explained the context. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, alright.  Can I then ask you to 
turn to page 391 and in the last sentence of the first 
unfinished paragraph on page 391, Mr De Freitas records 
the following: 
“The Minister had not provided reasons to the 
10 
Portfolio Committee and/or board members 
themselves for firing the board...” 
 
Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, in the last hearing, I think on 
the 22 n d or the 23 r d, I did give an indication that given an 
opportunity, I will try and retrieve some of the documents.  
So I would have – it has – this thing happened more than 
four years ago.  So I do not remember the exact wording of 
the letter.  So I would request for that indulgence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so you cannot remember whether in 
20 
the letter you gave reasons or not?  That is what you 
cannot remember? 
MS PETERS:   I cannot because that is how Honourable De 
Freitas is speaking it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 22 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   That either to the committee or to the board 
members themselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS PETERS:   So I need to refresh my mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Do we not have a copy of the letter 
in the bundle or in some bundle that was given to the 
Portfolio Committee? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, may I make this point? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That matter is dealt with in the 
10 
judgment, the ensuing judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And I purposely had not cluttered the 
papers with that, but yours ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is in an important issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In terms of the exercise of... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So if we need it, we can get it later. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But for now, I want to develop it on 
the basis of how the court that looked at the application to 
set aside the dismissals, dealt with those real allegations 
that are made here. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 23 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, what – I think if you recall that 
in the judgment, the court said something about whether 
reasons were given in that letter or not.  It might be helpful 
to mention to Ms Peters that the court did say, yes, the 
reasons were given in the letter ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...or they were not given.  Just – 
because probably she would accept that.  That is what I am 
saying. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I understand. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, okay.  Ms Peters, I am going to 
read to you the relevant parts of the judgment.  And this is 
what the judge says.   
 
The judge says you did not give the reasons.  
You were asked for reasons.  You did not give the reasons 
before the matter was taken to court.  You only gave your 
reasons at a press conference on the 13 t h of March.  But 
that is what the judge says and I will read to you those 
relevant parts but I did not want to clutter this file with 
20 
that.   
 
But Chairperson, you are quite right, because 
the issue had been raised.  But we will deal with that 
matter and your recollection when I deal with it later.  Is 
that alright Ms Peters? 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 24 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   Alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But I just want you to get the 
chronology in place first.  Alright.  Now that is on the 
8 t h of March.  Now I just want to ask you because this is 
another matter dealt with in the judgment.  The board 
members indicated to you that they would be challenging in 
court your decision to dismiss them, did they not? 
MS PETERS:   Come again Chair? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The board members, when the 
decision 
was 
announced 
that 
the 
board 
had 
been 
10 
dismissed, each of the members of the board had been 
dismissed, the board members told you that they were 
going to take the matter to court.  That is correct, is it not? 
MS PETERS:   I do not remember if it was all the board 
members but I remember Mr Molefe. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay but he did tell you? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now on the 8 t h, did he tell you before 
the 8 t h or after – or after the 8 t h? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean on the 8 t h or after the 8 t h. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am sorry.  On the 8 t h ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 8 t h or before.  Ja ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, of course.  Of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But...  Yes.   
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 25 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   It is very difficult to recall the chronology of 
the engagements Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But two(?) is a matter dealt with. 
MS PETERS:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then in the next... Oh, so sorry.  
Then on the 8 t h of March you announced the interim board.  
That is in the first paragraph under the heading “Minister 
Peters 
announces 
a 
new 
PRASA 
Board”. 
 
Then 
in 
paragraph 2 of that section of Mr De Freitas’ minutes, he 
10 
says: 
“As was revealed at the meeting, the members 
of the board had gone through the entire 
process in 2016 to identify someone to serve 
as PRASA Group CEO but the Minister had 
stopped the whole process and asked the 
board to start again. 
As quoted in the media, I said the Minister had 
realised that she had messed up with this 
decision and was trying to fix the problem she 
20 
had caused...” 
 
That 
is 
his 
interpretation 
or 
that 
is 
his 
commentary on what happened.   
MS PETERS:   That is his interpretation Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But you will recall, Ms Peters, 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 26 of 153 
 
because I deliberately read that part to you, that one of the 
Parliamentarians had said that the non-appointment of the 
CEO was a good reason to dismiss the board.  Remember 
that we said, that was a passage that I read to you?  We 
do not need to go to it Ms Peters.  I am just trying to 
remind you that that is the context in which that issues 
arises.   
MS PETERS:   That is what the Parliamentary Committee 
believed Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then on the 14 t h of March, the 
10 
Portfolio Committee meets again, this is the Portfolio 
Committee on Transport.  And this is what happens at that 
meeting.  In the paragraph under that heading, Mr De 
Freitas says: 
“Despite there being unanimous agreement by 
the Portfolio Committee on the 8 t h of March 
that an inquiry into PRASA would take place, 
at this meeting, on the 14 t h of March 2017, the 
ANC members had a complete opposite stance 
to what they had stated only six days earlier. 
20 
Suddenly, 
according 
to 
the 
ANC, 
no 
investigation was necessary. 
According to the ANC members, the Minister ’s 
removal of the board meant that no inquiry was 
necessary, as if suddenly all allegations of 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 27 of 153 
 
corruption, theft, looting and mismanagement 
and maladministration had never taken place. 
The reality is that they have taken place and 
whether a board led by Molefe was in place or 
not, an inquiry was absolutely needed...” 
 
Now Ms Peters I need to be fair to you.  This has 
nothing to do with you.  This is what happened at the 
Portfolio Committee but you understand the context that I 
am trying to paint, that the announcement is made in the 
Portfolio Committee which had decided on the 8 t h that 
10 
there is this inquiry.   
 
Six days later, the Portfolio Committee members 
said but now that the board has been dismissed, there is 
no need for that and Mr De Freitas is challenging the 
proprietary of that...  I am just putting the whole thing into 
context.   
MS PETERS:   I understand what the question relates to 
Chairperson but I cannot say because I was not part of the 
committee.  I did not give the concurrence.  I cannot – I 
understand the context that is being raised here, according 
20 
to Mr De Freitas.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think what Mr Soni is doing.  He just 
wants to make sure before he asks you certain questions, 
you are both – all of us are on the same page as to the 
context of those questions.  So when it comes to those 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 28 of 153 
 
questions, we have our memories freshened in terms of the 
context.   
MS PETERS:   Thank you, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then on the last paragraph of that 
page, page 391, Mr De Freitas makes the following 
observation and obviously it is a political point but let me 
just place it on record.  He says: 
“Obviously behind the scenes, they had been 
instructed to tow the line and insist in a cover-
up 
that 
involved 
people 
all 
the 
way 
up, 
10 
allegedly, including the then President Zuma.   
This was clear to me as the discussions in the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
were 
always 
flaunted 
away 
from 
investigating 
the 
corruption 
in 
PRASA but instead their focussed had been on 
Molefe...” 
 
Now I have made the point that that is his 
political point.   
MS PETERS:   Noted Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then on page 392, he continues, 
20 
again dealing with the 14 t h of March.  Yes. 
“Ms Sibande said that the committee had then 
agreed on an inquiry initially. 
However, the committee had not anticipated 
that the Minister would be so quick to respond 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 29 of 153 
 
about 
PRASA 
and 
an 
inquiry 
was 
not 
necessary as the PRASA Board had already 
been expelled...” 
 
Now that is what Mr Sibande said in relation to 
now the link between the dismissal of the board and the 
need of the inquiry.   
“Mr Maswanganyi suggested that the Minister 
be requested to appear before the committee 
after 
which 
the 
committee 
should 
decide 
whether to pursue the inquiry or not...” 
10 
 
Let me ask you outside this?  Were you asked 
after the board was dismissed to appear before the 
Portfolio Committee on Transport? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, the request for meetings 
before the committee was happening frequently and I would 
not recall at that particular time whether there was that 
specific issue relating, usually we go to present quarterly 
reports and in it we would then have to give other matters 
of importance, so I would not recall, Chairperson, what 
exactly happened after that particular process.  I am also 
20 
trying 
as 
the 
evidence 
leader 
is 
directing 
to 
those 
statements trying to recall exactly the sequence of events 
during that particular period because there was a lot of 
things that were happening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe one could put this question.  Do 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 30 of 153 
 
you recall that at some stage you did deal with the issue of 
the reasons for the dismissal of the board before the 
portfolio committee whether you were called especially to 
deal with that or whether it was one of the routine 
meetings? 
MS PETERS:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not recall? 
MS PETERS:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then Mr de Freitas says: 
10 
“I stated that since the 8 March meeting it appeared 
that the ANC members had been instructed to toe 
the line and keep quiet.  I expressed concern, the 
portfolio committee allowed the minister to tell it 
how to conduct oversight.  I could not support the 
proposal to abandon the inquiry.  I expressed my 
disappointment that the committee was not acting 
as an independent body.  I explained that I no 
choice 
but 
to 
speak 
to 
the 
media 
about 
the 
corruption at PRASA which involved billions.  I 
20 
explained that this committee’s change of heart had 
become part of the cover-up.” 
Again, Ms Peters, all I am trying to do is set out the whole 
context.  
MS PETERS:   Thank you, Chair. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 31 of 153 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then in the last line of the next 
paragraph: 
“The Chairperson recommended that the committee 
suspend the inquiry until members had heard from 
the minister.” 
Now you say you cannot remember whether you did 
address the committee, is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I then ask you to turn to the next 
page and that is page 393?  Now this records what 
10 
happened on the 30 March.  You will see it is in the first 
third of the page.  On the 30 March, new Transport Minister 
Joe Maswanganyi is appointed.  It was on the 30 March 
2017 as a result of President Zuma’s cabinet reshuffles.  
One of the ANC portfolio committee members, Mr Joe 
Maswanganyi, was appointed as Transport Minister.  Now it 
is correct that you were relieved of this portfolio on the 30 
March 2017, Ms Peters? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair, the evening of the 30 March. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I just want to read to you what 
20 
Mr de Freitas says about the replacement …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Soni, I know that 
sometimes the – or sometimes Presidents do not give or 
tell members of cabinet the reasons when they relieve 
them on their portfolios but sometimes they are told.  I 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 32 of 153 
 
think Mr Ramatlhodi told me when he gave evidence here 
that when he was moved from the Ministry of Mineral 
Resources to Public Service and Administration he was told 
that he was being promoted. So may I find out whether you 
were told the reasons why you were being relieved. 
MS PETERS:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I was going to deal with that but Iet 
me deal with the related issues, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, that is fine.  Ja. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, you have served in the 
cabinet for about ten years, if I understand correctly. 
MS PETERS:   About eight years, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   About? 
MS PETERS:   Eight years. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Eight years, sorry.  And prior to that 
you were the Premier of the Northern Cape, correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair, correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It was four, five years, as I 
understand. 
20 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair, correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now nobody likes to be relieved and 
you had a history of service to this country and I am saying 
this with thanks to you has a citizen who benefitted from 
your commitment, you have a history from the time you 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 33 of 153 
 
were young. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is traced in your CV. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And that is when you and Mr Molefe 
first made contact with each other and grew to sort of bring 
about a change in the dreadful system that we had prior to 
1994. That is correct, is it not? 
MS PETERS:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I am going to ask you this and it 
10 
stems from what the Chairperson said but I was going to 
ask you a little later but let me deal with it now.  It must 
have occurred to you that there is something amiss, I have 
given so much of my life to this.  When the President 
communicated – well, sorry, did the President communicate 
the decision to you? 
MS PETERS:   No, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You must have been hurt.  I mean, 
you have served for 13 years in highly important executive 
positions, you must have been hurt. 
20 
MS PETERS:   Naturally, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And I say it genuinely.  Now it must 
have then occurred to you but look, what is it that I have 
done wrong because it must be something wrong for a 
dismissal to take place without even a communication let 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 34 of 153 
 
alone and explanation? 
MS PETERS:   Chair, at the time when the announcement 
came …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was about to say maybe tell us how 
you got to know if it was not communicated to you. 
MS PETERS:   Incidentally, Chairperson, it was the 30 t h of 
– that day I still remember quite well because it is very 
historic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   It is the 30 March.  That evening I was in 
10 
the ministerial residence with the ministerial team and the 
Road 
Safety 
Agency, 
Road 
Traffic 
Management 
Cooperation Team together with the Western Cape team of 
transport because we were planning the next day on the 31 
March the launch of the then – that year ’s Easter Road 
Safety Campaign, and when we heard – at the end of the 
briefing, they came to brief me the preparations of the day, 
we were with the then Deputy Minister Sidisiwe Chikunga.  
At the end of the meeting and when people were leaving 
we go to hear that the President going to make an 
20 
announcement and I then said to the team that I work with 
closely in the Ministry do not go because it might just be 
the day that the President makes this announcement about 
where to, you know, whether we get – and I made a joke, 
whether we get redeployed home or we get redeployed to 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 35 of 153 
 
another 
ministry 
because 
every 
time 
there 
was 
an 
announcement 
that 
the 
President 
is 
going 
to 
make 
announcement, anybody who is an executive position gets 
that jittery to know what is going to be announced and 
what is going to be said and we were waiting.   
So what then happened was that the President 
announced his new team and obviously in the new team 
Elizabeth Dipuo Peters was not there and I then took the 
opportunity to thank the team of men and women that I 
worked with and then I said to them let us call the Western 
10 
Cape MEC and inform him that I will not be there tomorrow 
and I immediately called the Deputy Minister who was on 
her way to her residence to indicate to her that the 
announcement says I am no longer Minister and I think you 
must continue tomorrow, let nothing get disrupted and that 
is how it happened.  And incidentally, Chairperson, that 
evening of the 31 March there was a Jazz Festival and I 
went to the Jazz Festival. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Jazz Festival was it on the evening 
after the day on which the announcement was made or was 
20 
it on the same evening? 
MS PETERS:   The Jazz Festival – the announcement was 
on a Thursday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja ,30 t h. 
MS PETERS:   Thursday is a very nice day because you 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 36 of 153 
 
always remember Sheila’s day.  Thursday evening, that 
was announcement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   30 t h. 
MS PETERS:   The 30 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS PETERS:   And the 31 s t was Friday and there was a 
Jazz Festival. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and you said I am going to enjoy 
myself. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, because …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Forget about a lot of things. 
MS PETERS:   One of the things that I grew up knowing is 
that when you wake up in the morning you are still alive 
you say thank you, God.  So for me it was I am still alive 
and incidentally it was just after that period where I had 
been very seriously ill and I had also taken it upon myself 
to inform the President at that time of my ill-health, so I do 
not know – and I never took it to him to ask why you 
removed me from this responsibility because he appointed 
me, I never went to ask him why are you appointing me.  
20 
So I thought it would be wrong for me to go to him and ask, 
Chairperson, why did you dismiss me when I did not ask 
him why did you appoint me.  So I just took it that they say 
it is all fair in love and war, so that must continue. 
 
And one of the things that I really took at that 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 37 of 153 
 
particular time was primarily because – and I have to say it 
here although I did not say it to the committee, that is why 
I say I take offence to De Freitas I claim I was sick.  I was 
in hospital from the 24 March when – of February when I 
left the meeting where we had all the CEOs and board 
chairpersons to look at the new strategic plans of the 
entities and the department so that we can then be able to 
table them in parliament. 
 
So just after that, that very same day, one of the 
colleagues actually said to me Minister, you do not look 
10 
well and I asked the protectors who were driving me at the 
time to drive me to the hospital, Steve Biko Academic 
Hospital, and when I got there I was admitted and that 
evening I was removed from the ward to high care and for 
me, it was very – and at that time, Chairperson, the spats 
between the CEO, Acting Group CEO and the Chairperson 
of the board were going on and on and on, I am in hospital 
at that particular time.  When I was discharged that is 
when I took this particular decision and it was informed 
from some of the things that were before me also at that 
20 
particular time.  So I just give you the context and the 
history and I think at my time after my being released, 
immediately that evening I drafted a statement that I put on 
social media thanking God, my family, the African National 
Congress and all those, including President Zuma himself 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 38 of 153 
 
and his predecessors for allowing me for so long to serve 
the people of South Africa through the African National 
Congress which had put me in that particular position and 
it is a situation and a position I am still grateful because I 
was given an opportunity out of the almost million members 
of the African National Congress to be considered of one of 
the less than 100 to be part of the top representatives of 
the ANC in government.  For me it is an honour and it is 
still an honour that I carry up to today, I am grateful and I 
am thankful. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess your gratefulness is justified but 
I know that they say, you know, in politics things are done 
differently but I am sure everyone wishes things could be 
done differently even if you could just get an SMS thirty 
minutes before the announcement to say I am sorry, I will 
announce that you will not longer be part of the team 
rather than watch it with people and find that you are no 
longer on the team. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, I think it – the courtesy 
would have really been grateful. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS PETERS:   It would also have allowed me an 
opportunity to personally say thank you for allowing me to 
serve but up until to date I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You never had that chance. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 39 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   I never had the chance and I do not find a 
reason to ask why.  Maybe if one day the former President 
or the leadership would say this was the reasons, I would – 
probably, I do not know, but I think the context that I gave 
that when I was appointed I was not given the reason why 
amongst everybody else I get appointed. So when I was 
relieved of my responsibility – and, Chairperson, at that 
particular time, they say things happen for a reason I was 
not physically and health wise okay and I saw that as my 
creator ’s intervention to go t say look at yourself and 
10 
recharge yourself and I did that and I am happy for that 
opportunity.  I usually joke with my children to say maybe if 
the 30 March 2017 did not happen I might have been RIP 
somewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.  Ms Peters, I 
am sorry about the insensitivity but this is something I 
must ask you.  I know you, as was said at the meeting of 
the 20 August, that everybody serves at the pleasure of the 
President, so you could not ask him but it must have been 
20 
something you have reflected on.  Can you suggest any 
reason why you were so unceremoniously removed? 
MS PETERS:   Can I get a reformulation, Chair? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, I say …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 40 of 153 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You could not ask Mr Zuma and I 
accept that you served at his pleasure but when you have 
served for 14 
years and 
you are 
so, as 
you 
say, 
insensitively, unceremoniously removed, you must ask 
yourself but why?  Did you? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I think it is human nature that 
when you are alone you will just start searching and 
searching and say but what did I do wrong, what did I say 
and all those type of things or maybe I just said I have had 
an opportunity maybe to serve in different responsibilities, 
10 
maybe if the President had arrived at a point and say 
maybe we need to give others chance.  I personally looked 
for the reasons but I never find it in myself to ask the 
former President why did you do that because, like I said, 
Chairperson, I have not asked of all these others why 
Elizabeth Dipuo Peters for the responsibilities that you had 
appointed me into.  So that is why I found it easier to thank 
everybody including my organisation for the honour to 
serve. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess there would be two areas of 
20 
concern.  One would be why have I been removed and you 
would say I wish I was told so that maybe in the future if I 
am given a chance to serve again, if I made some mistakes 
I would try and address them.  So that is one. 
 
Maybe that might be easier, the fact that you were 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 41 of 153 
 
not told the reasons or any minister who does not get told 
the reasons why they are removed, maybe the fact that 
they are not told the reasons might be easier to handle 
because of the nature of the office namely being a 
politician and knowing that you serve at the pleasure of the 
President. 
 
But the other one, which I think might be more 
troubling even to a politician might be the manner in which 
it is handled to say I do not mind if I am removed because 
of whatever reasons or even if there are no reasons, I 
10 
accept that I serve at the pleasure of the President and if 
he wants to change his team he is free to do so but when 
you get to know about it at the same time as the whole 
nation on television you – most people will say why could 
they not just let me know privately first?  Just that.  I am 
not asking – I will not even ask why they removed me as 
long as least they give me the courtesy.  That is all I would 
ask for.  I suspect that would be a much greater concern 
even to a politician that the reasons why. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, normally in the political 
20 
executives responsibilities is that once you are appointed 
you sign a performance agreement with the President but 
you do not have performance appraisals.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So you never know if you failed in your 
performance? 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 42 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   Except through the collective clusters of 
cabinet, the collective cabinet as well as through the 
department of performance monitoring and evaluation but 
as a minister, you do not have something that you can then 
say 
tomorrow 
I 
am 
going 
to 
be 
evaluated 
for 
my 
performance and therefore I need to now come with my 
portfolio of evidence and all those type of things like you 
do with the DGs and others.  That is an anomaly that 
probably needs to be corrected because if that was in 
place you would then as a member of the executives know 
10 
that here I am starting to skate on thin ice, I need to jack 
up my act here, pull up my socks here and those type of 
things.  That is not happening, there is no performance 
appraisals and there is also no peer review system in place 
like you would have with your DGs.   
And for me, that is what is an anomaly.  But also, 
you do not have your – like you would have the bilaterals 
with your boss to say come, let us sit and go through this, 
this is your targets, this – have you met it, what are the 
challenges?  You make the request yourself to say I would 
20 
want to meet, I would want – and in my nature, having had 
the honour, Chairperson, to serve as a Premier, I had 
created a particular process where I would sit every 
quarter with my colleagues to look at those and I had each 
department’s notebook so that – and the other thing, 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 43 of 153 
 
Chairperson, and I am sorry, I have to raise it here, that 
was for me an anomaly in the way in which we were 
operating 
as 
an 
executive 
with 
our 
President 
who 
appointed me to serve was that if I had a meeting with the 
President, there was no note taker, somebody who could 
kept record and next time when I come say Minister, but 
last time you said this to the President and you seem to be 
backtracking or seem not to be following through on those 
particular things.  And I think unofficially one day I had 
raised it with the President when we had a meeting to say 
10 
if there was a note taker so that we can follow up and that 
was in my previous position as Minister of Energy.   
 
I would want to say with regards to being relieved 
of your responsibility, with hindsight I wish I would have 
known but I had this instinct that it is coming.  I always 
have that feeling when…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:    When something is going to happen. 
MS PETERS:   When something is going to happen, 
[speaking vernacular]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MS PETERS:   And there are certain things that says 
[speaking vernacular].  You start seeing body language and 
then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS PETERS:   And then those things when they happen 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 44 of 153 
 
you say oh, yes… 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is why he was not smiling back or 
something like that. 
MS PETERS:   Ja, those type of thing.  As a human being 
you watch this and sometimes you would make jokes with 
your colleagues to say it looks like …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not look like I am in good books 
with the boss. 
MS PETERS:   No, not that.  It looks like I am on my way 
out, I must start packing my bags.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS PETERS:   You know, those type of things, you just 
joke and then when that announcement was made for the 
30 t h I would want to say I was one of those that were 
ready. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS PETERS:   Maybe ready because of my own feeling. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Soni? 
MS PETERS:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When did you first have that 
20 
impression that maybe the door is being opened slowly and 
I will be ushered out soon?  Can I just ask? 
MS PETERS:   In the Catholic – I am Catholic, in the 
Catholic sense you must tell the truth or you must go to the 
priest to confess.  There was an article in one of the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 45 of 153 
 
publications in March 2015 that made me realise I must 
start packing my backs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That early? 
MS PETERS:   That early. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS PETERS:   So in a way I – March 2017 took a bit too 
long.  Maybe that is why I got sick. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what was that article about? 
MS PETERS:   There was a snippet in a publication that I 
read.  I was on my way to Cape Town.  I do not remember – 
10 
it was, I think, the New Age.  There was a snippet – I 
always try and look for that but I cannot find it.  In fact last 
time after you reprimanded me for my papers I then 
thought maybe those papers that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, he did not reprimand you. 
MS PETERS:   There is those papers – he cautioned me – 
those papers, Chairperson, that I probably should have cut 
out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS PETERS:   Because that paper made me aware that 
20 
h’m h’m, things are not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did it predict your departure or – 
because the New Age did predict the promotion or the 
dismissal of certain ministers.  I think it did predict 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 46 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, it was – Chairperson, it 
was an article that says that these are the – almost like 
indicating that people who might be – remember there was 
– issues of reshuffles are always allegations and then 
people start doing [speaking vernacular] and saying it 
could be this one, it could this one, it could be this one, it 
could be this one.  And then was a small thing, almost like 
this paragraph that said I could be one of them and it some 
reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Some story, ja. 
10 
MS PETERS:   It had some [speaking vernacular]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now this may come as some comfort 
to you and, I mean, I have got to say to you, Ms Peters, I 
really sympathise with what you would have gone through.  
Let me just finish what Mr de Freitas says about the 
appointment of your successor, he says in the next 
sentence under the heading 30 March.  He says: 
“It quickly became clear to me the reason for this 
appointment.  He…” 
20 
That is your successor. 
“…was willing to do his master ’s, then President 
Zuma’s bidding.  My suspicions were confirmed by 
the manner that the new minister led his department 
as events unfolded in the subsequent months.” 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 47 of 153 
 
Now it seems to me that what Mr de Freitas is saying is 
that it was quite clear that Minister Maswanganyi was more 
compliant than you in regard to Mr Zuma’s bidding.  I am 
just placing on record what is here. 
MS PETERS:   That is Mr de Freitas’ view Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, can I then ask you to look at the 
last matter that I want to deal with in regard to the 
Parliamentary recordings, and that is on the 10 t h of April, it 
records that the Court dissolves the interim board and 
reinstates the previous board under Molefe because on the 
10 
10 t h of April Judge Peter Mabuse ordered that the former 
board be reinstated, and the interim board be dissolved.  
Now, there are two things that I want to highlight in 
[indistinct – dropped voice] and context is important.  
There is a dispute raging at the Portfolio Committee in 
Parliament from at least the 31 s t of August 2016 if not 
before relating to the alleged incompetence of the board 
which 
coincides 
with 
the 
time 
Mr 
Molefe 
made 
the 
allegation about Maria Gomez asking for 10% of the 
Swifambo contract to be given to the movement, I’m just 
20 
placing 
that 
in 
context, 
we’ve 
been 
through 
that.  
Culminates in your dismissal of the board on the 8 t h of 
March but the thing that surprises me is, even before the 
board – the Court makes its decision on the board’s 
challenge to your decision, you are relieved of your duties. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 48 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   I can’t answer that one Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well, let me put it to you this way, 
when one looks at the thing objectively, you ask and look 
for patterns, that’s why I’m saying to you, the 31 s t of 
August and what happened thereafter, as I’ve read to you, 
suggests that the Portfolio Committee was making a case 
against Mr Molefe’s board, but it is you who dismisses the 
board because you have the power to dismiss the board.  
That seems to please the Portfolio Committee, that’s what 
they say in Parliament in one of the arms of Government 
10 
which recorded in public but more importantly, thereafter, 
after what they seem to want to be done, is done by you, 
you are dismissed, that’s what intrigues me about all of 
this. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I never sat down and thought 
about 
this 
to 
have 
any 
significant 
inter-relationship 
because my engagements with the board, with regards to 
their non-performance, with regards to the key – core 
areas of performance, the quarterly reports, the annual 
reports and the engagements that I had with them in the 
20 
AGM’s and the formal meetings that we had where I 
addressed them and incidentally in the hearings of the 22 n d 
and 23 r d, Chairperson, I did give an indication that those 
documents will be part of the supplementary that I submit 
to indicate the length of time it had taken me to engage 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 49 of 153 
 
with this board with regard to the need for them to focus on 
the core areas of responsibility which is to make sure that 
the trains are there, running, they are clean, safe and our 
people can reach their jobs, schools and other areas of 
enjoyment and everything on time and in a safe way.  So, 
Chairperson, I have never sat down and looked at this 
Parliamentary Committee process in relation or whether it 
had any bearing on my removal because we were comrades 
all of us and we are still comrades all of us and even after 
my removal I had an opportunity to sit with the new 
10 
Minister and – in a handover meeting and I handed over 
everything, including the information related to this – the 
board and the fact that they are before the Courts and also 
the other matters, litigations and everything else because 
the Department and entities of transport were so litigious 
that you could eventually stay in Court when you look at 
the issues related to transport and I handed that over to 
the new Minister and how he took the process forward, I 
think he’s better placed to respond to that, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, what emerges from what 
20 
is publicly available, that’s the debates in Parliament is, 
that the ANC NP’s wanted Mr Molefe’s board out, that I’ve 
read to you and you said you can’t contribute to it and 
rightly so but we, as a Commission need to examine all 
developments to see if there’s a pattern.  So, when I look 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 50 of 153 
 
at what happened, especially from the 31 s t of August 2016 
onwards to what happened on the 8 t h of March when the 
Board is dismissed, that, one would think, sitting outside, 
that’s what the ANC wanted but instead of being rewarded 
with a continuation of your portfolio, 22 days later you are 
dismissed, and it is that, that intrigues me. 
MS PETERS:   Is that? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is that that intrigues me, there’s no 
pattern in all of this. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I’m unfortunately unable to 
10 
respond to that but I just want to say, with regard to this 
board and I did indicate in the last hearing that, given an 
opportunity, had I still been there, even on the 10 t h of April 
when they were reinstated by the judgement of Judge Peter 
Mabuse, 
I 
would 
have 
appealed 
it 
because 
of 
my 
engagements and having worked with the board but in 
particular, 
the 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
board 
up 
to 
that 
particular stage.  In fact, Chairperson, if I was a very 
impatient person, I would have dissolved and/or removed 
that board many years prior.  On the 8 t h of January 2015, 
20 
that’s when I started engaging with the board with regard 
to issues of performance and all other matters and there’s 
records to that, Chairperson.  I remember, Chairperson, 
speaking to the board at the time they had the situation of 
Mr Montana and we agreed also, that there is important 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 51 of 153 
 
factor that they need to focus on the core areas.  I met 
them again, I think it was around June or July 2016 and 
spoke to them.  I always met them on AGM’s and always, 
Chairperson, if you look at the track of the paperwork, you 
would see that I had been very patient in requesting the 
board to focus on the issues that are core to their 
responsibility. 
 
When, incidentally, Chairperson when I became a 
member of the Standing Committee of Appropriations and 
the first engagements we had was a decision of lack of 
10 
spending in PRASA where monies that PRASA were given 
for infrastructure had to be sent back to the revenue fund, 
I felt like crying because I then said, these were the things 
that I had foreseen to say, make sure that the trains and 
the stations and the …[indistinct – audio distorted] and all 
those 
things 
are 
attended 
to. 
 
The 
modernisation, 
Chairperson, the issue of the factory, we sat down with Mr 
Molefe to say, this new trains we need to save this 
initiative, these trains must run and be built in South 
Africa, skills must be developed here, people in the streets 
20 
supporting the rail sector must be built here and that’s 
why, I’m happy to say, on the 4 t h of – I think it was in 
March 2016 when we launched the initiative around, or the 
…[indistinct – audio distorted] of the factory we were 
celebrating in Ekurhuleni with the people of Ekurhuleni 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 52 of 153 
 
because we said, jobs, skills and opportunities are coming 
and for me, those were the things that I said the board 
should focus on.  Equally, I then said to Mr Molefe, whilst 
you 
are 
chasing 
the 
thieves, 
focus 
on 
the 
core 
responsibility. 
 
Las week – last time I made an example, I said, 
Chairperson, if you have a house and a house is on fire 
and you see Dipuo is responsible, there’s Dipuo she has 
just poured petrol and put the house on fire, will you chase 
Dipuo instead of putting out the fire and saving that which 
10 
needs to be saved and then follow Dipuo legally because 
[speaking vernacular] and you know these people and I 
said, let’s allow the legal or law enforcement agencies, like 
we are doing with other entities of the State that I was 
equally responsible for.  We  even had a situation where 
the SIU was given a proclamation by President Zuma with 
regard to other mattes that were related to transport and 
entities of transport to investigate. The driver ’s license 
issues, the …[indistinct – audio distorted], if Chairperson, 
one day, maybe after this whole process can be over and 
20 
you drink tea, we can drink tea and I can tell you my 
nightmares at transport, not under the Zondo Commission, 
thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well Mr Soni was dealing with the 
question of, reasons why you were relieved of your 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 53 of 153 
 
responsibilities as Minister of Transport, maybe it was felt 
that you took too long to deal with the board and dismiss it 
because in your view and in the view of whoever else it 
was not performing properly, what would you say to that? 
MS PETERS:   Maybe that was the reason, Chairperson, or 
maybe other reasons also. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS PETERS:   Mr Molefe once said to me…[speaking 
vernacular], meaning I’m a Christian and I – but I was 
also…[speaking vernacular] towards him. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   All that you’ve said to the 
Chairperson, very passionately about what was wrong with 
the board, I take it you put all of that in your affidavit when 
you filed an answering affidavit when Mr Molefe and the 
other board members took your decision to Court, that’s 
correct isn’t it? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, they are in the affidavit, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And they were available to you at the 
time you addressed a press conference on the 13 t h of 
20 
March? 
MS PETERS:   Come again, Chairperson? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay can I – I don’t want us to 
debate this, because it’s all here, can I read to you what 
Judge Mabuse said.  Now, that Chairperson, is in PRASA 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 54 of 153 
 
Bundle A Exhibit SS2, the judgement starts – and it’s on 
the right-hand side, red letters at page 83 and I want to 
alert – I want you to go to page 123. 
MS PETERS:   I don’t think I have it. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Chair, might I just chip in and I’m sorry 
that I have to be seated for the mic…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that’s fine. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Chair, I  have no difficulty with my learned 
elder reading out whatever …[indistinct – audio distorted] 
as per Judge Mabuse but I think said must also not be lost 
10 
on the fact that she had indicated that, had she stayed on 
she would have challenged that particular decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  I have no difficulty there, but I think it’s 
very important because we are also not reading into the 
record, that which she might have said in her answering 
affidavit, so we need to be fair and not paint a one-sided 
context but obviously the witness is more than capable of 
responding but I’ll be failing if I don’t raise that concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that’s fine and to the extent that 
20 
you are able to obviously, Mr Soni, you might refer, if in 
the judgement there’s something else that is meant to – 
that might put whatever you’re going to read in context but 
otherwise Mr Majavu would also be paying attention so 
that, should he decide to re-examine he can pick that up 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 55 of 153 
 
and get clarification. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, at paragraph 50 on page 123, it 
says, 
 
“The Minister did not, initially provide reasons for 
her decision…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to let her get there first? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She’s still looking, we are looking at the 
10 
red numbers this time on this bundle, 123, is that right? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   123 yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, have you got it Ms Peters, look at 
the red pagination on the top right-hand corner of the 
pages, can  you find it? 
MS PETERS:   Page? 
CHAIRPERSON:   123. 
MS PETERS:   I did find page 123, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, you’ll see, right at the bottom 
20 
in paragraph 50, this is what the judgement says, 
“The Minister did not initially provide reasons for 
her decision to remove the relevant Directors from 
office either at the time of their removal or in 
response to the applicant’s requests for reasons on 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 56 of 153 
 
the 9 t h of March”. 
 
Can you recall whether you had provided reasons? 
MS PETERS:   Whether I represent…[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, Ms Peters, I’m just trying to 
understand the extent to which you will dispute what is 
stated in this judgement.  Now in this judgement it is 
stated at paragraph 50,  
“The Minister did not initially provide reasons for 
her decision to remove the relevant Directors from 
office either at the time of their removal, that’s 
10 
obviously on the 8 t h of March, or in response to the 
applicant’s request for reasons on the 9 t h of March”. 
 
Now, did your answering affidavit say anything 
different? 
MS PETERS:   Answering affidavit to the…[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   To this Court case yes, to the 
application by Mr Molefe and the others? 
MS PETERS:   It’s becoming difficult for me to recall that 
answering affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, that was the argument made by 
20 
Mr Molefe’s counsel or the board’s counsel, then it says, 
“The fact that initially no reasons were provided and 
that still no reasons were provided when they were 
requested 
on 
the 
9 t h 
of 
March 
created 
the 
impression that the decisions by the Minister was 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 57 of 153 
 
irrational”, 
 
Now, that’s what was argued, and I tell you why it is 
important because you’ve indicated to the Chairperson 
today, these were the reasons why you dismissed the 
board and what is important is, whether these reasons 
were represented to the Court, when you opposed the 
application.  Now it would appear that they were not. 
MS PETERS:   From reading here, Chairperson, it does 
appear that they were not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, can I then go to ask you to 
10 
look at page 124 where at paragraph 51, the judgement 
says, 
“For the first time the Minister purported, at a press 
conference that she held on the 13 t h of March to 
justify 
her 
decision 
to 
remove 
the 
relevant 
Directors.  She did that to the media instead of to 
the concerned Directors”. 
 
Now, that’s the complaint you made about how your 
removal – how you were informed about your removal, is it 
not Ms Peters, I’m just asking? 
20 
MS PETERS:   I’m like the board, I wrote to them to alert 
them.  The one thing that I did concede last time was the 
fact that, probably a lot of reasons were not provided but I 
believed that they knew what was the reasons and that is 
why, Chairperson, I repeated it today that, given an 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 58 of 153 
 
opportunity, if I was still there, I would have appealed this 
particular judgement. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, let’s carry on, he stated that, 
this at the media conference, 
“The board was found wanting relating to, amongst 
others the declining performance, lack of good 
governance, lack of financial prudence and ever 
deteriorating public confidence due to spats of in-
fighting”. 
 
That’s what you said at the media conference, I see 
10 
you shake your head, is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then the learned Judge records, in 
the continuation of paragraph 51, 
“In 
her 
answering 
affidavit 
she 
sets-out 
two 
fundamental reasons for her decision.  Firstly, she 
claims that the trigger for the relevant Directors’ 
removal 
was 
their 
decision 
to 
terminate 
Mr 
Letsoalo’s secondment to PRASA, is that correct”? 
MS PETERS:   It could have been one of the reasons 
20 
Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then the learned Judge goes on to 
say, 
“She states that the board was removed because 
the board acted in unison in frustrating the actions 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 59 of 153 
 
of Mr Letsoalo and ultimately removing him”, 
 
Is that substantially correct – more or less correct 
as you recall your answering affidavit? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right, then the learned Judge say – 
because one of the issues that was raised was that you 
had acted procedurally unfairly that you said in your 
answering affidavit that,  
“You had substantially complied with the procedural 
fairness obligations in respect of this complaint 
10 
because you wrote to the board on the 1 s t of March 
and asked her to explain the public spat with 
Letsoalo and to furnish reasons why she should not 
intervene in order to restore good governance with 
PRASA”, 
 
Do you recall that, that you wrote to him and you – 
and I take it you attached that, or you annexed that letter 
to your answering affidavit? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, then the learned Judge deals 
20 
with the second reason and he says, 
“Secondly the Minister claimed that she wide-
ranging concerns about the board’s management of 
PRASA.  She considered it to have been involved in 
corruption and in irregular expenditure since it’s 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 60 of 153 
 
appointment”, 
 
Is that what you said in your answering affidavit? 
MS PETERS:   There was an Auditor General’s report that 
has shown the exponential growth of the over expenditure, 
I mean the irregular expenditure, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I’m asking a different question.  Did 
you, in your affidavit, accuse the board of corruption? 
MS PETERS:   I don’t know whether there was the word 
corruption. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, the learned Judge got it wrong 
10 
then when he says…[intervenes]. 
MS PETERS:   I don’t remember, Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Chair, I really now have to object.  I think, 
what we are now busy with, with respect.  A lay witness is 
expected to comment on the correctfulness or otherwise of 
how a Judge rendered a particular decision and it’s 
reasoning and it’s difficult.  The witness is not even having 
sight of her answering affidavit contemporaneously to also 
be able to see what it is that she said, it’s very difficult.  I 
bet you if I were to do that, Advocate Soni, he himself 
20 
would find it very difficult and that is not the purpose of the 
exercise.  I think the issue here is, rightly or wrongly a 
Court decision was made which is extent, but she has said, 
If I was still in office, I would have challenge it, maybe 
rightly or maybe wrongly and nobody knows whether that 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 61 of 153 
 
decision will still be standing. I thought the picture being 
painted and a comment on which she was expected to say 
something, was about a particular plot or what appears to 
be a pattern and she has indicated that, I am in no position 
to comment on this pattern or not because I never reflected 
on it and with respect, we’re going to enter into a very 
speculative realm and it’s dangerous, I’m cautioning very 
collegially. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that’s fine.  Mr Soni, I don’t 
know if you want to say something in response, but I am a 
10 
little concerned as well, so maybe you can just address the 
concerns because the judgement is there, it was not 
appealed, it stands.  It gives reasons for the conclusion 
that the Judge reached.  The witness may agree or 
disagree with those but there was no appeal, and it stands. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   With respect, Mr Chairperson, let me 
first start off by saying, it’s not for my learned friend to tell 
me what questions to ask, I am the evidence leader.  If the 
questions are out of bounds, then it’s for you to tell me but 
it’s not for my learned friend to say, these are the matters 
20 
that are relevant, it’s for us, we’ve been involved in this for 
a long time…[intervenes].   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, but he is entitled if he has concerns 
that his client is not being dealt with fairly because he’s 
expected to answer certain matters that, in his submission 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 62 of 153 
 
maybe he shouldn’t be. So, there are matters to which he’s 
entitled to object.  So, let’s deal with the question of, 
maybe what it is you want to use the judgement for 
because as I say I’m also concerned so that I can see 
whether his concerns has grounds or not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, I would not have dealt 
with this paragraph but for one thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The witness says to you today, these 
are the reasons I’ve dismissed the board. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I didn’t hear her say, corruption, she 
didn’t accuse the board, so the question I want to ask her 
is – and I’m entitled to ask, did you say to the Court that 
the board was corrupt and the relevant…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That would be legitimate. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And that was the question that my 
learned friend objects to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But Chairperson, let me make this 
20 
quite clear, why this issue is important is, you will 
remember those passages I read from the 31 s t of August 
suddenly a board which had been fighting corruption was 
being accused of corruption and I read all of those 
passages deliberately. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 63 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no – well it may or may not be that 
the question or the way it was formulated didn’t come 
across that way, I don’t know, I think Mr Majavu nods, to 
the extent that you ask Ms Peters whether the reasons that 
she gives today, are reasons that she placed before the 
Court that would be legitimate. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes but I’m also entitled to ask 
whether, given what she said today where she has not 
mentioned 
corrupt, 
she 
mentioned 
corruption 
in 
the 
answering affidavit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that’s fine, what – to the 
extent that you want to see whether the reasons that she 
gives today were given in the answering affidavit that was 
placed before the Court, that’s legitimate. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    
MS PETERS:    
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright, so let’s go back, maybe 
repeat the question – Mr Majavu you wanted to say 
something? 
20 
ADV MAJAVU:   Chair, just to be of assistance to the 
Commission and to my elder, firstly I’m not going to be told 
by him or any evidence leader for that matter, at what point 
to object or not to object. I do so very guardedly, and I 
don’t do it because I don’t want to disturb the floor. I  did 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 64 of 153 
 
not object to a specific question for that matter, I fully 
appreciate that he needs to set-out the context to enable 
the witness to comment.  What I did caution against, and 
my choice of diction was very clear, was let us be careful 
to 
avoid 
having 
a 
lay 
person 
commenting 
on 
the 
correctness or otherwise of Judge’s reasoning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MAJAVU:   It was a no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Because if we do that you are opening it up 
10 
to speculation by a lay witness and that is not going to be of 
any utility. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJAVU:  For the record I have no difficulty with the 
proposition that says the reasons that you are giving today 
from your recollection did you – did they make their way into 
the answering affidavit?  Because if they did something may 
have to be said about the Judge’s conclusions. But what is 
being read are the portions in a judgment and I am saying it 
may well be that if she was also being referred to what she 
20 
said in her answering affidavit or what she did not say.  It 
may be of assistance because now she is forced to make 
concessions without having had the benefit – because the 
challenges here is what you are saying before the Chair 
today you did not say in your answering affidavit.  But she 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 65 of 153 
 
has not been referred to her answering affidavit where she 
supposedly deals with – with those portions.  And that is the 
only point I was trying to make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJAVU:  That the lines he is pursuing is legitimate I 
am not querying Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And I do not want to be unduly obstructive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  I have said my piece.  If my learned friend 
10 
wants to continue debating that judgment which is extent and 
we all know that it is extent so be it but I would have been 
entitled to say as colleagues, as officers of this tribunal let 
us be careful, let us watch it.  That is all I seek to achieve 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no that is fine.  Let us – so let us 
continue I think go back to your question Mr Soni so that I 
can  also … 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Listen to it carefully. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Can I ask you Ms Dipuo Peters I listened 
very carefully when you said to the Chairperson outside this 
judgment now why you dismissed the board.  Is it correct 
that today you did not mention corruption?  It has got 
nothing to do with the judgment I am just asking you in 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 66 of 153 
 
relation to the reasons you gave to the Chairperson. 
MS PETERS:  The reasons that I gave to the Chairperson did 
not go into even the reasons that let or that were interlinked 
with the Letswaolo process.  Because the – the matters in 
this particular instance have got many loops and probably 
that is why Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let us start with this – I am sorry to 
interrupt you.  Let us start with a straight answer to that 
straight question.  When you told me today the reasons why 
you dismissed the board did you include corruption as one of 
10 
the reasons?  I think that was the question. 
MS PETERS:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now do you recall whether you included 
corruption in your answering affidavit? 
MS PETERS:  I do not remember Chair but there was an 
issue related to the over payments and of remuneration and 
other allegations which were not SAAT. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes okay.  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It did not relate to corruption.  Yes okay. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Now – then the learned Judge says in 
response to what he says was contained in your affidavit.  
He says quite clearly  
“Nowhere does she state that she afforded the relevant 
directors an opportunity to be heard on these issues before 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 67 of 153 
 
she took the decision to remove them.” 
Now that is a legal matter relating to two – if I could just say 
to you one of the things you had said in your answering 
affidavit is in regard to Mr Letswayo you had said to the 
board, look on the 1s t of March please tell me how we can 
sort this out and on the second issue the learned Judge says 
you did not – you did not give the board an opportunity to 
respond to whatever allegation you made.  That is – that is 
the point that the learned Judge is making. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson and in my last response in 
10 
this house I did give an indication that that is the procedural 
technicality that was found at the particular time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did – did I wrongly get the impression that 
on that point you had no issues with what the Judge found?  
Was I wrong to get that impression? 
MS PETERS:  To say I did not ask them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not have issues with the finding on 
what you call was a technical procedural point? 
MS PETERS:  Um. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let me – I think when you said – 
20 
when you dealt with the issue of the procedural fairness or 
the finding by the Judge or my impression was that you did 
not have any issues to say no but the – the Judge should not 
have found that because I did give them a hearing.  That is 
the impression I got was my impression correct? 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 68 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair because I did indicate that given an 
opportunity if I had enough opportunity I would have 
appealed.  It was based on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay no may – we may be speaking at 
cross purposes.  You would appeal if you wee – if you 
disagreed with the finding?  It – did you  disagree with the 
finding?  I do not need you to go into details the finding that 
technically as you put it you had not given the directors an 
opportunity to – to be heard on – on those 00:06:31 
allegations? 
10 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV SONI SC:  Can I ask you then Ms Peters to turn to page 
131 and you will see right at near the top of the page is a 
paragraph 60 but I just want to and you do not need to go 
there in the previous paragraph the learned Judge deals with 
two issues.  One is your removal for your decision to remove 
the Judge – the directors and the second to appoint a 
second set of directors with Mr Nazeer Allie being the 
Chairperson.  That is correct is it not?  That is the board you 
20 
appointed on the – on the 9t h I think of March? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright now I want to read to you what he 
says at paragraph 60.  He says: 
“I reached a conclusion that the applicants – that is the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 69 of 153 
 
former directors – or should I say the removed directors 
have proved that they have a clear right to challenge the 
decision taken by the Minister and furthermore to have the 
decision reviewed and set aside or to obtain an order 
suspending the operation of the removal of the notices of 
removal.  The removed directors have a right to the proper 
exercise of statutory powers by the Minister who exercises 
public power and whose decision in this regard is subject to 
administrative just. 
 
Secondly it is in the public interest that the affairs of 
10 
PRASA be properly regulated by an independent board of 
control independently of any interference from government. 
 
Thirdly and finally it is of paramount importance that 
corruption in PRASA be exposed and prevented.  The  public 
has an interest to fight the deep rooted corruption in the 
country because it comprises the democratic ethos, the 
institutions of democracy and gnaws at the rule of law. 
 
Accordingly the appellants therefore have a clear 
right.” 
Now that the basis on which the learned Judge Justice Peter 
20 
Mabuse gets 00:09:15. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  He gives his reasons for that. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now I heard you not only today and I have 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 70 of 153 
 
heard your – your attorney on your behalf say that if you had 
the opportunity you would have appealed against this 
judgment. 
MS PETERS:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry what is the question?  Did – I 
missed the question. 
ADV SONI SC:  If you had had the opportunity and the 
opportunity Chairperson I am saying did not arrive because 
the judgment is given on the 10t h of April but she was no 
longer Minister from the 13t h. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  So that is the only point Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you – so it was not a question you were 
just mentioning that? 
MS PETERS:  Well no I am saying to Ms Peters that you 
would have appealed this judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is your evidence that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She has confirmed she would have 
appealed ja. 
20 
MS PETERS:  I would have appealed . 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS PETERS:  Appealed the judgment Chairperson and when 
you appeal you give – you do not 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your grounds. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 71 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:  Ja you give your answer properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Can I ask you to now turn to your affidavit 
which appears… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe this might be the right time to take 
a short adjournment.  I see we are past – gone past four.  
Let us take a ten minutes adjournment. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes Mr Chairman.  As you  please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will resume it would be thirty minutes 
at twenty past four.  We adjourn. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson.  
Chairperson, may I just place on record that I am not going 
to be much longer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I have dealt with most of the issues. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   There are a few things I need... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, can I ask you to look at 
your affidavit?  It appears at bundle, the PRASA Bundle L, 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 72 of 153 
 
Exhibit SS-22 and turn to page 14 which is now the 
opposite one.  It is on the top left-hand side, L-14.   
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Your affidavit. 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   L-14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just switch on our mic Ms Peters. 
MS PETERS:   Thank you, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now this is, obviously, in answer to 
what Mr Molefe had said in his affidavit and I just want to 
10 
read to you what you said in this answer at paragraph 10.8 
after 
dealing 
with 
the 
complaints 
he 
made 
about 
Werksmans and other matters including the Werksmans 
matter.  You say at paragraph 10.8: 
“Lastly, it is common cause that I dissolve 
Molefe led board as I lost confidence in them 
and felt that they were clearly failing to turn 
PRASA around.   
They exercised their rights to challenge their 
dismissal in court and the court, subsequently, 
20 
ruled in their favour and I accepted the court’s 
ruling. 
I cannot take the issue further than that as I 
respect the rule of law. 
After all, I never personalised the issue. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 73 of 153 
 
Hence I accepted that the court overturned my 
decision in my representative capacity. 
Courts of law are there to adjudicate over 
different points of view...” 
 
Now I am just placing on record that that is your 
respect for the law and we all applaud that, but of course, 
it does not say that if you had – it does not deny you the 
right to say if you have had the opportunity, you would 
have appealed.  That is on record but I am just placing it.   
 
But 
more 
importantly, 
what 
this 
seems 
to 
10 
indicate is, the reason for the dismissal of the board was 
your loss of confidence in the board.   
MS PETERS:   Loss of confidence, Chairperson, you can 
put in context(?) or I think I agree there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well, I am not putting words.  I am 
reading what you said under oath. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  I want to now get back to 
the... issue.  We have dealt with the reasons and I told you 
what the judge said and so on.  I want to ask...  When you 
20 
were dealing with the question of the appointment of 
PRASA’s CEO, you explained to us ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Soni.  I am sorry.  I was 
trying to see whether you are going to another point. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am Chairperson. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 74 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, then let me ask this person.  
The passage that Mr Soni has read to you from your 
affidavit filed to this Commission. 
MS PETERS:   H’m? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not seem to me to be consistent 
with what you said, namely, had you still been Minister of 
Transport, you would have appealed this judgment.  It 
seems to be saying you accepted the judgment.  So I am 
putting my impression what the paragraph says to you so 
that you can tell me whether I misunderstand it. 
10 
 
When you were testifying earlier on, you said 
had you been Minister at the time when the judgement 
came out, you would have appealed it and that seems to 
me to be somebody who would not accept the judgment, 
who would be aggrieved by the judgment and therefore 
would appeal in order to have it overturned. 
 
But the passage that Mr Soni has read, seems to 
suggest to me a different position on your part.  It says: 
“They exercised their rights to challenge their 
dismissal in court...” 
20 
 
I am reading from paragraph 10 at page 15: 
“They exercised their rights to challenge their 
dismissal in court and the court, subsequently, 
ruled in their favour and I accepted the court’s 
ruling. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 75 of 153 
 
I cannot take the issue further than that, as I 
respect the rule of law. 
After all, I never personalised the issue. 
Hence I accepted that the court overturned my 
decision in my representative capacity. 
Courts of law are there to adjudicate over 
different points of view...” 
 
Is my understanding of what you say here 
incorrect, namely, that it seems to be inconsistent with the 
position that says:  I would have appealed against this 
10 
judgment. 
MS PETERS:   In my view, Chairperson, it is not 
inconsistent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS PETERS:   This affidavit has been done when I am no 
longer Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS PETERS:   And I am responding to the notice as 
submitted 
by 
the 
Commission 
with 
regard 
to 
what 
Mr Molefe had presented. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS PETERS:   And had I been given an opportunity to 
answer to what would you have done – because at that 
time, Chairperson, I was no longer – when I respond now 
here, I was no longer the Minister and I am not even 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 76 of 153 
 
responding on behalf of the then Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS PETERS:   Then in my response to you, Chairperson, 
earlier and even in my previous appearance here, the 
motivation on – with hindsight, given an opportunity, I 
would have if I was still in that position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS PETERS:   Because of what I knew, and that is when 
the evidence leader even referred me to not making use of 
information that I have not submitted in supporting and 
10 
then I made a commitment to say I would give supporting 
information in terms of the performance and all other 
things that I have raised. 
 
So I am saying, here I am – I respect the rule of 
law and I have done that for all the time I have been alive 
and even including cooperating and working together with 
the Commission to get to unravel what the challenges are 
with regards to malfeasance, corruption and other matters 
from the state and that is why I am here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, that is fine.  It might not – 
20 
nothing materially will turn on it but I just wanted to raise 
this.  Ja.  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Ms Peters, when we were 
dealing with the question of Mr Montana leaving the – 
leaving PRASA.  As I understood your evidence, you said 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 77 of 153 
 
you communicated this to the then President. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, you then – because we went 
into the question of what role the Cabinet plays and the 
President plays and you said to us:  Well, these names are 
submitted to Cabinet, in a sense, for approval and it is sort 
of a sounding board.  Is this person going to be a good fit 
or not.  That is how I understood that.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I ask you in – and then you also 
10 
said that a similar thing applies and I mean, that is why – 
well, not applies but that is why when a person leaves as 
CEO, you would want to tell the President and you made a 
point of telling the President about Mr Montana’s leaving.  
You remember that? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, in this instance, I cannot give 
a yes or no.  I gave an indication on a number of – I mean, 
emanate vacancies that were going to emerge in the state-
owned entities at that particular time.   
 
And I still stand by my indications, Chair, that 
20 
what I said last time, that based on the institutional 
memory, 
the 
experience, 
the 
knowledge 
and 
all 
the 
capacity issues these people had and because of the 
different phases of development that South Africa was in 
and the plans that we have.   
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 78 of 153 
 
 
I gave an indication that we just adopted the 
Transport Master Plan.  We had just adopted the Rail 
policy and that required a number, including the Transport 
Economic 
Regulator 
and 
quite 
a 
number 
of 
other 
instruments that would have helped us to move faster with 
development in this country.   
 
And 
I 
went 
to 
the 
President 
with 
an 
understanding that I am the Minister.  Remember, ministers 
are the first line of advice, even to the President.  I went to 
the President to make him aware that there are these.   
10 
 
And if you allow me, I can even mention the 
names of those people because they have been historically 
in the department.  They were part of the genesis of the 
department, from Minister Maharaj to Minister Jeff Radebe 
to Minister (Joel) S’bu Ndebele(?)to Minister Ben Martins 
and to myself.   
 
And I said it will be wrong for government to 
insist in this capacity and especially people and then lose 
them, to go out and probably start their private sector 
consultancies and with exorbitant costs and now come 
20 
back to the state.   
 
And it was under that context that I went to the 
President to alert him about this vacancies.  That time it 
was going to be eight months or so before the due time of 
Montana to leave.   
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 79 of 153 
 
 
So I was making him alert of that, and I even 
said 
to 
him: 
 
Mr 
President, 
you 
have 
got 
these 
responsibilities in the continent.  You are the Chair of the 
North South Corridor that speaks about the real network 
from Mombasa to Durban.  It deals with the challenges of 
weighbridge(?) and all of that.   
 
And I even briefed him about the issues that we 
are dealing with between Zimbabwe and the agreement that 
we had gone to engage with the Minister of Transport of 
Zimbabwe with regard to how to deal with the weighbridge.   
10 
 
So as a Minister – and it was the witnesses that 
I gave you an indication earlier on, Chairperson, about the 
fact that we do not have performance appraisals.  I then 
felt it is important because the President meets with his 
colleague in the region in the continent.  It is important for 
him to know but also it would strengthen his hand to help 
this knowledge of people as a team of people around him.   
 
And I then said I am not looking for capacity 
elsewhere.  There are these people that in the Transport, 
Rail and Road and whatever.  You could then use these 
20 
people as even advisors and on different platforms that you 
are engaging.   
 
It was just after he had received that review of 
the state-owned entities report.  And in my limited or my 
weakness 
I 
then 
thought 
I 
am 
strengthening 
the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 80 of 153 
 
government 
by 
not 
losing 
the 
capacity, 
because 
my 
concern was that we are going to lose this capacity or 
these people that the Government of the African National 
Congress has invested in them over the years.   
 
So I then said, even as advisors you could 
utilise them.  And that was the rationale Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Let me ask you this.  And the 
question I am asking is.  I understood you to say that is 
the procedure that applied whenever the CEO of a 
company – of a state-owned enterprise is either appointed 
10 
or was leaving or am I wrong? 
MS PETERS:   With regards to appointment, I did give an 
indication that the President is the Chair of the Cabinet 
and it would be an anomaly and sorry, Chair, if I used my 
previous 
experience 
as 
Head 
of 
Government 
in 
the 
Northern Cape at – and maybe it clouded my approach to 
dealing with matters of government.   
 
I then had to brief the President, primarily 
because, it is – and consult with the President because... 
this meeting, he is the one that also needs to give 
20 
guidance and conclusion to whatever meeting that would 
be determined but also, it helps when you consult with 
other colleagues in Cabinet.   
 
And I want to indicate that there was once when 
I was almost appointed as the CEO of another entity, only 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 81 of 153 
 
to find that he had left another entity of government, 
reporting to another department under a cloud.  And based 
on the consultation process, they could alert us to that 
particular issue.   
 
So I was saying, for me I believed that it is 
important that the head of government always be informed 
about particular processes.  With regard to the leave...  
The appointments, yes.   
 
With the leaving, I – when they leave, I gave that 
example because I felt it would not be good for us as 
10 
government to lose this capacity and then later on source 
it at exuberant amounts.  Bona-zer-alie(?) and Sipho 
Khumalo’s and all those type of people, were the people 
that actually went to the President about.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  So would your answer be that 
with regard to the appointment of CEO’s of SOE’s, your 
understanding would be that the relevant Minister would 
approach the President first to get an indication of whether 
the 
President 
has 
any 
issues 
with 
regard 
to 
the 
appointment 
of 
a 
particular 
candidate 
or 
particular 
20 
candidates from which the selection must be made? 
 
And that when a CEO of an SOE may be facing a 
possible dismissal, the relevant Minister would approach 
the President to alert them that there may be dismissal of 
an CEO of an SEO?   
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 82 of 153 
 
 
I think if I am not mistaken, that is what Mr Son 
is asking, whether to your knowledge there was a practise 
that went along those lines. 
MS PETERS:   With regard to dismissals, that was another 
matter.  It never even occurred to me that when a person is 
dismissed...   
 
Let us remember with the Montana case, the 
chair of the board came to inform me - equally I think in his 
affidavit, he does make reference to the fact that when 
they arrived it was a time when Montana indicated to him 
10 
that his contract is about to end and they then requested 
him to stay on.  
 
I then knew that Montana’s contract is coming to 
an end.  I think it was the next year towards the – either 
the end of that year or next year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was the end of the year, I think. 
MS PETERS:   But it was early in the year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS PETERS:   So then I made the President aware that 
prior to this time arriving, make it possible that in – not 
20 
actually directing him or whatever.  I was advising him that 
as the Minister having been in this position that you have 
deployed me in, I have met these people and these people, 
it is this one from SunRail, this one from C-BRTA, this one 
ARTIA(?) and this one from PRASA.  Their contracts are 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 83 of 153 
 
coming to an end.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS PETERS:   But I believe there is knowledge, these 
three and knowledge and information and whatever skills 
that they have.  That we cannot lose. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS PETERS:   It was only that instance Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Yes.  So is your answer that, as a 
general practise, you are or you are not aware that 
ministers will approach the President alert him if the CEO 
10 
of an SOE under their portfolio may be leaving or may be 
dismissed? 
MS PETERS:   I can repeat Chairperson.  With regard to 
dismissal, that is a labour related matter and Labour Law 
issues.  There was no way in which we could get involved.  
But with regard to the possible or the eminent ending of a 
contract... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS PETERS:   I do not know about other ministers, but I 
am saying, in this instance, I used my previous experience 
20 
and 
I 
used 
the 
fact 
that 
we 
are 
losing 
expertise 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, that is fine. I have understood 
what you did in regard to the specific instance.  I think 
Mr Soni wanted to know if there was a general practise. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 84 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   No, it is not a general application. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay. 
 
But 
with 
regard 
to 
the 
appointment, the President would be approached by the 
relevant Minister to say whatever process has been 
followed, here is the name I may be presenting to Cabinet 
for consideration to fill the position of CEO in such and 
such an SOE.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   I do not know about others. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   But I know in my situation ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did that.   
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in regard to appointment of 
boards, what role did Cabinet play? 
MS PETERS:   Pardon Chair? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   With regard to the appointment of 
boards of SOE’s, what role did Cabinet play? 
MS PETERS:   Cabinet had equally – the same procedure, 
appoints the boards of SOE’s.  And if you have the 
20 
courtesy to do the same approach to the President, you 
will do it.  Like I say, I had made it my approach to say this 
is what I am presenting before Cabinet.  Even with regard 
to policy, I used to do that   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, Ms Peters, sorry, we must limit 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 85 of 153 
 
your answers.  I am sorry about that. 
MS PETERS:   I am sorry Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now with regard to the dismissal of a 
board such as PRASA’s board, what role does Cabinet 
play? 
MS PETERS:   Cabinet is not involved. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So the Minister chooses when to 
dismiss a board with no reference to Cabinet at all? 
MS PETERS:   Once you have appointed the board, you as 
the Minister works with the board, the board reports to you 
10 
and when the time had arrived, I make this instance, when 
the time had arrived where there were these particular 
issues, I then terminated the board, wrongly or rightly.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me ask this question.  With 
regard to SOE boards.  When you take the names of or the 
proposed names of board members of an SOE to Cabinet, 
does Cabinet actually make the appointment or you make 
the appointment but you present the names to them to see 
whether any colleague has, in Cabinet, any issues with 
what you propose with the people you propose to appoint? 
20 
MS PETERS:   In Cabinet, there is something called 
Cabinet Committees. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS PETERS:   The first report or the first Cabinet full 
package will be presented to the Cabinet Committee and if 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 86 of 153 
 
the colleagues support you and agree with that particular, 
it would then be part of the Cabinet minutes that goes to 
Cabinet.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  So if they approve? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But who actually does the 
appointment?  Do they say you can go ahead and appoint 
this board or do they say:  We appoint this board, as 
Cabinet?  So you make a recommendation to Cabinet and 
Cabinet appoints or the power to appoint lies with you as 
10 
Minister but you take the matter to your colleagues in 
Cabinet for a consultation process? 
MS PETERS:   For consultation, Chairperson, and support.  
In the most instances it is there for support.  They would 
support you.  Remember Chairperson, when you are in a 
position of authority like government, you do not govern for 
our own self.  Even the next ones that come, continue with 
the those ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   So as Cabinet members, we were always 
20 
operating on the principle of individually and collectively 
responsible. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS PETERS:   So I would have taken the proposal from the 
board with my signature saying I support this. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 87 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS PETERS:   And I...  No, there would – the right word is 
I recommend for Cabinet to support this particular board 
appointment and then in most instances, Chairperson, they 
would support.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But the actual letter of appointment 
comes from you? 
MS PETERS:   The actual letter?  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   Because the Minister is the delegate 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You are the appointing authority, as far 
as the board is concerned? 
MS PETERS:   Back to the board to say Cabinet has 
approved this.  And in most instances, the board would 
already know even before the Minister writes back to them 
that – because there would be the next day a Cabinet 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS PETERS:   H’m. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  It might not have been... it might 
not be as clear as I would have liked but I think we can go 
and proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Now Ms Peters, the power to 
appoint boards rests in terms of the PRASA Act with the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 88 of 153 
 
Minister and the power to dismiss rests with the Minister.  
You are aware of that? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now when you are dismissing all the 
members of a board, is that a matter that you would regard 
as unusual to take the President or to take to Cabinet? 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
 
When 
that 
happens 
– 
maybe 
the 
circumstances under which this particular happened was 
different but when that happens, you do not take it to 
Cabinet or to the President because the responsibility has 
10 
already been given to you and you – it is charged have that 
particular responsibility.  And you take responsibility for 
the actions that ensures from that, rightly or wrongly.  And 
I would want to say, if it was wrong, then... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you make the decision ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that you believe is correct, whether 
somebody else thinks differently.   
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the decision you make. 
20 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now that is the principle in this case.  
Did you discuss this matter with the President? 
MS PETERS:   After the board was dismissed. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 89 of 153 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Before the board was dismissed? 
MS PETERS:   Not before the board was dismissed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   After the board was dismissed? 
MS PETERS:   After the board was dismissed...  I phoned 
him and just informed – I think, if my mind serves me well, 
I phoned the Secretariat of the President to inform him that 
this is what happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, do not speak away from the mic.  So 
...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   Okay Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just repeat. 
MS PETERS:   I am trying to recall exactly how the process 
unfolded but I think I phoned the Secretary of the 
President to indicate that he must – she must inform the 
President that this is what happened.  If it comes out in the 
news, he must not be surprised because time did not allow. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When did you take the decision to 
dismiss the board? 
MS PETERS:   When did I take the decision? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, to dismiss the board?  You wrote 
20 
the letter ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   At the ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...on the 8 t h. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When did you take the decision? 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 90 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   On the 7 t h, I think I wrote to...  Is it the 5 t h 
or the 7th?  I wrote to the board, indicating to them that 
they must deal with these challenges related to their specs 
and their conflict.  And at the end of – I think it was the 
end of that week, I took that particular decision.  I think it 
was a decision that I made that up to so far and no further.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you recall whether you made the 
decision on the 8 t h, which was, I think, the date of your 
letter to them or the previous day or two days before the 
8 t h? 
10 
MS PETERS:   I think it was on the 8 t h.   
CHAIRPERSON:   It was on the 8 t h? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I read to you a passage in the 
Parliamentary or in the Portfolio Committee debate, where 
the person who succeeded you as Minister of Transport, 
Mr Maswanganyi, said but there are just three months left.  
Why – even if it ...[indistinct – word cut off] why should we 
dismiss this board?  You heard that – I mean, you read that 
20 
that is what he had said.  Can I ask you why did you 
dismiss the board three months before its term of office 
ended? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I did indicate that it might 
have been wrong at that particular moment but for me at 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 91 of 153 
 
that moment I thought it was correct decision. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you knew at the time, we know it 
is early March, you say maybe 6 t h, 7 t h or 8 t h, it does not 
matter, but you knew in March that come the end of July a 
new board needs to be appointed.  You knew that. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Just like you knew when Mr 
Montana’s contract was going to end that a replacement 
needed to be found. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What steps did you take before you 
took the decision, irrespective of the decision, what steps 
did you take to find a replacement board? 
MS PETERS:   We had already started with the advert for 
the new board. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When was that? 
MS PETERS:   Already around that time the advert was 
out, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And how long would that process 
have taken? 
20 
MS PETERS:   I am unable to anticipate how long it would 
have taken, Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You see, I will tell you why, Ms 
Peters, you might remember I have read to you what the 
late Mr Makwetu said in his affidavit and we went through 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 92 of 153 
 
those passages and he said two things.  One, he said the 
instability in PRASA was due to the fact that it did not have  
permanent CEO.  You remember that? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He also mentioned that there was a 
time in 2016 when the board was quorated because the 
Treasury representative was not there and he made the 
point that you then regularised the position. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What is it that causes you in spite of 
10 
– and remember we have been through this, that there is 
exponential increase in irregular expenditure. 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what causes you to create more 
turmoil, and I am putting this to you, causes you to create 
more turmoil and dismiss the board there and then? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I did not create more turmoil, I 
created an opportunity with an interim board. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But that is exactly the point that Mr 
Makwetu is making in regard to inference, he was saying 
20 
PRASA does not have a CEO since July 2015, everybody 
thereafter is in an interim position, this is what is creating 
instability but that is the very thing you do, you dismiss a 
permanent board. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, earlier on I did indicate that it 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 93 of 153 
 
might in somebody else’s reading be wrong and I concede t 
it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You see, Ms Peters, when I say 
something to you and I have to put it to you, Mr de Freitas 
says that the reason that the board was dismissed was to 
avoid that inquiry that had been agreed to in the previous 
week, on the 7 t h, I think, for the [indistinct – dropping 
voice] 
What do you say to that? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I want to put it on record here 
10 
that it is not possible that that inquiry could have been the 
reason why the board was [indistinct – dropping voice] 
because already at that particular stage there was an 
investigation that was happening, that I made reference to 
that.  Between myself and Mr Molefe we had agreed that 
we will reconcile the forensic investigation I had requested 
the auditor-general to do as well as the work that they 
were doing in PRASA with the Derailed Report as per the 
Public Protector’s determination that Treasury investigate 
everything that is above 10 million.  That investigation was 
20 
on in the office of the Chief Procurement Officer.  What we 
needed to follow up was the process now with what the 
Chief Procurement Officer was doing.  So there was no way 
I could be part of a plan to stifle an investigation when I 
knew that instead, Chairperson, I did indicate in the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 94 of 153 
 
meeting we had with the AG that I am happy that the 
threshold for the investigation that is being referred to the 
office of the Chief Procurement Officer is even lower than 
where I had pegged it which then took it to 10 million.  
And remember, there was indication that in PRASA 
the delegations for procurement were at times more than 
500 million or more than a million.  So the fact that it went 
right down to 10 million satisfied me.  So there was an 
investigation already that I had concurred with because I 
had agreed and signed off on a request for a forensic 
10 
investigation and because of the statement from the late 
Auditor-General that the because all these investigations 
needs the same people.  There is sometimes, in their 
language, investigation lethargy.  Let us put everything 
together.  We agreed.   
We had a meeting with the then Chief Procurement 
Officer and Mr Molefe to say this is what is going to 
happen.  Between PRASA and the Chief Procurement 
Officer, the investigations were supposed to continue. 
In 
fact, 
incidentally, 
Mr 
Molefe 
agreed 
when 
20 
Letswaolo started there, that these investigations are part 
of the processes that he, Letswaolo, as they even gave him 
a term – called it Mr Fix It, that there is problems of 
malfeasance, corruption and other things in PRASA that 
this man is going to deal with.   
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 95 of 153 
 
And, Chairperson, I want to indicate here that the 
fact 
that 
Mr 
Maswanganyi 
did 
not 
continue 
or 
took 
whatever decision, he is responsible for those decisions 
that he took thereafter.   
There is a saying that says you do not [indistinct] 
from the grave, you cannot want to come back as a former 
minister and say but you are doing wrong, you should 
follow that and it had never happened in my engagements 
with the portfolio committee to determine for them what 
they needed to do even when they had called me to be 
10 
before the committee, I would always adhere to what the 
committee has said we should be doing. 
So the fact that the investigation did not continue I 
cannot take responsibility for, Chairperson.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The choice before you at the time 
you made your decision, whichever day it was in March 
2017, the choice before you was this, I either disregard 
what Mr Makwetu has been saying to me over and over 
again about the disruption not having a permanent board or 
a permanent CEO, or I can tolerate this board for another 
20 
three months.  That was the choice.  Do you agree with 
me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Switch on your mic.  You can keep it on. 
MS PETERS:   Thank you, Chair.  I do not know what the 
choice was before me at that particular time, Chairperson. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 96 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me ask this question.  If you 
dismissed the board three months before the expiry of their 
term and you appointed an interim board would the term of 
the interim board be the three months or would it be 
whatever period you were – you felt you could give to 
them?  Was it the three months remaining that would not 
have been served by the dismissed board? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   Because like I indicated, there was already 
10 
a process in place for an appointment of a new board 
because this board’s term was coming to an end.  So that 
process was in place.  That is why I then took a decision 
that this be an interim board so that it would also allow me 
with the process of the new appointment to do the 
consultation routes that we would have – they would have 
served the remaining period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I guess maybe Mr Soni has this 
question in mind that he maybe was going to ask or is 
asking, would it not be fair to say to dismiss the board 
20 
when all that is left is three months for its term to expire 
could not have been based on a reason that had been 
there for a long time, it had to be that it must have been a 
recent reason because, for example, if the board had not 
been performing its duties properly for two years and you 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 97 of 153 
 
had not dismissed it, how does it help to dismiss them 
three months before the expiry of the term?  But if there is 
something that has arisen that was not there that prompts 
you to say this board must go, then one could understand.  
What do you say to that?  Would it not be fair to look at it 
in that way? 
MS PETERS:   No, Chairperson. I do not think three 
months was probably, in my view, going to be a very long 
period, that three months.  I coincided with the last quarter 
of the financial year and there were quite a lot of other 
10 
things that were happening at that particular moment, 
Chairperson, and maybe with hindsight you could join the 
judge who said it was irrational but I feel, Chairperson, 
that if I had given the board a notice that says give me a 
reason why not to dismiss you, that was going to be good 
enough for the court to even see that it is not irrational 
because it would have probably laid out the whole – this 
thing.  So maybe with hindsight you can say the court was 
correct to say it was irrational but I still believe that even it 
was probably a week before the end of the term of the 
20 
board because of my engagement.  Maybe the limitation of 
this process is that you would – we are not dealing with 
things as up to the end, the build-up, can probably use that 
word. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you see, if – I mean the board came 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 98 of 153 
 
in – was appointed sometime in 2014, if I recall correctly, 
about July or thereabouts. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Beginning of August 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, August 2014.  August 2015, that is a 
year, you should have had a fair idea of whether they were 
performing their duties properly.  August 2016, that is two 
years, you must have known by then if they were worth 
keeping.  Now you are at close to the end of their term, 
about three months, if it was about performance, I just 
have difficulty with the idea of – I do not have difficulty 
10 
with dismissing for – if they do not perform, I do not have a 
problem, they should be dismissed if they do not perform, 
but I have difficulty in understanding the decision to 
dismiss them three months before the end of their term if 
the reason for dismissal is performance or if the reason is 
something that had been there for quite some time.  If it is 
something that had just happened maybe one could look at 
that but also it seems to me one would – in your position 
one would need to factor in effect that if you bring in an 
interim board, you would be bringing in an interim board for 
20 
only a very limited period, number one. 
 
Number two, they would need some time to get to 
understand their new job, all – at least in three months and 
before they could do anything their term would have ended.  
It does not seem to me, subject to what you have to say, it 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 99 of 153 
 
does not seem to me to be something that one would likely 
do unless there was something that had just arisen that 
one found so totally unacceptable that one could not say 
look, they are leaving in three months, let me focus on 
recruiting good people. 
MS PETERS:   That time when this thing happened, 
Chairperson, and even in the letter that – I do not whether 
I did indicate in the last hearing that I will avail that letter 
that I wrote to the chairperson of the new interim board 
about what is expected within that short period that they 
10 
were there to do and make sure that they investigate the 
issues of the 350% salary increase, their unending or the 
prolonged investigations that was happening and all those 
other matters that are in those particular letters. 
 
But like I have indicated, Chairperson, if you sit 
now in 2001- I mean, what is the year now, 2021, and you 
look what was happening in 2017 at that particular time, 
you would realise, Chairperson, that that is why I say given 
an option and opportunity, I would have appealed that 
particular court judgment because even if …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but remember, we are not talking 
about the judgment now, I am just talking about… 
MS PETERS:   Why. 
CHAIRPERSON:   About why you would have thought it is 
warranted to dismiss the board three months before the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 100 of 153 
 
end of its term in circumstances where, as Mr Soni says, 
the 
Auditor-General 
had 
complained 
that 
there 
was 
instability in this entity which was adding to the problems.  
So if you dismissed this board three months before the 
expiry of its term you are going to put in an interim board, 
they need to take some time before they are on top of 
issues.  Then they have to go, then they have got to bring 
another board.  Then it takes some time before it is on top 
of issues.  It just does not seem to be something that one 
expects unless you say to me here is something that they 
10 
have just done which had not been there before which was 
just so intolerable that I could not allow them to continue.  
That would be different for me. 
MS PETERS:   The issue raised by the AG about the 
instability at PRASA and the fact that all the issues that I 
have been raising were related to those particular issues 
also an including the other matters that were related to the 
performance, Chairperson, I would indicate here that 
maybe at that particular time that was the risk I was 
prepared to take, even if it was going to be the last risk 
20 
before I die or I get moved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So is – so am I correct in saying 
you are not saying that there is something that happened 
which had not been there all along during their term, their 
tenure, there is something they had done which came to 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 101 of 153 
 
your attention which was so intolerable that you could not 
allow 
them 
to 
continue 
for 
three 
months, 
what 
you 
dismissed them for were things that you had been engaging 
with them for quite some time.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   One of things that I would want to say at 
that particular time also, Chairperson, over and above the 
issues of the performance and all that, I did indicate, 
Chairperson, that it was this – what do you call it, the 
public space, the challenges that were there in PRASA with 
regard to many other things including the contestation or 
10 
the conflict that emerged between them and Letswaolo and 
I then took the decision Letswaolo must go back to the 
department.  And whilst we were busy also with dealing 
with that – and one of the biggest challenges I used to 
have with dealing with the then Chairperson of the board is 
that you would engage with him and talk to him and the 
next thing it is in the media, it is in the press and for me, 
Chairperson, it was something that I felt is – it is not 
something that I can tolerate and work with because you 
cannot have a situation where you meet with somebody, 
20 
you agree with tomorrow there is a press briefing you have 
got to have also your press briefing to respond – the media 
wants you to – there was quite a lot of things that was 
happening and PRASA in itself was – I would say… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Deurmekaar. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 102 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   Pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said PRASA was itself – you said 
PRASA itself was – then you kept quiet, so I am asking 
whether you wanted to say deurmekaar. 
MS PETERS:   It was deurmekaar, it was mengelmoes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was? 
MS PETERS:   Dit was ŉ mengelmoes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So was your complaint against Mr 
Molefe’s approaching the press? 
10 
MS PETERS:   Pardon, Chair? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was your complaint – because I 
heard you say to the Chairperson, one of the last things, 
that what you could not stand was that you would have a 
meeting with Mr Molefe and he would approach the press.  
I am just trying to understand, Mr Peters, because at the 
end of the day I have got to say to you when one looks at 
all the information that is before this Commission relating 
to the dismissal of the board – and I want to come back 
just now to the non-appointment of a permanent CEO but 
20 
as regards the dismissal of the board, there is nothing 
before this Commission that suggests it was rational.  In 
fact, if anything, it suggests that the dismissal was not 
bona fide.  I am putting that to you. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I need to indicate here that 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 103 of 153 
 
there was a stage which I arrived at where I realised that it 
is very difficult to work with Mr Molefe.  I can leave it at 
that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Why did you not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course if he was the problem would 
not  have had the opportunity of removing him only and 
continuing with the other members of the board with whom 
you had no difficulty?  Why the whole board because of 
one person? 
MS PETERS:   Maybe because I had taken that there – 
10 
when you meet with all of them they do not – almost like  - 
like you say, in most instances I met the board in full 
several times but I met Mr Molefe several times, every now 
and then.  Whenever he wanted an appointment he would 
come, he even knew where I stayed, he would come and 
we would meet and talk and he would want an answer 
immediately and even if you say give me chance and all 
those type of things.  So like I said earlier on when the 
advocate was raising issues related to what the judgment 
said, I said probably with hindsight, one could say probably 
20 
it was irrational the way I approached it but it happened at 
that particular moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you accept that if your difficulty was 
with one member of the board, the Chairperson, there 
would have been no reason to fire the whole board? 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 104 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:   With hindsight …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would have fired him. 
MS PETERS:   With hindsight, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   But they were not – I would say that the 
other board members [speaking vernacular]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want to say that in English? 
MS PETERS:   I would say, Chairperson, that the other 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I am not sure that I understand 
10 
it but … 
MS PETERS:   The other board members were not probably 
able to manage the leadership style of Mr Molefe.  That is 
my view. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but of course once he was not there 
that problem of theirs would not be there because it would 
be somebody else who would be Chairperson. 
MS PETERS:   Ja, it was happened and they then 
increased their remuneration.  When I raised it with him he 
said I was out of the country and so I am not responsible.  
20 
You know, it – I do not know, Chairperson, but I am saying 
with hindsight you can say it was an irrational approach 
maybe having arrived at up to so far and no further.  
Maybe that is… 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, the reason why we – why both 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 105 of 153 
 
Mr Molefe and I go probe into your reasons for certain 
decisions such as …[intervenes] 
ADV MAJAVU:   Mr Soni, Chair.  Chair, you said the 
reason why Mr Molefe and I, and I am just correcting that 
Freudian slip. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh and I did not hear myself.  Thank 
you.  Thank you, Mr Majavu, thank you.  The reason why 
Mr Soni and I are probing certain issues including your 
decision to dismiss the board is we want to understand how 
certain things happened at PRASA and we want to 
10 
understand because sometimes decisions are taken and 
certain reasons are given for those decisions but those 
decisions are not the truth – those reasons are not the 
truth, there are other true reasons that are not being 
advanced.  So we want to know whether reasons that were 
given were the true reasons or there maybe have been 
other reasons or there may have been certain pressures, 
like we do not know, we want to try and understand 
because sometimes when decision does not seem to be 
rational, it might mean you must probe further because you 
20 
might arrive at the truth.  So I am not saying necessarily 
that the reasons you were gave were not the right reasons, 
that can be decided later, I can decide that later but that is 
the reason why you see us wanting to try and understand 
the reasons for the reasoning that – on which your decision 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 106 of 153 
 
was taken. Okay. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, like I said earlier on that 
at that point I just took a decision that if that is the risk I 
am taking, I am prepared to follow through and bear the 
consequences.  Like I said earlier on, if there were other 
pressures they were internally within the Transport and 
PRASA related …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Within your portfolio. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, in the portfolio itself, Chairperson.  
And at that particular time, like I said, that at the end of a 
10 
meeting where I was with the board and CEOs were taking 
a decision there would be an assessment of all the board, 
all the boards took that, PRASA board refused and there is 
quite a number of other things but I understand your 
question, Chairperson, to say ...[indistinct – word cut off] 
within - when three months was remaining.  Three months 
remaining but the process that you take to appoint was not 
necessarily going to be that three months.  At times it went 
beyond the three months, primarily because of the process 
that you need to follow.  May that was what informed me 
20 
because the advert is out but I know in the back of my 
mind that it might, we might say, there is three months 
remaining, it could be six months.  
And for me, the other processes would have helped, 
but in terms of somebody saying, do this [speaking in 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 107 of 153 
 
vernacular], I at that particular time and…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was your own decision. 
MS PETERS:   It was my own decision and that is why I 
said Chairperson that if I was irrational, I accepted that but 
I still say that if we had been given – I was there on the 
10 t h of April, and the outcome came, because of the 
weakness. 
And I need to acknowledge that at times, even as 
government the reason why we lose cases it is because of 
the weaknesses of our affidavits and information and I 
10 
think because of the weakness of our case, we lost it, and 
I think that is why is say with hindsight, I believe had we 
appealed we would have won. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, I think part of the reason why, 
for example, Mr Soni was referring to the attitude of the 
Portfolio Committee with regard to the inquiry that they had 
decided should be conducted is that the parts of Mr De 
Freitas affidavit that he was reading and the documentation 
from which he was reading gives the impression of a 
committee, which at a certain stage wanted to get rid of 
20 
the Board.  But they are taking a decision that there should 
be an inquiry into the affairs of PRASA.  
As I understand it they did not say inquiry into the, 
conduct of the Board and inquiry to the affairs of PRASA 
but obviously that would encompass how the Board had 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 108 of 153 
 
handled certain issues I would imagine.  But then the 
moment you have dismissed the Board, suddenly they say 
it is not necessary to have the enquiry and we know that 
PRASA was left with serious allegations of corruption 
during that time, suddenly it is not necessary to have an 
inquiry. 
 So it is I think part of what was looking at is, is 
why is this happening like this?  And then of course, you 
say, but it is only three months left why can they not wait, 
why can the Minister not wait, but I may be repeating what 
10 
I have said, but I wanted to make sure that you understand 
the reasoning, Mr Soni. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair I understand the reason. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, you just said to the 
Chairperson, well, I knew this would take, or it may we 
think it will take three months, but it may take six months.  
Now, this is the difficulty I have with that on your version 
and I am saying on your version, because I have got to put 
it to you I do not accept it.  On your version you wanted 
this 
Board 
out 
for 
some 
time, 
certainly 
before 
the 
20 
beginning of March 2003.  You had, as you said you had 
had your gut follow it, you had had enough of them, they 
tested your patience.  
MS PETERS:   Yes, sir.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right, that is why to avoid any 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 109 of 153 
 
extension of their term if that was the position, you would 
have started the process of replacing the Board three 
months’ sooner than you in fact did.  That would be made 
sure that they would not be one more day with this existing 
Board. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I am saying that the Board, in 
particular the Chairperson had pressed my patience for a 
very long time with regards to the core responsibilities of 
the work that was before them.  It had nothing to do with 
the Portfolio Committee process.  It had nothing to do with 
10 
any other matter, except the fact that that is where I had 
arrived at that particular time.  
And I still concede at this particular time that if it 
was irrational, it was because I was informed by my 
experience up to that moment, as well as remember, when 
the predecessor to the acting Group CEO Letsoalo, Mr 
Molefe came and said, this man is useless and now there 
was this one, which we thought would be there to try and 
clean up and make sure that by the time that the CEO is 
appointed, 
those 
issues 
that 
were 
set 
needs 
to 
be 
20 
addressed, has been addressed, and then again, there is 
this issue with regard to this one.  
So, freely speaking, I was at my tethers end and I 
felt that that is what informed the Chairperson, and I am 
sorry that the Portfolio Committee decided to abandon its 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 110 of 153 
 
own processes, based on the fact that the Board was 
removed, when they could have continued because if you 
look at the letter that I wrote to the interim, I even take 
from the previous letter that I wrote to the Chairperson of 
the Board to say I wrote to the Chairperson, with regard to 
these matters, continue with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters I have heard you, can I 
ask you just one question, I heard you say so many times, 
that if it was irrational that decision was taken in March 
10 
2017, the decision to dismiss the Board, we are now in 
March 2021.  When you reflect on it, was it rational? 
MS PETERS:   I would say the timing was wrong, thank you 
Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So we can accept then based on the 
fact that as has been put to you, there is three months left, 
what the Auditor General had said the instability the fact 
that there was no CEO.  When you look at it now, it sounds 
irrational, and maybe one should have just waited until 
there term had ended and they would have ridden off into 
20 
the sunset.  Would that not be the more rational thing? 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
 
I 
do 
not 
know 
that, 
Chairperson.  
Chairperson can I be given one and a half minutes’ comfort 
break? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, let us make it, shall we 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 111 of 153 
 
make it 10 minutes, 5 minutes?  I assume one minute 
would not be good enough.  
MS PETERS:   Five minutes will be fine.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Five minutes, okay, we will take a five 
minutes’ adjournment.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us continue.  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.  Ms Peters, I 
want to finish this part of questions I want to ask of you, I 
want to raise this with you, because I said to you I am 
aware of your contribution to the new society. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Speak up a bit Mr Soni, yes I cannot 
hear. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I was saying, that I am deeply 
conscious of and very appreciative of the Ms Peters 
20 
contribution to our new society.  You know, Ms Peters all 
that we or people who have contributed to our democracy 
will leave behind the legacy.  Now, I say this to you, 
conscious of what the Chairperson said that one needs to 
understand what happened.  
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 112 of 153 
 
Now, I have got to say it to you, and I say it with 
the utmost respect and humility, that it does not make any 
sense to me, given all the facts, that there was not 
something more in relation to the dismissal of the entire 
Board than what you have communicated. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson I said earlier on that, I think 
that probably the timing was wrong, but Chairperson with 
my experience that advocate is referring to, I know that 
one day, one week, a month, is very long in government 
and a lot can happen.   
10 
At that particular time Chairperson, in my view, and 
in my recollection of what was happening in PRASA, I 
believed that I would be allowing this Board to preside over 
destroying the company further than it was.  So that 
informs me and I said earlier on that, if it is in the 
understanding of the Commission that I was wrong, then I 
concede. 
But I am informed by this very experience of having 
served – this, during the anti-apartheid - and incidentally, I 
want to indicate that my patience was also informed by my 
20 
knowledge and experience of having worked with Mr Molefe 
and my respect for him, which I still have, up until today. 
Like I said, even in my affidavit, the matter has never been 
personal.  Even when he called me Mzolwana in or a born 
again, Christian, I accepted it, that is my leader saying it 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 113 of 153 
 
these type of things.  
But Chairperson, I think there is a stage where you 
really need to say, why allow that which has been 
destroyed so far or do I salvage, and in my own view, that 
is what I thought I am doing at the time.   
And that is why if you could have looked at the 
reasons 
for 
appointing 
the 
interim 
Board, 
whilst 
we 
appointing - I did not look for a one-person administrator 
or those type of things, I looked at a team with particular 
skills that I thought would be able to take the process 
10 
forward, including the representatives from the department 
and all those.  
And in my view Chairperson, I was trying to correct 
that which I said, the company is not ready for a new CEO 
at that particular time, and I am happy and I want to 
congratulate the Minister of Transport for finally getting a 
CEO for PRASA and I wish the CEO equally like the person 
who said to me from a compliments and congratulations 
and condolences, because it is important that you realise 
that there is a lot that needs to be done to be able to turn 
20 
around that particular company.   
So I just want to say that the public space and the 
things that were there created the environment in which, as 
a Minister with other matters that I had to deal with the 12 
entities 
plus 
the 
two 
regulating 
bodies, 
and 
the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 114 of 153 
 
responsibility that we were facing the end of the financial 
year and all that, I just thought that up to so far and no 
further.  So I say to you, Chairperson, if I was wrong, I 
take it that I did it in the cause of doing my responsibility. 
MS PETERS:   Ms Peters let me finish my point on that 
issue by saying the following, it may be that in addition to 
finding that, or let me not anticipate what the Chairperson 
will find. But let me say that, I am going to argue at the 
end, when we are debating PRASA, that not only was your 
decision irrational, as you somewhat seem to concede, you 
10 
have not been candid, you have not given us this true 
reason. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, if there is somebody else who 
knows the true reasons for this particular decision at that 
particular time, I think probably the Evidence Leader would 
be able to provide those particular rue reasons.  
But as I speak, and as I am seated before you 
today, I can vouch that - Chairperson, let me give you an 
example, that is why I say if it was wrong, on my part as 
Elizabeth Dipuo Peters, I concede and accept, I will accept 
20 
that responsibility.  And if it was irrational, as indicated 
even in the judgment here, I will accept.  But I am saying, 
for me, I was informed by the circumstances I was faced 
with a particular time.  And that is why I said, like they say 
in the township the timing might have been wrong but I felt 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 115 of 153 
 
that one day, it could be just a day too long, or a three 
months was going to be too long, and I felt that I needed to 
act at that particular time.  
If there is other information elsewhere – I am one-
person Chairperson that do not entertain corridor talks, 
and that is why I am not going to come before you and say 
I was put under pressure by somebody, when that person 
has never put me under pressure for anything.  And I think 
it is important that I be a big girl and take responsibility for 
my actions, and I am saying if it was wrong, I take it that it 
10 
was wrong.  
But if I had extra time, I was going to change that 
wrong, and I was going to make it right, according to the 
prescript in terms of giving them notice, to tell me why I 
should not because I believe that that was only the lack 
but also the fact that we had a weak legal argument in 
terms of the documents that we presented. So given 
another opportunity, we would have strengthened our 
argument. 
MS PETERS:   I am going to finish my questioning by 
20 
saying this that when one looks at the facts one looks at 
what happened in the public space in an important arm of 
government, namely in Parliament.  What is quite clear is 
not so much that the Molefe led Board conducted the 
investigations into corruption at PRASA, multi-billion-rand 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 116 of 153 
 
corruption.  There was a R3,5billion and we have been 
through it before, a R3.5billion the Swifambo contract, 
which the Supreme Court of Appeal said in so many words 
was corrupt. 
The Siengena contract, which recently the High 
Court in Pretoria of a three Judge bench set aside 
R2,8billion that for that Board to be put in inverted commas 
“rewarded” who had been unceremoniously removed from 
office does not make sense.  So I just want to put that to 
you.  
10 
And then what was said was that it was Mr Molefe’s 
revelation that there may have been a link between the 
Swifambo contract, the award of these contracts with 
Swifambo and certain pressures being put on individuals to 
make certain payments, purportedly to the ANC.  
I am putting that to you that that is the only 
reasonable 
explanation 
that, 
or 
the 
most 
reasonable 
explanation that comes to mind as to why that Board was 
dismissed. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson I want to indicate it here and 
20 
now that there is no way that this investigations would 
have been the reason, because at the point when this 
investigation started, we had a discussion with Mr Molefe 
and we agreed, including Chairperson even on the new 
trains 
that 
are 
being 
built. 
 
We 
agreed 
on 
this 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 117 of 153 
 
investigation, and that is why somebody made reference in 
the last hearing that - I think it is Mr De Freitas that says 
in my answer to a parliamentary question, I did give an 
indication that I supported the investigation by Werksmans. 
Yes, I agreed Chairperson.  We agreed even with 
the investigations by Werksmans and I gave an indication 
that in the time that this report about Swifambo and others 
came up Mr Molefe came with the Chair of the Audit 
Committee and showed me and that is why we even went – 
I had to say some of the matters needed the Auditor 
10 
General to do a forensic investigation.  
Chairperson, this investigation of Swifambo with the 
one of the locomotives that they said were too big, we 
agreed with Mr Molefe.  He went to court with it with my 
understanding my issue was Chairperson that in the first 
year of the Werksmans investigation, it was unforeseen, 
unplanned, and we agreed that it could go ahead.   
The second year, you cannot say it is unforeseen. 
They needed to plan for it as a Board and the company 
now, so that they can then be able to continue with the 
20 
investigation.  
The third year Chairperson, I said, it is important 
that this matter because it is part of the Auditor General's 
report Chairperson, as well as the Portfolio Committee 
having raised it, you need to regularise it, there is ways in 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 118 of 153 
 
which things are regularised.  Some of those things even 
involves taking it back to Parliament to another committee 
of Parliament called SCOHA, which is the Appropriations 
Committee in terms of the deviations that you request from 
Treasury, the extensions you request from Treasury, or 
modifications that you request from Treasury.  
That is ways in which you regularise certain things 
that you have done in the previous period that you believe 
needs to continue.  And I thought Mr Molefe understands 
that, and Mr Molefe and Tim should have continued, we 
10 
fully 
work 
together 
even 
including 
with 
all 
these 
investigations. 
The last periods, he then did not even inform or 
report.  That is why out of myself, I wrote to him to say, 
can we get a report because we were no longer even 
getting periodic indications that now we are going to court.  
This is type of happening, and I said, in my understanding, 
and in my experience, that Mr Soni referred to I know that 
investigations when they go on, they open another loop, 
which needs a new mandate.  
20 
And therefore, if that is the case, we need to be 
able to look at the Werksmans report, especially in view of 
the fact that it is linked now to the derailed report, as well 
as the combined investigation that we say the office of the 
chief procurement officer must follow up.  Can we get a 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 119 of 153 
 
report on what has been done so far, so that we can then 
be - in my own limited understanding and limited wording 
of the letter, I thought he would understand that this would 
also be part of the process that would help him to be able 
to regularise this irregular expenditure that is now growing.  
And at that particular time, we were already told 
that it is above R200million.  And, Chairperson it does not 
mean that if you are looking at wrongs, you need to take a 
wrong way of addressing the wrongs, you need to make 
sure that your way of doing it is correct, and I thought that 
10 
is the route that we are following.  
Incidentally, Chairperson, I had an opportunity to 
serve with Mr Molefe in the National Executive Committee 
of the African National Congress and at one stage, me and 
him 
were 
given 
a 
responsibility 
together 
with 
other 
officials, the late TG of the ANC, the then a secretary 
general, and another member to be part of the Finance 
Committee of the ANC.   
And we knew that this thing, that is why I said to 
him, if there is an R80million story, you need to also 
20 
investigate it, investigate it by the ANC equally, and I was 
on record in SADEKA where I said whilst PRASA and 
government is investigating the R80million, the ANC itself 
must investigate who is fundraising in the name of the ANC 
so that the ANC can be able to follow up this particular 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 120 of 153 
 
individuals.  And that is the only thing at no given stage, 
there were Braamfontein Depot that was being dealt with, 
there was a lot of things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But basically, what you are saying is you 
were in support of…[intervene] 
MS PETERS:   Of the clean-up, of the clean-up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …to conduct those investigations, to be 
conducted.  
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You just had certain issues around how 
10 
it was done but in terms of the investigations being 
pursued, you are saying that you were in support of that, 
and you told him. 
MS PETERS:   I was in full support of that Chairperson, in 
fact Chairperson if you read the - at another time, the 
affidavit of Mr Montana, he seems to read that to be an 
indication that I had then given Mr Molefe a mandate to get 
rid of him, which was not true.  
And I am happy, honourable I mean Chairperson, 
that they Evidence Leader indicates issues of legacy.  I do 
20 
not one day to want when the almighty calls me to have 
people doing funny things over my grave, I want to rest in 
peace at the time it happens and I am not going to stand in 
any form of investigation or prevent any investigation.  I 
am just saying, let us do things correctly.  
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 121 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS PETERS:   And that is why I believe Chairperson in 
conclusion, why in every correspondence to any Board, in 
any entity that I worked with, to always put things in 
writing, because I know it is not for me, it is for those who 
will come after me to be able to have a paper trail and a 
record. Thank you, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am going to suggest to you Ms 
Peters that, this is your decision not to appoint a CEO from 
10 
the time the Board started pressing you to do that, as I 
understand it was early 2016.  
That 
especially 
when 
a 
black 
woman 
was 
recommended, and not only black in the collective sense, 
but an African woman who met all the criteria, to fit that 
position that that to the explanation you have given us 
here as to why that was not done was also lacking in can 
do. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, in the last hearing, I did give 
an indication that I take responsibility for the delay, 
20 
because there were certain things that happened around 
that time, that prevented me to go through the full 
consultative process.  
And if it so happened, that it could not have been 
carried through to the final end, then I take responsibility 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 122 of 153 
 
Chairperson, but whether I am candid or not, I want to say 
I have always believed that the truth you do not have to 
remember you tell it as it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me ask this question and it is quite 
important 
that 
in 
regards 
to 
the 
failure 
to 
appoint 
permanent CEO as well as what was happening at PRASA 
over you as Minister of Transport. 
Did you keep the then President and the cabinets 
fully informed of what was happening at PRASA and the 
challenges about allegations of corruption and at the 
10 
relevant times the fact that the position of Group CEO was 
vacant and was vacant for a long time and no appointment 
had been made or that you did not think PRASA was ready 
for a permanent CEO. 
Did you keep either the President or the cabinet or 
both properly informed about what the state of affairs was 
at PRASA? 
MS PETERS:   I informed, what is called the ETC which is 
an informal committee of the Ministers of the economic 
PRASA. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   And then Chairperson I, like I indicated I 
informed the President on those matters and I am happy to 
indicate that when I went to the President with a list of 
issues that were being investigated, he gave on various 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 123 of 153 
 
matters, he gave a proclamation to the SIU to investigate 
some of the matters that was on the list of issues that 
needed to be investigated.  And we had not concluded on 
everything, and like is said the last time if you have briefed 
somebody on something and you have not concluded on it I 
do not take it that that is the final it means that there is 
still need for us to go there. 
In fact, even the one of the issue of the trains 
recently I read somebody saying that those trains are not – 
the 
locomotives 
it 
is 
actually 
not 
the 
trains. 
 
The 
10 
locomotives the ones of Swifambo are not problematic but I 
want to say that the reports that we got at that time which I 
then informed the President was indicating that the trains 
were not meeting the standard and there was no – what is 
this, they even said that there is no aftercare maintenance 
contract arrangements. 
There was an issue related to whether it can fit into 
the existing locomotives workshop and even Chairperson 
they say things happen for a reason.  Incidentally during 
the testing process one of the locomotives derailed on a 
20 
Transnet network not very far in the Northern Cape and I 
said [speaking in vernacular] because now it would look 
like this trains can only move or this locomotives can only 
move in the Northern Cape because I am from the Northern 
Cape. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 124 of 153 
 
Because it fall and the length of time it took for that 
locomotive to be removed from there and literally Transnet 
removed it from the tracks and put it on the side convinced 
me that it is true that it is this locomotives that are not 
suited and that is why we continue and we agreed with this 
investigation at Swifambo because…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to translate [speaking in 
vernacular]? 
MS PETERS:   I was actually saying Chairperson to Mr 
Soni, I am – does it mean that I have got bad luck that this 
10 
thing should happen in the province I come from because it 
got derailed around in the Northern Cape and for me that 
was an indication Chairperson, and the one of the others 
that we as PRASA had paid for access control things that 
we have in the Gautrains that are not working all those 
things we agreed with Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but your answer, is your answer 
that yes you kept the President and the cabinet or a 
particular committee, sub-committee of cabinet properly 
informed of the state of affairs at PRASA? 
20 
MS PETERS:   Not the full state affairs – when things 
happened you brief them accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As and when things happens. 
MS PETERS:   The then President had to establish I do not 
know, 
whether 
it 
is 
still 
happening 
had 
established 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 125 of 153 
 
something 
called 
the 
in 
a 
Presidential 
Infrastructure 
Coordinating Commission, where we met as all these 
Ministers that are in the infrastructure sector. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS PETERS:   And when you will report to the committee 
why there is delays because the trains were cited as one of 
those projects that needs to be tracked, and you would 
report that there is an investigation on this particular 
matter, there is this thing that is happening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But would there have been regular 
10 
written reports of your, about your portfolio that were 
either presented to the President once every six months or 
once a year, which could be available, which would have 
informed him or the cabinet of what was going on, if they 
did have such reports? 
MS PETERS:   In the earlier hearing Chairperson, I did 
give an indication and I think if my memory serves me well, 
in the response to the other notices I did attach the way in 
which I had created a platform to brief the President, 
taking into consideration the limitation that there was no 
20 
performance appraisals. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   I then always had made sure that if there is 
something I would put it properly in writing, and others, we 
would talk about it informally or formally. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 126 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But there would be no written reports, or 
there would be sometimes? 
MS PETERS:   In some instances, there would be a written 
report, in some instances it would be…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A verbal discussion. 
MS PETERS:   A verbal discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, I have no further 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  Mr Majavu, so you 
10 
propose to re-examine? 
MR MAJAVU:   Thank you, Chair, perhaps before I start 
might I just get an indication from the Chair, as to what 
does the Chairs time limitation permit so that I can pace 
myself accordingly? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, what is your own estimate of how 
much time you might need to take? 
MR MAJAVU:   Chair I had not worked it out, I would prefer 
to work backwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay alright, if we say 30 minutes, 
20 
does that sound too little? 
MR MAJAVU:   No, let us soldier on and see how far we 
go. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And see how far, ja and you can review 
it if you need more time. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 127 of 153 
 
MR MAJAVU:   I will be indebted to the Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR MAJAVU:   Yes, I think…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then if you can take the podium 
there, that would be better now that they have sanitized.  
Ms Peters your attorney will now re-examine you.  What 
that means is he will ask you questions that are aimed at 
clarifying 
matters 
that 
might, 
he 
might 
feel 
need 
clarification and so on. 
MR MAJAVU:   Thank you Chair and perhaps a couple of 
10 
introductory 
remarks, 
which 
would 
proceed 
my 
re-
examination, largely aimed at striking the process.   
Firstly, Chair, I wish to confirm as my learned elder 
did indicate that this morning as at 11:28 we were placed 
in possession of a supplementary affidavit by Mr Molefe 
which we will consider and to the extent necessary our 
response there too will form part of the supplementary that 
we promised the Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MAJAVU:   So to the extent that there may be an 
20 
overlap we will not be-labour the point but only focus on 
the aspects that I believe fall properly within the province 
of the re-examination and where there might be an 
oversight or paucity of information it is not a deliberate 
oversight.  
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 128 of 153 
 
One had given an undertaking to Mr Soni that while 
the witness was technically under cross I am constrained 
to canvass certain issues, so I needed to put that 
disclaimer upfront Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
MR MAJAVU:   And thank the Commission for making good 
on its word that there will be an attempt to bring us back 
here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And for that we are grateful and that is why 
10 
we had no difficulty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV 
MAJAVU: 
 
Accommodating 
the 
commission 
with 
different. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And changing times. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no thank you. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Then Ms Peters before I ask you these 
questions I want you to listen carefully to what I am putting 
to you so that you can journey with me because you 
20 
understand the parameters of the exercise we will go a lot 
quicker.  I am going to pick up on certain propositions that 
were put to you and I will ask you pertinently and expect a 
pertinent and pointed response to that which I would have 
put to you namely do you agree do you not agree are you 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 129 of 153 
 
able to explain yourself better without rehashing what has 
already been said and I will also refer you to one or two 
portions in the transcript of the proceedings of the 22n d and 
the 23r d.   
 
Chair when I refer to the process – the transcript it 
will be purely for ease of reference for the Chair and my 
learned brother and I will indicate the page on which those 
purchases – passages are to be located and do no more than 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV MAJAVU:  Ms Peters then when certain propositions 
are put to you I want to reassure you not that it is my place 
neither the Chair nor the evidence leader sought to cast 
aspersions on you but they were aimed at establishing your 
position with regard to what was put to you. 
 
So I am going to be following pretty much a similar 
approach.  So I am – I am pleading you to just give me short 
and pointed answers to very short propositions and that we 
might be out of here sooner.  Do you understand that – are 
you comfortable? 
20 
 
Then a useful starting point is you made certain 
concessions today and the previous occasions do you stand 
by those concessions that you made? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And in instances where you say you take 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 130 of 153 
 
responsibility for the decisions that you took as a decision 
maker at the time you still stand by that? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Now let us accept that in some instances 
your conduct viewed telescopically today but backwards you 
have accepted that it was fumble and more 00:02:46 or a 
lapse of judgment or an incorrect decision.  With those 
concessions let me ask you this pointedly.  In any of the bad, 
poor or ill-considered decisions that you took were those 
accompanied by any malice or any ill-intent by you? 
10 
MS PETERS:  Chair there was no malice or ill-intent like I 
indicated even today that I respect Ndada Molefe and 
primarily because of my respect for him and having known 
him and knowing his history in South Africa that is why 
probably I allowed my patience with him and his board to 
scratch over. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Okay.  In the lack of expedition with which 
you were expected to act or even in the poor decisions that 
you took did you stand to benefit anything personally as 
Dipuo Peters? 
20 
MS PETERS:  Not at all Chairperson. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Did you have any reason whatsoever to 
suppress any investigation into PRASA during your term of 
office at all? 
MS PETERS:  Not at all Chairperson. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 131 of 153 
 
ADV MAJAVU:  Much was made about how you focussed on 
the money in the face of an investigation of corruption to the 
tune of R3.5 billion and this is how this was put to you.  
Chair you may just make a mental note that the portion about 
which I am to refer is on page 81 of 220 of the proceedings 
of the 23r d of February 2021 otherwise dubbed as Day 348.  
23. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As Day 3? 
ADV MAJAVU:  Day 348. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
10 
ADV MAJAVU:  And it is the 23rd of February 2021. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  The context had to do with the amount of 
money that was spent on the Werksmans investigation that is 
deposed against an indication that as we debated the letter 
that she wrote when she said close off the report.  It was put 
to her or certainly I gained an impression and she will 
correct me if I am wrong the criticism seemed to have been 
going along the lines that why were you concerned about the 
money 
spent 
on 
the 
Werksmans 
investigation 
when 
20 
Werksmans was doing a good job of chasing after big corrupt 
contracts and this is what was said by my brother Mr Soni 
and I quote it starts from line 4 and a half at the top of the 
page.  I open the quotation. 
“Now does it make sense that you would concentrate on the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 132 of 153 
 
cost of the investigations, as opposed to allegations of 
corruption in a R3.5 billion contract?” 
Now prior to that you would remember the Chair observed 
and a made a rightly so but were you not concerned about 
the forever increasing quantum of the irregular expenditure?  
You remember that exchange with the Chair? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Now what do you have to say to a criticism 
that says, when you were raising the concerns that you did 
apropos the expenditure on the Werksmans Report at the 
10 
time when you compare it with the ever increasing regular 
expenditure.  What do you have to say to yourself about that 
because that there was irregular expenditure growing is a 
fact we do not need to debate it.  But it was put to you but 
you seemed to be focussing on a small dot as opposed to 
chasing bigger criminals? 
MS PETERS:  Can I respond Chair?  Yes Chairperson I 
remember that – that statement and I – I need to indicate to 
you Chairperson that like I said earlier on all these 
investigations that were done I supported.  Equally so I was 
20 
dealing 
with 
the 
issues 
related 
and 
I 
– 
there 
is 
correspondence to that effect related to the matter of the 
growing over – irregular expenditure in – and irregular and 
unauthorised expenditure in PRASA which was – had moved 
from something like 500 to more than billions.   500 million 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 133 of 153 
 
to more than billions and the reason being that Chairperson I 
did indicate that my concern with regard to this particular 
investigation is that it falls in the Terms of Reference of the 
very investigation that was now being followed by the office 
of the Chief Procurement Officer but equally so it was 
growing and again Chairperson like I explained earlier on the 
– it – the board was not regularising the appointment of the 
said company.  So it was not an issue of chasing the – the 
small amount that was going to look at the big amount. 
 
Like I said earlier on the process of regularising the 
10 
appointment was my biggest concern.  Thank you Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  So for the record did you have any difficulty 
with Werksmans investigating? 
MS PETERS:  Not at all Chairperson.  I gave an indication 
that in the first instance we were at one even with the 
Chairperson with regard to this matter.  It only became a 
challenge when it became an audit query and equally so it 
became a recurring issue that was contributing to – it might 
be a small amount but it adds to this irregular and 
unauthorised and I then said to the Chairperson and the 
20 
board there is processes of getting to regularise get it to be 
regularised.  Close off what is available now let us determine 
the going forward. 
ADV MAJAVU:  For the South Africans how the – how small 
is small?  At the time you raised your concern what was the 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 134 of 153 
 
figure? 
MS PETERS:  Chairperson – Chairperson at the time I was 
raising my concern the figure was go – had started to – at 
about 80 and was going above at the point that I was given 
the figures it was already getting to above 200 and 
something million. So it was becoming a concern because 
now if it is 200 and something million it is adding to this 
irregular expenditure.  And it is correct for the board to 
follow and investigate and I said I agreed and Chairperson 
even in the documents that you would receive that we have 
10 
sent you will see that at all time I said you are correct in 
doing this but do it correctly. 
ADV MAJAVU:  So is that your position that in the process 
of following the big crooks you cannot yourselves be a 
smaller crook in the manner of speak? 
MS PETERS:  If I have to copy a recent statement from the – 
the – there is the Head of the – I read it yesterday in the 
papers.  The Head of the NPA is it the NPA?  Who said to 
Parliament that when the sardines fry then they – they will – 
so that small amount adds to the bigger amount.  But also 
20 
there is a saying that says:  If you – you must take care of 
the cents and the pounds will take care of themselves.  So it 
is also important Chairperson that as the board and I thought 
I am helping Ndada Molefe that do not create ammunition 
that later will come back to haunt you by doing the wrong 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 135 of 153 
 
things whilst you are trying to chase the wrongs.  Wena do 
the right thing to create – to chase the wrongs.  And that is 
why I said regularise this appointment and there will not be a 
problem.  And I do not know whether there is anything wrong 
in as a Minister you say to a board Chairperson that you 
cannot have in the first year – like I indicate that even in 
terms of the PFMA in the first year it is un – unplanned, 
unforeseen.  The report came yes let us act quickly, let us 
get investigators. 
 
The second year now you must plan now.  You need 
10 
to quantify how much you will need for that investigation in 
that financial year.  You must put it as part of your – your 
target also so that it is part of your plans and that is what I 
think I  am found at wrong for having requested the board to 
do. 
 
Regularise the process of this appointment of this 
company.  But Chairperson I – it is also important … 
ADV MAJAVU:  Ms Peters may I just interject there? 
MS PETERS:  Oh. 
ADV MAJAVU:  I think we have been down that road before. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And I do not mean to be unkind to you I just 
want to stick within the remnant of a re-examination. 
MS PETERS:  Okay thank you Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And not returned as if… 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 136 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJAVU:  You are an accused person and I do not 
want to act like defence.  We are trying to assist so. 
MS PETERS:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  The parting shot on this would it be a fair 
proposition to say you did not in your conduct do anything 
that can give any justification to a – an idea that you wanted 
to stop the investigation and by implication protecting those 
that may be on the – on the wrong side of the road at 
PRASA? 
10 
MS PETERS:  Not at all Chairperson. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Right.  Let us then step off that.  Is it also 
correct that from your engagement with the AG you had 
agreed that it would be prudent to consolidate all of these 
investigations so that there could be better control?   Would 
that be a fair proposition? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair and in the honour of the late AG he 
actually was the one who also advised that if it is 
consolidated it would give us better results.  And – and I 
think I can take it like that. 
20 
ADV MAJAVU:  Okay now you were asked to – to explain 
what you meant when you said in your view in spite of these 
challenges that you and the late AG may his soul rest in 
peace spoke about you then took a view that PRASA was not 
ready for a new permanent CEO.  The two positions appear 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 137 of 153 
 
to be irreconcilable and may I ask you very briefly without 
rehashing what is already on record what exactly did you 
mean by saying PRASA was not ready for a permanent CEO?  
What animated your state of mind at the time because it is 
that which the Chair needs to have an appreciation because 
you were the decision maker, you know what you exposed to 
we are not in your mind.  Can you just try and unpack it 
because I must confess even to me it appears a bit 
irreconcilable so I want you to try and clarify that for us 
please? 
10 
MS 
PETERS:  Chairperson 
at that particular moment 
anybody who was going to be appointed in the position of 
CEO was not going to last. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why? 
MS PETERS:  Because of the challenges in terms of the 
problems that were in this particular organisation and I – I 
want to say to you through Chairperson that history has 
proved me right.  It is only now that they have been able to 
appoint a Group CEO at PRASA despite the – the number of 
years after I left and the attempts that those who came after 
20 
me held.  And I wish that right now with the report of the – 
the administrator that was appointed and now with the CEO 
they would be able to get a way of getting that company.  
That important institution of the state actually on the right 
track. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 138 of 153 
 
ADV MAJAVU:  What I am interested in is what is it in your 
state of mind at the time that caused you to hold the view 
that if a new CEO is appointed today PRASA would not be 
ready for such appointment? 
MS PETERS:  When… 
ADV MAJAVU:  What is it that made you hold that view? 
MS PETERS:  When I had the meeting with the board and 
executives of PRASA before the secondment of Mr Letsoalo 
there was a statement that was made by one the executives; 
I just do not remember his name quite well.  He was sitting 
10 
somewhere on my right in the corner and he said the 
problem that they have is that since PRASA was established 
they have not been able to create an organisation.  They 
have been chasing the big ticket items and it then told you 
why we were faced with this type of situation that we were in 
and that informed me that we needed a financial systems 
person to come and – and before you if I have to backtrack 
one of the officials of the AG’s office in briefing us when they 
had a challenge with the audit process of PRASA had said 
they went to PRASA during that time Mr Montana was still 
20 
there and they were shown a room to say there is the 
records go and look for yourself.  And – and for me 
Chairperson it meant that you need a systems person and – 
and I supported the secondment of Letsoalo to go and try 
and from the side of the Department also knowing what we 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 139 of 153 
 
want to be happening to try and get that organised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I know we dealt with this quite at 
length previously so I do not want us to go back to it but I 
just want to say this.  That approach seems to me like non-
doctors who are faced with somebody who is sick not just 
sick very sick instead of saying let us call a doctor or let us 
take this person to hospital they say, no, no this person is 
not ready to be seen by a doctor.  We non-doctors are going 
to try what we can now because PRASA was very sick at the 
time.  It has serious problems but you were saying no, no, no 
10 
PRASA is not ready for somebody who can lead it properly – 
the C – a Group CEO.  But I do not want to go further.  I just 
wanted to say that is the impression I have of your approach.  
Mr Majavu. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Chair. 
MS PETERS:  Maybe Chairperson somebody who is sick 
arriving at a hospital seen by some people called a triage 
and in that triage would be a Letsoalo probably and the 
department is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Somebody is very sick I would imagine 
20 
when you arrive at a hospital and somebody is very sick they 
say please bring a doctor quickly, quickly.  Because if you 
are going to be busy with somebody else this person might 
die while somebody else who is not a doctor is looking at 
them.  Okay alright. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 140 of 153 
 
MS PETERS:  Maybe I am not a doctor Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Can we accept though that you stand by that 
particular concession that you made? 
MS PETERS:  I stand by it Chairperson that they were not 
ready. 
ADV MAJAVU:  No, no the concession that in the analogy of 
the Chair perhaps you may part ways but you said that you 
took the view that PRASA was not ready for a permanent 
CEO notwithstanding his challenges.   
10 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And on the previous occasion you said today 
looking backwards that might not have been the correct 
decision.  So you stand by that concession so that we can 
step away from it. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair I did say in the previous time that if 
the two years I did not appoint a CEO I take responsibility. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Okay.  And even on the face of that 
concession can I ask you if you stood to benefit anything at 
all from that poor judgment? 
20 
MS PETERS:  Nothing at all Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And is it also further correct that no one 
influenced you otherwise? 
MS PETERS:  Not at all Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Now let us turn to the issue with regard to 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 141 of 153 
 
your other concession with regard to how you may have dealt 
with the issue of the board and I am asking it in the context 
of a – a submission that was put to you by learned brother at 
the end.   
 
Pertinently in dealing with the issue of the board the 
way you did and I do not expect you to rehash what you did 
or what you did not do was that decision influenced by any 
other factor other than those that you shared with the Chair 
or with the commission? 
MS PETERS:  Nothing Chair. 
10 
ADV MAJAVU:  To your knowledge how can the disbandment 
of any board rightly or wrongly be synonymous with the 
stopping of an investigation by another body over which you 
do not have control? 
MS PETERS:  Nothing Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  What do you pertinently say to a suggestion 
that went along the lines that there was an attempt to stifle 
the investigation an SA contributor to that attempt it resulted 
in you getting rid of the board as if once the board is gone 
the investigation may not continue. 
20 
MS PETERS:  Nothing Chair because that is why I am saying 
if you look at my engagements with the interim board we 
spoke 
and 
indicated 
that 
they 
continue 
with 
the 
investigations that were happening. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Now lastly Ma’am the impression created or 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 142 of 153 
 
what is coming out is that in your delaying the appointment 
of a permanent Group CEO you added fire fuel to a raging 
fire.  Now as a decision maker sitting where you are seated 
when you reflect backwards would you be able to say that 
regardless of the correctness or otherwise of your decisions 
would you in good conscience say you took the best decision 
that you could as a decision maker at the time?  We now 
know you have accepted that it might not have been the best 
decision that you could have taken. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
10 
ADV MAJAVU:  With regard to dismissing the board there is 
also a similar suggestion that you might have dismissed the 
board for some other ulterior purposes because the language 
used was that you were not candid in terms of what we 
shared in the commission.  Now I want to ask you pertinently 
have you been less than candid with the commission with 
regard to the reasons that animated your decision at the time 
when you took that decision pointedly. 
MS PETERS:  I have been truthful with the commission that I 
have indicated that I wanted to cooperate and work with the 
20 
commission to unravel some of the issues that they are 
investigating and that is why I came here to tell the truth as I 
know it. 
ADV MAJAVU:  There was also an indication when one had 
regard to a complaint by Mr Montana and we know that he 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 143 of 153 
 
has yet to testify but Chair we can all accept that we are 
privy to his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  He seems to be complaining that you and Mr 
Molefe colluded against him in the context that you did not 
seem to support his wanting to bounce back for want of a 
better phraseology.  Or on the other hand Mr Molefe seems 
to complain that you might have been a lot closer to Mr 
Montana with specific reference to what transpired at the 
meeting with the – with the then President.  Do you 
10 
remember those two positions? 
MS PETERS:  I remember those two positions Chairperson 
and I am very surprised that here are two people who seem 
to be putting me in the middle.  The one saying you wanted 
this one, the other one says you worked with this one to get 
rid of me.  And I – I am in the middle so both of them find 
fault at me so it means somewhere along the line I was right 
in both instances. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am not sure whether you got it right 
Mr Majavu but to the extent that you may have said in your 
20 
proposition that Mr Molefe suggested that at the meeting 
with the former President she might have been on the side of 
Mr Montana.  If that is what you said that was not my 
understanding.  My understanding was that Mr Molefe says 
at that meeting Ms Peters was on his side.  So I am just 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 144 of 153 
 
saying in case that is what … 
ADV MAJAVU:  No, ja with respect Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  I do not accept I got it wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  I was – I was referring to Mr Molefe’s 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Not necessarily what he might have said 
orally when he testified. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  He seemed to have taken issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJAVU:  With the fact that at the meeting Mr Montana 
appears to might have been pre-briefed and he is also 
saying not in so many words that he too he felt he was left 
out and on that basis the insinuation was that Ms Peters and 
Mr Montana might have had some other pre-engagement with 
the President before he gets called in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  oh okay. 
20 
ADV MAJAVU:  So that is what leads us in the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That will – ja – yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  So I just needed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  That to be clarified yes. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 145 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  To get that – yes ja okay.  No I must just 
say that my understanding was that and I cannot separate 
between what he may have said in the affidavit and what he 
said on the witness stand my understanding was that as far 
as any prior briefing was concerned my understanding that 
he was not including the Minister. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In that prior briefing he meant there may 
have been a prior briefing involving Mr Montana and the 
former President and or Mr Radebe. 
10 
MS PETERS:  Radebe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Minister at the time.  That was my 
understanding. 
ADV MAJAVU:  That is fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAJAVU:  I think nothing really turns on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Other than the context was also this and it is 
very important.  You remember he also lamented even 
though he did not  - of Ms Peters the fact that President 
20 
Zuma what is the lyrical about Mr Montana and to some 
extent said the things that Ms Peters said to him in the 
context of not losing the skill. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  So I just sought. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 146 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  To clarify that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  So that the world out there knows that she in 
her response was of the view that here are two feuding 
people that I am calling to order on account of their public 
spats.  If either of them is unhappy with me about each other 
certainly I am in the middle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And I am not sure it either ways but I am 
10 
happy that that is the understanding that you have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  You also share that understanding Ms 
Peters? 
MS PETERS:  I share that understanding Mr – Chairperson – 
Chairperson DCG – DCJ because Mr Molefe in his affidavit 
seems to insinuate that I wanted to enable the continuation 
of corruption and in Mr Montana’s indication he – he 
indicates that I appointed Mr Molefe to get rid of him. And it 
is in that context that I say the one says you appointed this 
20 
man to get rid of me, the other one says you wanted to 
enable 
the 
corruption 
that 
is 
alleged 
to 
have 
been 
perpetuated by this one.  So where exactly do I fit in? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Yes.  And Chair I accept that we are 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 147 of 153 
 
somewhat jumping the gun but the language used by Mr 
Montana in his affidavit he pertinently says the following 
people are enablers of corruption. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And then he lists Ms Peters and then when 
you listen to the summation that was put to Ms Peters by the 
evidence leader he says, not only did you make rational 
decisions but these decisions are – and the 00:02:02 is 
developed so I am seeking to debunk through the witnesses 
on my – as to what does she make of that purely because 
10 
she may not get an opportunity to come back and that is the 
only liberty I am stating Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine.  That is fine. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Yes.  Now with all he has said the 
responsibility that you have taken, concessions that you 
have made what is it that you have to say to this commission 
about the conduct of both Mr Molefe and Mr Montana at a 
point at which you felt there was a need for you to intervene 
in the manner that you did?  Just that and then we – we wrap 
it on that basis. 
20 
MS PETERS:  Thank you Chairperson.  The – the day I 
called on Mr Montana and Mr Molefe to desist from going to 
their individual press conferences incidentally I was at a 
Mandela Day activity in Vryburg the birth place of one of our 
veterans Me Ruth Mombathe in whose honour I had gone to 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 148 of 153 
 
do that particular Mandela Day program.   
 
And I then asked that – because on that day it was 
said Mr Montana has convened a press conference and Mr 
Molefe has also convened a press conference.  And I then 
called 
on 
both 
of 
them 
to 
desist 
from 
those 
press 
conferences because they were going to focus both on 
issues of PRASA an organisation that I felt needed to be 
brought to stability and – and in my intervention it was not 
intended to say if you find wrong with anybody – because if 
there were legal processes Mr Montana the said there was a 
10 
legal process he was going to follow because he was 
terminated.  And I thought that that would be the route he 
will follow and I thought Mr Molefe also as a leader would 
understand the context that as leaders you do not stand on 
platforms and throw stones against each other.  And it is like 
in a family if 00:04:24 daddy and mommy is fighting publicly 
in the streets what would then happen to the family?  So I – I 
took it that they should desist from those utterances.  And 
even at the time if I have to go further when I called on them 
I also even called on them as comrades.  I said, comrades 
20 
can they desist – please comrades desist from doing this 
because both of them come from the same stable that I come 
from.  Thank you Chair. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Okay. Now for avoidance of doubt on the 
issue of Mr Montana’s attempt to lobby for his return am I 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 149 of 153 
 
correct that your position was you supported the board’s 
decision not to entertain his comeback? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson I did say it even in the 
presence of the President Mr Montana he put in his 
resignation and the board accepted it.  And I think maybe he 
went back there I had experiences of those nature elsewhere 
– he went back and realised I made a mistake.  And he 
lobbied and it is common knowledge because we know quite 
a number of marches happened. He lobbied quite a number 
of people wanting to go back.  Maybe he put in his 
10 
resignation when he was not ready.  He felt (speaking in 
vernacular) and then… 
ADV MAJAVU:  Okay Ms Peters that is fine I will take the … 
MS PETERS:  I am sorry – I am sorry. 
ADV MAJAVU:  I will transcribe it for the record meaning I 
am playing with them I am not serious about it.  That is what 
the record will reflect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well Mr Molefe also said he – it 
could be that he was I think he said testing the waters. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Testing the waters. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Testing the waters hoping that the board 
would not accept but then they accepted.  Mr Molefe did say 
maybe that is what was happening. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Ja.  No that is in order. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 150 of 153 
 
ADV MAJAVU:  Because it is – it is clear when we deal with 
Mr Montana Chair we appreciate that he actually accuses Mr 
Molefe, Ms Peters and I think Minister Mkize as having been 
a cover that acted against him and that is why it was 
important to get Ms Peters to actually say where she stands 
in relation of – of these lobbying aspects. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV MAJAVU:  Ms Peters in conclusion is there anything 
arising from today’s proceedings that I might have omitted to 
cover with you that you wish to highlight?  Not what you 
10 
have already said then I will take my bow. 
MS PETERS:  I have already said it Chairperson but I just 
want to repeat it that the resolution of the board led by Dada 
Molefe had no malice on my part.  There was nowhere in fact 
both Mr Molefe and many of the other board members whom 
– who would – I met Mr Molefe at a funeral we greeted each 
other and Mr Molefe is still my leader and he is still my 
comrade and everybody is still the people that I know so 
there was no malice.  It is only the reasons that I advanced 
earlier on Chairperson.  Thank you very much. 
20 
ADV 
MAJAVU: 
 
Chair 
then 
lastly 
purely 
from 
the 
housekeeping point of view so that the Chair knows where 
we stand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  We will endeavour to respond to Dada 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 151 of 153 
 
Molefe’s 
supplementary 
affidavit 
and 
also 
contemporaneously deal with the other documentations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The correspondence. 
ADV MAJAVU:  That we have subsequently now received 
and now that I have re-examined her we will then submit one 
composite affidavit that seeks to clarify all of these issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And the undertakings that we made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  And then we will take it from there.  If there 
10 
is any further need to engage with the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:  On the PRASA related matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think what remains is to fix 
sometime today. 
ADV MAJAVU:  We had agreed … 
CHAIRPERSON:  For a submission of the affidavit. 
ADV MAJAVU:  It is ten days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Yes Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay from today? 
ADV MAJAVU:  From today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:  We got it today but we will use our best 
endeavours to try and do it before then if we can. 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 152 of 153 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  That is fine. 
ADV 
MAJAVU: 
 
Chair 
thank 
you 
very 
much 
for 
accommodating us beyond the normal sitting times. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No thank you very much. 
ADV MAJAVU:  I have nothing further Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For your cooperation as well. 
ADV MAJAVU:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  And thank you Ms Peters for 
your cooperation.   
MS PETERS:  Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
We 
have 
reached 
the 
end 
of 
the 
proceedings.   
ADV SONI SC:  It is the end of the proceedings Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Okay alright.  Tomorrow just for 
the benefit of the public I will hear the evidence of Mr Anoj 
Singh insofar as it relates to Eskom during the day and I 
think in the evening I will hear the evidence of Mr Pamensky 
who was the – one of the board members of Eskom.   
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we end the proceedings today.  We 
20 
adjourn. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 18 MARCH 2021 
 
 
17 MARCH 2021 – DAY 362 
 
Page 153 of 153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
  
