 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 338 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 212 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 3 of 212 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 05 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Freund, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I understand there have been some 
technical glitches but I am happy that we are finishing the 
week off – we are finishing this week without the kind of 
glitches – the technical glitches I thought we would have 
so on the whole it is has gone smoothly.  Okay are we 
going to complete Mr Selfe’s evidence today – this morning 
10 
first? 
ADV FREUND SC:  That is correct Chair.  Mr Selfe is here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And I presume he should be reminded 
that he is still under his former oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Mr Selfe good morning to you. 
MR SELFE:  Good morning Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Thank 
you 
very 
much 
for 
availing 
yourself again this morning as arranged.  The oath you 
took the other day when you gave evidence will continue to 
20 
apply today.  You understand that? 
MR SELFE:  I understand that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  You may then 
proceed Mr Freund but as I say so I am trying to remember 
whether you had said you had no further questions.  I was 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 4 of 212 
 
the one who wanted to ask further questions Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well Chair what I was about to do if I 
can refer you to Bundle 2 at page 741. I was about to 
take… 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Mr Selfe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Comments there and I make a – to do 
so very briefly and you then Chair said well perhaps it 
needs a little more time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes okay what page did you refer to just 
now? 
ADV FREUND SC:  741 in Bundle 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh – oh okay, okay.  Okay.  Yes okay 
thank you.  So I think the … 
ADV FREUND SC:  My suggest… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Go ahead. 
ADV FREUND SC:  My suggestion Chair is (no sound) 
Chair [?] through this and that as we go along if you wish 
to pose whatever questions then of course you should do 
20 
so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that is fine let us proceed on that 
basis. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Selfe on the 
previous occasion when you testified you had really 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 5 of 212 
 
completed what we might call a chronological narration of 
your 
experience 
on 
the 
00:03:24 
of 
allegations 
of 
corruption and the like relating to BOSASA and its related 
companies. 
 
From that you then move on in your affidavit to – to 
deal more broadly with your observations and analysis of 
the role played by Portfolio Committees and you say in 
paragraph 2 that – paragraph 7.2 that you would argue that 
many of your colleagues on the committee at the time did 
not obey, respect and uphold the constitution and did not 
10 
perform their functions as MP’s to the best of their 
abilities.  Is that correct? 
MR SELFE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then you – you expand on that in 
paragraph 7.3 and then you say there are many reasons for 
this failure in you and you start to list those reasons.  And 
the first of those that you refer to in paragraph 7.3.1 is the 
lack of independence of MP’s generally and particularly in 
the ANC.  Would you care to comment on that issue 
please? 
20 
MR SELFE:  Yes well the South African Electoral system is 
structured in a particular way at the moment whereby 
political parties provide closed lists of candidates for the 
National Assembly to the electorate.  The electorate does 
not vote for any particular candidate it votes for a political 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 6 of 212 
 
party and the political party gets a requisite number of 
seats depending on their proportion of the vote.  But the 
lists themselves by notion be constructed by the branches 
and regions and provinces are in fact finalised by the 
headquarters of the political party.  Very few voters know 
who is on those lists and in the end the person or the 
group of people who put that person – that candidate on 
the list can remove that candidate.  It is very highly 
centralised 
and 
that 
does 
not 
lend 
itself 
to 
the 
independence of the MP’s.   
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  While we are on that point… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – I am sorry Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  If they can… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Mr Selfe I would like your full 
comment on the proposition that as long as members of 
Parliament in our current electoral system do not have 
adequate protection to be able to act in the best interest of 
South Africa or the people of South Africa where the 
interests of their party might be in conflict with what they 
believe to be the interest of the country or of the people of 
20 
South Africa.  As long as we do not have in our system 
adequate protection for members of Parliament who want 
to act in accordance with the interest of the people as they 
see them or of the country when there is that conflict and 
as long as the parties are able to instruct them how to vote 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 7 of 212 
 
or how to do – perform their overall oversight functions and 
the instruction is not one that makes sure they do their job 
properly.  And as long as parties can take steps to 
prejudice somebody who may have decided to act in what 
they believe is the best interest of the people in that 
situation then it is going to be very difficult to have 
particularly the members of the majority party and we have 
the – an ANC majority party now but it could be members 
of whichever majority party there may be in the future to 
put the interests of the people of South Africa first where 
10 
they are in conflict with those of the party.  So the 
proposition being unless the system provides adequate 
protection then maybe we may as well forget that we would 
have effective oversight and proper accountability on the 
part of members of the Executive in Parliament.  What do 
you say to that proposition? 
MR SELFE:  The proposition is completely correct Judge 
Zondo because the – at the current moment as you can ask 
a 
number 
of 
people 
who 
have 
been 
expelled 
from 
Parliament for – for not agreeing with the party line or 
20 
simply did not get re-elected at the next election.  There is 
a very chill wind that blows as a result of the way that the 
current electoral system is structured.  So yes you do 
require protection for members of Parliament who are bona 
fide doing what they regard as being the work of the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 8 of 212 
 
electorate and in the interests of South Africa.  But I would 
argue that it goes further than that but a member of 
Parliament needs an independent mandate not just a 
mandate from his or her party and that mandate should 
ideally come from a constituency system but I introduced to 
private members all in 2013 to provide for exactly that 
constituency system so that members of Parliament have 
an independent power base; an independent mandate.  But 
that bill was rejected by every other political party in 
Parliament.   But it never saw the light of day. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you for that comment Mr 
Selfe.  But maybe you could speak up a little bit so I can 
hear you but I would hear you better if you spoke up a little 
bit.   
Now what you have just told me about the private 
members be I think that is what you said that you 
introduced but it did not receive enough support seems to 
reflect 
my 
understanding 
but 
you 
might 
be 
able 
to 
enlighten me more – better because you are in Parliament 
and have been there for many years.  You are a senior 
20 
member of Parliament, you have experience about how 
things happen there.   
My sense is that most – that the bosses of most of 
the political parties I am just – I am saying the bosses for 
just to indicate the leadership – most political parties do 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 9 of 212 
 
not seem to have an appetite for a system where the party 
cannot instruct its members in Parliament how to vote .   
They – I may be wrong but I have this impression 
that it looks like that might be one area where all these 
different parties seem to – to have no divergence of 
opinion.  I may be completely wrong. What is your 
impression on this point? 
MR SELFE:  As somebody who up until very recently was 
in fact a party boss of my own party I can tell you that it is 
very convenient if you are a party boss to have this sort of 
10 
electoral system that we have at the moment because you 
can ensure discipline; you do not have to worry about   
corium’s; you do not have to worry about people stepping 
out of line.  But I would argue that that does not 
necessarily serve the interests of democracy and it does 
not serve the interest of accountability or oversight.   
 
You ought to be in a position where a member of 
Parliament is able on bona fide grounds and following his 
or her conscience and good reason to take a view that is 
different from that of the party leadership. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Excuse me.  Now you – you may be able 
to – to say this you might not be able to say.  Do you know 
whether for example your party the DA whether it shares 
this view that you have just expressed or whether its 
position is different? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 10 of 212 
 
MR SELFE:  No Judge Zondo my party is committed to 
introduce a system of constituencies.  They are members 
of Parliament are elected directly the voters of South 
Africa unaccountable to them.  That was the basis of the 
private members bill that I introduced in 2013 but it saw no 
favour or it had no favour with any other party in 
Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What do you understand to be the main 
grounds 
of 
objection 
to 
the 
proposal 
of 
using 
the 
constituency system?  I ask this question because it seems 
10 
to me that if the country used the constituency system to a 
very 
large 
extent 
we 
would 
be 
able 
to 
improve 
Parliamentary 
oversight 
by 
members 
of 
Parliament 
including those who may belong to the majority party.  
Because under that system I have to be elected – I have to 
be elected by the majority of voters in my constituency and 
those voters might not just be those who belong to my 
party.  It might be other people who think I am doing a 
good job in the constituency.  And if I believe when for 
example there is a motion of no confidence in a President 
20 
or in the President at a certain time in Parliament and I 
truly believe that being faithful to the Republic of South 
Africa in accordance with the oath of office that I took as a 
member 
of 
Parliament 
I 
should 
support 
that 
motion 
because the President has failed in his duties or is no 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 11 of 212 
 
longer good to lead the country.  And I know that the – my 
constituency will have no problem with that and maybe they 
actually want me to vote that way.  
 
Then if my party wants to punish me or dismiss me 
because I did not follow an instruction to vote against 
maybe I may be dismissed and might be out of a job for a 
certain 
period 
of 
time 
but 
the 
next 
elections 
my 
constituency might vote me back and I go back to 
Parliament.  
 
Or maybe even – maybe even if my party can 
10 
dismiss me that would not result in my removal as a 
member of Parliament therefore I would know that going 
against my party on this issue on this motion of no 
confidence is not going to result in me having no job and 
not being able to put bread on the table for my family 
because I know my constituency appreciates my work.  
They think I am doing a good job and so on.   
 
Therefore I can say well maybe they will not 
promote me and make me a chair of a certain committee; 
maybe they will not make me Deputy Minister; maybe they 
20 
will not make me Minister but I will – I will not be without a 
job.  They will not be able to take food from my table. 
 
So therefore I can speak to what I believe is best 
for the Republic.  So those are the – the – that is the 
thinking that I have and that therefore in that way you can 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 12 of 212 
 
enhance – we can enhance the prospects of even members 
of the majority party to perform proper oversight at least 
those who want to do the right thing.  Those who take that 
job seriously.  
 
Have you got any comments on that? 
MR SELFE:  Yes Mr Chair you are absolutely right.  If one 
has a constituency system one is able to be much more 
independent; follow one’s own conscience; follow one’s 
reasoning and also truly represent the voters who voted for 
you without fear or favour because as you correctly say the 
10 
parties have their – have the ability to prevent you from 
being promoted but not to make you lose your job. 
 
Now that is the basis of the independence of 
members of Parliament allows them to do their job.  There 
is only one proviso of course and that is that the 
constitution enthrones us that the composition of the 
National Assembly shall in general be proportional to the 
votes cast.   
 
There are various mechanisms where one can make 
sure that that happens but involve principle you are 
20 
correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what is your understanding of what 
the main grounds of opposition are from other political 
parties to the idea of the country you know using the 
constituency system? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 13 of 212 
 
MR SELFE:  Well I do not know about all the other political 
parties but at the time of the negotiation of the constitution 
it was felt that particularly in minorities would not be 
adequately represented if there was a constituency system 
and in addition to that it was felt that particularly women 
find it difficult to represent a constituency when they – 
when there is no degree of proportionality.   
 
So I think it really has to do with the represent 
making sure that the National Assembly is representative 
of everyone in the right sort of proportions rather than a 
10 
constituency system which may result in clever domination 
by a particular party. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I guess that there may be ways to 
address that.  I do not know I seem to have heard or read 
somewhere that there could be a situation where it is a mix 
of the two systems constituency and the current one. Do 
you know anything about that idea? 
MR SELFE:  Yes that in fact was the basis of the bill that I 
introduced where 300 members of the 00:22:22 and 100 of 
those members would be elected from a proportional list so 
20 
as to ensure that the representation of the National 
Assembly was as close to the proportions who voted for 
particular parties as possible. 
 
So indeed it is eminently possible to work around 
that problem. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 14 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think it is just going to be important 
for all of us as South Africans to consider a way of even 
some protection to members of Parliament who might want 
to do the right thing for the country where their party might 
not think that is the right thing and one has in mind here is 
a situation where quite clearly it is not the right thing you 
know. But the party says this is what we want our members 
to do.   
 
Because I think in the current system of oversight I 
mean the evidence that I have heard in this commission is 
10 
as if there is no oversight in Parliament.   
 
Of course there are certain committees that seemed 
to have really tried but by and large it seems that the 
performance of oversight functions comes mainly from the 
opposition parties and not from members of the majority 
party. 
 
Whereas if everybody took that function seriously 
and wanted to do it effectively then there could be a lot of 
difference that could be made in how things are happening 
in terms of corruption and just proper governance. 
20 
 
So if we – we leave this situation as is I do not see 
any chance that if we were to be faced as a country with 
allegations of state capture in the future and a huge rise in 
corruption I do not see that Parliament would be able to – 
to play any better role than they played over the past X 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 15 of 212 
 
number of years. 
 
Are you able to make – to give me any comments? 
MR SELFE:  I agree with that proposition Judge.   
ADV FREUND SC:  No thank you.  Mr Freund you may 
continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Just – just for the 
sake of clarity Mr Selfe there is as I understand it but I am 
asking you to confirm if you happen to be able to do so.  
There is a provision in the constitution which makes clear 
that if a member of parliament is expelled from the party on 
10 
whose list that member came to Parliament that member 
then ceases to be a member of Parliament and so loss of 
your party membership automatically results in loss of your 
seat as a member of Parliament.  Am I correct in that 
regard? 
MR SELFE:  Absolutely Chair. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And so the – that provision also has – 
has implications it seems to me I am putting it to you for 
your 
comment 
on 
the 
degree 
to 
which 
members 
of 
Parliament are likely to follow their conscience in defiance 
20 
of party instructions.  Would you agree? 
MR SELFE:  I would agree because in the end it is the 
political party that orders the list and if one can be 
expelled for holding a different kind of view then it does 
cast – well cause a chill wind to blow on anybody who 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 16 of 212 
 
might be inclined to do proper oversight. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And in your affidavit you just refer in 
passing to the position of Mr Andrew Feinstein.  I 
appreciate that it traverses a little beyond the scope of the 
current commission but if you could just maybe in one 
paragraph summarise the Andrew Feinstein experience? 
MR SELFE:  Yes well as I remember Andrew Feinstein was 
one of the early whistle-blowers on the arms deal.  He tried 
to as a member of the majority party tried to have 
Parliament take these allegations seriously.  He failed in 
10 
that quest and he was gradually worked out of the – out of 
the ANC. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And he was not only a member of the 
majority party he was a – a sterling member of SCOPA 
before which committee the arms deals acquisition in 
question was being investigated, is that correct? 
MR SELFE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Therefore due to his insistence or 
persistence in trying to ferret out the – the details of the 
alleged 
irregularities 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
arms 
deals 
20 
effectively you say he was worked out of Parliament. 
MR SELFE:  That is my understanding yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now in paragraph 7.3.1.4 the foot of 
page 743 you deal with what you call the hierarchy call the 
nature of the African National Congress and you say that 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 17 of 212 
 
this tends to mean a senior officer bearer such as Cabinet 
Ministers are treated with deference if not obsequiousness.  
Could you just tell us the basis on which you make that 
assertion? 
MR SELFE:  I make that assertion on the basis of my 
experience when members of the Executive appear before 
various committees and invariably they are treated with kid 
gloves.  I do not think the hard questions are necessary be 
put to them and there are as I understand it from some of 
my colleagues consequences for people who give members 
10 
of the Executive or senior members of the organisation a 
torrid time when they come to committees. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now can I take paragraph 7.3.1.5.  In 
that sub-paragraph you are dealing with the issues of ANC 
Study Group meetings.  In fact, you say that on one 
occasion, really, by error you found yourself attending an 
ANC Study Group meeting.  Is that correct?   
MR SELFE:   That is correct.  I chanced on a meeting that 
I thought I was part of but found out that I was not part of 
it.  It was an ANC Study Group. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you then go on to deal with a 
particular instance which you say illustrates the impact of 
decisions taken in the Study Group in relation to the 
degree of oversight then carried out in the Portfolio 
Committee meeting that follows.   
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 18 of 212 
 
 
And you refer at 7.3.1.5 to an instance where you 
tried to raise the topic of the award of a fencing contract to 
SA Fence and Gate.  Could you please just elaborate on 
that to illustrate your point? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, indeed.  I had received information from 
a source and I tried to raise the topic at the Portfolio 
Committee on Correctional Services because obviously the 
subject of the award of the fencing contract was very 
controversial 
because 
of 
the 
controversy 
that 
had 
surrounded the award as iZulu previously 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Is iZulu a BOSASA related company? 
MR SELFE:   The source that I said that I talked to said 
that there were irregularities in the award of the contract to 
SA Fence and Gate.  I tried to raise the topic at the 
committee.  The committee members from the majority 
party simply would not entertain a discussion about this at 
all. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And why, if you do, do you link that to 
the Study Group issue? 
MR SELFE:   Well, in my experience and I am also relying 
20 
on information that has been given to me by various other 
people.  A committee meeting was preceded by the Study 
Group.  Very frequently that Study Group is attended by 
the Minister and/or members of the Civil Service.   
 
And a line is taken about certain topics, a 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 19 of 212 
 
predetermined line and if the majority decide on that or if 
the instructions come from the majority party that that is 
the party line.   
 
Where in my experience I find it very, very difficult 
to elicit any sort of sensible conversation on the committee 
on the topics that have been pre-discussed by the majority 
party. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I want to move on to your paragraph 
7.3.2.  It is a slightly more prosaic matter.  But you deal 
with what you the unsatisfactory modes operandi of the 
10 
portfolio committees and you commence by dealing with 
the problems that flow from the manner in which the 
agenda of these committees are determined.   
 
And I imagine that is tied in with a bigger problem 
of this sort of annual cycle of oversight or the annual cycle 
of functions of the committee.   
 
So I would like you to talk to that briefly but in 
particular the implications of that cycle and the nature of 
that work for the capacity of portfolio committees when 
appropriate.   
20 
 
When matters come into the public domain to 
actually 
exercise 
speedy 
and 
effective 
oversight 
on 
important matters that then arise and are not necessarily 
catered for in this cycle of meetings.   
MR SELFE:   Yes, you are absolutely correct.  At the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 20 of 212 
 
beginning 
of 
the 
quarter 
the 
committee 
normally 
determines its agenda for the quarter where a number of 
steps that a committee has to take, it has to adapt with the 
department and with entities very frequently.   
 
There are limited opportunities for meetings as a 
Portfolio Committee and limited time to do that.   
 
And so when a topical subject arises, say a 
controversy 
around 
the 
awarded 
of 
a 
contract 
or 
unsatisfactory behaviour of a particular individual, it is 
very, very difficult to get a committee arranged to deal with 
10 
that matter bearing in mind the predetermined nature of the 
quarterly programmes.   
 
It is – I have achieved that sometimes in the past 
but a lot depends on the chairperson and the chairperson 
is bound by, again, by I imagine, the mandate given to him 
or her by the study groups.   
ADV FREUND SC:   That leads directly into my next 
question.  If I can refer you to paragraph 7.3.2.3?  In the 
first sentence you make the following point: 
“A lot depends on the latitude the chairperson 
20 
gives to members in the manner in which 
questions are asked.” 
 
Now before we come to the manner in which 
questions are asked.  You are drawing attention to the 
importance of the identify, character and disposition of the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 21 of 212 
 
chairperson of a committee.  Would you like to elaborate 
on that a little further? 
MR SELFE:   Yes, indeed.  Ja, obviously, in my time in 
Parliament I have served on a number of committees for a 
number of chairpersons and there are chairpersons that 
encouraged debates and encouraged oversight and there 
are chairperson who are reluctant to do that.   
 
And so I think but if you really want to have proper 
oversight, you need to look at something like the SCOPA 
model where a chairperson of a committee is given to an 
10 
opposition party and that chairperson has then an interest 
and... 
 
Yes, an interest in making sure that all the facts 
come out and are presented to the committee rather than 
an interest in making sure that the matter is electively put 
to bed.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you deal in this particular 
paragraph that I was quoting from.  With the modes 
operandi in relation to questions how MP’s ask their 
questions and how they are responded to.  Would you just 
20 
clarify as a matter of fact how that happens and then 
comment on its functionality? 
MR SELFE:   Yes.  Well, what ordinarily happens is.  A 
chairperson will then invite questions from MP’s after the 
presentation or the testimony of whoever appears before 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 22 of 212 
 
the committee is finished.   
 
And the MP’s ask those questions in turn.  Some 
MP’s ask three or four questions.  The whole question time 
takes probably half an hour or three quarters of an hour.   
 
And the department or the entity or the witness 
then responds but because they have maybe 25 or 30 
questions to answer, they do not answer them necessarily 
with the vigorous specificity that is required.   
 
Sometimes the questions are fudged.  Sometimes 
inaccurate information is given.  And it is not always 
10 
possible to follow up or to clarify on those replies.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Moving on to your paragraph 7.3.3.  I 
think essentially you make the point that there is heavy 
burden on portfolio committees.  And that might account by 
implication in part for example the way in which the 
BOSASA issue seems to have simply fallen off the agenda. 
MR SELFE:   Yes.  The committees do have a heavy 
agenda but in my experience what skilful chairpersons are 
able to do is to distinguish between what is really 
important when it comes to oversight and what is less 
20 
important.  And they then prioritise the more important 
aspects that need to be interrogated and they tend to let 
the other matters slide. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You raise in your affidavit, paragraph 
7.3.3.2 the Nkandla sage.  Now the matter has already 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 23 of 212 
 
been before the Constitutional Court which has expressed 
itself firmly in the adequacy of parliamentary oversight.  
But just for the record and extremely briefly.   
 
What are your comments about the manner in 
which the Parliament dealt with that issue and how that 
ties in with the points that you have been trying to make 
about portfolio committee oversight? 
MR SELFE:   Yes.  I was a member of all three ad-hoc 
committees on Nkandla and in fact went on an oversight 
tour of the Nkandla Homestead.   
10 
 
But I can tell you that any efforts or all the efforts 
that we made had key people report to the committee, to 
have documents produced, to have the then President 
himself come before the committee, were block by the 
majority party.   
 
In the second ad-hoc committee, I constructed an 
alternative report which was put to the vote and simply 
voted down.  So it was not a pleasant experience.  It was 
very frustrating because one was not able to get through 
the inbuilt majority in that ad-hoc committee.   
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   A former witness has referred to the 
fact 
that the 
rules 
governing 
the 
National Assembly 
actually provide that minority reports are to be permitted 
and to be appended or to be submitted together with 
majority reports.  Are you saying that that your attempt to 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 24 of 212 
 
evoke that simply failed? 
MR SELFE:   No, I – it was appended as a minority report 
but it was most certainly not accepted.  And in that 
respect, of course, the fact that we find it difficult to bunch 
a majority has led to a great deal of litigation to various 
courts to enforce what we regard as our democratic rights. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  And then you make a point 
near the end of your affidavit which is based on earlier 
parts of your affidavit but also based on the detailed 
material that we have not traversed in the PMG’s report on 
10 
BOSASA 
about 
the 
implications 
of 
political 
and 
administrative role-player turnover.   
 
If you can just talk about that issue very briefly.  
And it seems to me that this not confined to your 
committee.  It seems to be something you see in a host of 
committees that would be the subject of this Commission’s 
investigations. 
MR SELFE:   Yes, indeed.  There has been a very high 
turnover in my period on that committee of – as political 
office bearers and administrative heads of department one 
20 
can say. 
 
And while one can sometimes get away with having 
a new Minister every couple of months, it is very much 
more difficult if one has a change of the National 
Commission because the National Commissioner is the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 25 of 212 
 
Accounting Officer.   
 
The National Commissioner order and manage the 
department and if he or she only has a couple of months in 
office, it becomes very difficult to provide administrative 
accountability. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And Mr Selfe, subject to one 
qualification.  That is all I wanted to ask you.  The 
qualification is this.  You are aware of what is contained in 
your affidavit.  Is there anything in particular that you feel 
needs stressing that I have not given you the opportunity 
10 
to raise? 
MR SELFE:   I do not think so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Then I have no further 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Mr Self for availing 
yourself to help the Commission.  We appreciate it very 
much.  You are now excused. 
MR SELFE:   Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, your next witness. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I just want to check that the next 
20 
witness is in fact connected.  Let me just check that.  Yes, 
the next witness will be Mr Matt Johnston, who I believe is 
connected to this video call.  Perhaps he should come on 
screen and unmute. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I am here.  Good morning. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 26 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning.  Mr Freund, is his 
affidavit in this bundle or a different bundle? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, it is Exhibit ZZ-3, Bundle 1, 
page 217 and following.  Quite an extensive affidavit and 
annexures.  It is the first page of the affidavit beginning at 
page 217 in Bundle 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I have got it Mr Freund.  Thank 
you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Mr Johnston, do you have 
a hard copy of your own affidavit and annexures paginating 
10 
in accordance with the pagination system adopted by the 
prescripts? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if you look at page 217, is that the 
beginning of your affidavit? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if you go to page 325, is that your 
signature? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, it is. 
ADV FREUND SC:   In fact, you had an opportunity to read 
20 
and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry Mr Freund.  That 
we need to have the oath administered if you do not mind.  
And I was – let us do that first.  Registrar, will you 
administer the oath or affirmation? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 27 of 212 
 
MR JOHNSTON:   I prefer the affirmation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, she will administer the affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   It is Matt Paul Johnston. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed affirmation? 
WITNESS:   No, I do not. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you affirm that the evidence you are 
about to give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
else but the whole truth?  If so, please raise up your right 
10 
hand and say, I truly affirm. 
WITNESS:   I truly affirm. 
MATT PAUL JOHNSTON:   (affirmed) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you Mr Johnston.  Mr Freund, you 
may then start afresh. 
EXAMINATION BY ADVOCATE FREUND SC:   Thank you 
Chair.  And I apologise for the oversight.  Mr Johnston, we 
have just referred to page 217, will you confirm again for 
the record is the beginning of your affidavit? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I can confirm. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that the signature at page 325 
...[indistinct] [00:18:35] [distortion in transmission present 
– speaker unclear] 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, I do not know what is 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 28 of 212 
 
happening.  You – the last two questions, you have made – 
you were not very audible.  I do not know what is wrong 
with the – whether it is the technology or you are speaking 
softly.  Do you want to try again, starting from the first 
question? 
ADV FREUND SC:   I will try again Chair.  I am concerned.  
I have a bandwidth problem.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I can hear you well now. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Johnston, I think now for the third – 
I just want you to confirm in your affidavit from page 217 to 
10 
page 325, it is your affidavit and at 325 we find your 
signature.  Is that correct?   
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And have you had an opportunity to 
then read your affidavit and are you comfortable that this is 
correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I have and yes I am. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you say in paragraph 1 that you 
are 
authorised 
deposed 
to 
this 
affidavit 
and 
is 
not 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Freund.  You request that I 
admit the affidavit with its annexures as an exhibit? 
ADV FREUND SC:   You can most certainly do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
ADV FREUND SC:   Exhibit ...[indistinct] [00:20:11] 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 29 of 212 
 
[distortion in transmission present – speaker unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It will be exhibit what? 
ADV FREUND SC:   ZZ-3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  The affidavit of Mr Matt Paul 
Johnston which starts at page 217 together with its 
annexures, will be admitted and will be marked Exhibit ZZ-
3. 
AFFIDAVIT AND ANNEXURES OF MATT PAUL JOHNSTON 
IS ADMITTED AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT ZZ-3 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  You may proceed. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Johnston, you 
say in paragraph 9 of your affidavit that you are the 
Parliamentary 
Engagement 
...[indistinct] 
[00:20:57] 
[distortion in transmission present – speaker unclear] at 
the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse known by the acronym 
OUTA.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that you are now duly authorised 
by OUTA to depose to this affidavit on behalf of that 
organisation. 
20 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you make clear in paragraph 2.2 
that as from September 2017 OUTA and presumable and 
primarily you personally were engaged or attended the 
meetings of the Portfolio Committee with which you deal 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 30 of 212 
 
with in this affidavit.  Is that correct?   
MR JOHNSTON:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   But you have been clear that you also 
deal in this affidavit the proceedings prior to that date.  
You did not personally attend but where your information is 
derived from the records primarily of the Parliamentary 
Monitoring Group.  Is that correct?   
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you deal in paragraph 2.1 with 
your 
assessment 
of 
the 
...[indistinct] 
[00:22:18] 
or 
10 
otherwise of the Parliamentary Monitoring Group’s records 
of the portfolio meetings.  Can you just comment on that 
briefly? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes.  As I indicated in there, it is the 
best record that I am aware.  We have looked at internal 
parliamentary meeting minutes and we found that those 
were quite inadequate.  They are frequently incomplete and 
sometimes inaccurate or just conveniently omit information 
that some people would rather not publish.  So we use 
PMG as what we see as the best record.   
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And when you have regard to meetings 
that you personally attended in your regard to which they 
are recorded by the PMG.  What is your comment on the 
accuracy ...[indistinct] [00:23:17] of the PMG. 
MR JOHNSTON:   I would say they are almost a hundred 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 31 of 212 
 
percent accurate.  Frequently there is something that is 
omitted and I do indicate that because it is individual 
people attending those meetings with a digital recorder. 
 
And they would then subsequently transcribe those 
recordings but there is never content that was not in truth 
in that meeting.  But sometimes there are small omissions 
but by enlarge I would say they are accurate and complete. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I would like to take you to 
paragraph 3.3(?) of your affidavit.  You give an indication 
of what your objective was in compiling this affidavit.  
10 
Perhaps you could just take us through that paragraph? 
MR JOHNSTON:   So the purpose was just to provide a 
chronological series of meetings that we are aware of that 
dealt with the topic of state capture.  We used particular 
keywords to search for those meetings, for example the 
Gupta family.  I am just using this as an example.   
 
But in particular in the main we focused on a 
handful 
of 
Portfolio 
Committees 
that 
ostensible 
held 
inquiries or actually held inquiries and we deal with those 
minutes and how they dealt with the topic of the concept of 
20 
state capture. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You say in that paragraph: 
“The 
aim 
is 
to 
describe 
shortcomings 
in 
parliamentary oversight practices that we have 
identified over the course of several years of 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 32 of 212 
 
professional 
monitoring 
and 
evaluation 
in 
Parliament.” 
 
Is that correct?   
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And in fact, perhaps it would be 
helpful if you just describe what is the very purpose of the 
minute within OUTA that you are engaged in parliamentary 
– and what are the duties, the functions of a Parliamentary 
Engagement Manager at OUTA? 
MR JOHNSTON:   So what we have been doing as an 
10 
organisation and from 2016 and earlier on, we have been 
laying several criminal charges and pursuing issues of tax 
abuse which is basically similar to the abuse of authority in 
government.  And many of these issues that we dealt with 
would end up at law enforcement agencies.   
 
And I think what my superiors in the organisation 
realised is, is that those issues do not reach any sort of 
consequence.   
 
And we decided to really start some operation in 
Parliament to not only come to grips with what they are 
20 
doing in terms of the oversight of the Executive and how 
they spend taxpayers’ money. 
 
But to really put some of the issues that we have 
been dealing with and that were fruitless at the law 
enforcement agencies to put to parliamentary committees 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 33 of 212 
 
and to try and get some justice there.   
 
So in the beginning we monitored what particular 
committees were doing that were relevant to our mandate, 
to our projects for example in the transport, energy, water 
sectors 
and 
also 
in 
justice 
and 
constitutional 
developments.   
 
We monitored those committees to understand how 
they 
actually 
exercising 
oversight 
whether 
they 
are.  
Because frankly, the position was that surely they are not 
carrying out oversight because we are seeing the effects of 
10 
impunity.   
 
So the purpose was to initially to come to grips 
with how they were doing things but then really to try and 
improve the way they carried out oversight. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in paragraph 3.5 you summarise 
your conclusion and what then follows over hundreds of 
pages is detailed but you say: 
“To 
our 
profound 
disappointed 
we 
have 
repeatedly experienced in several Portfolio 
Committees 
of 
the 
National 
Assembly 
in 
20 
Parliament the brazen flouting of genuine and 
non-partisan oversight of Executive conduct.” 
 
Is that a fair summary of your conclusion? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, it is. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now...  Just bear with me, please. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 34 of 212 
 
MR JOHNSTON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   I would like to take you to paragraph 
5.1 of your affidavit.  And again, I only want to deal with 
this extremely crisply and briefly because the issue of the 
Waterkloof landing incident has been the subject of 
...[indistinct] [00:28:23] [distortion in transmission present 
– speaker unclear] before the Commission already.  And 
that is at paragraph 5.1.4 that: 
“Inappropriate 
...[indistinct] 
[00:28:37] 
realisation(?) of state asset by a private 
10 
family, the Gupta family, well-connected to 
high-ranking politicians was answered by a 
member 
of 
Cabinet 
as 
something 
the 
parliamentarians 
need 
not 
to 
concern 
themselves with.”   
 
You say: 
“Members of the ruling party did not object to 
this explanation.” 
 
Firstly, who was the Cabinet Minister to whom you 
are referring? 
20 
MR JOHNSTON:   It was the then Minister of Justice and 
Constitutional Development, Mr Jeff Radebe. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And could you just elaborate on why 
you say members of the ruling party did not object to this 
explanation? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 35 of 212 
 
MR JOHNSTON:   Well, the Hansard record is there.  There 
were some objections from members of the opposition 
party and I would have wished to be a little more privy to 
how debates on matters of public interest go but I have 
never been fortunate enough to attend such.   
 
In this instance in 2013 was the first debate in the 
National Assembly on an issue of public importance as far 
as I am aware since the year 2000.  So those are very 
uncommon but there were objections. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Sorry to interrupt you but you are 
10 
referring to a particular technical device which is provided 
for, and if you could just ...[intervenes]  
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, the parliamentary debate on a 
matter 
public 
importance 
is 
something 
that 
can 
be 
requested by any member of parliament requested from the 
Speaker and in this instance she acquiesced and accepted 
that request and that is why this debate actually happened 
and this is something that does not happen very often, is 
my point, it happens very seldom and that is just a 
testament, one of the many testaments, in my view, of the 
20 
fact that there are not many relevant debates in parliament 
on issues that are of importance today.  That is the point I 
was trying to make. 
ADV FREUND SC:   When you talk debates in parliament 
are you referring to the debates on the floor of the National 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 36 of 212 
 
Assembly? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Amongst others, yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And did you have regard to Hansard or 
what was the source for comment that the members of the 
ruling party did not object to this explanation? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, precisely. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you make the point …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Freund, I want to make 
sure that I am following.  The explanation you talk about is 
it the one that is dealt with at paragraph 5.1.3 that is said 
10 
to have been provided by Minister Radebe?  Mr Freund?   
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, here you, Chair, I assumed that 
the question was directed to Mr Johnston.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, no, no, to you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Maybe shall I cover the material again? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I just want to make that I 
understand. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Well, let me … 
CHAIRPERSON:   That the explanation you are referring to 
…[intervenes] 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes.  No, let me… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you go.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, after paragraph 5.1.3 there is in 
the first sentence of paragraph 5.1.4 the allegation by Mr 
Johnston that says that – and he explained now, that 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 37 of 212 
 
Minister 
Radebe 
said 
that 
the 
alleged 
inappropriate 
utilisation of state assets by a private family, the Gupta 
family, 
was 
something 
that 
parliamentarians 
need 
not 
concern themselves with.  That is what Mr Johnston said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh ja, I see that.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you say, Mr Johnston, is that 
once Mr Radebe had , is that once Mr Radebe had 
expressed that view, you say members of the ruling party 
did not object to that explanation, as I understand your 
evidence, is that correct? 
10 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes and I should just qualify that saying 
he also referred to it being dealt with by the Public 
Protector ’s office and this is a point that I make further on, 
is that very often issues of parliamentary oversight are 
silenced on the basis that they are being dealt with either 
in the judiciary by some court or in a Chapter 9 institution. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the statement, if you have got the 
statement right, that Minister Radebe said the utilisation of 
Waterkloof, effectively that the Guptas landed their plane 
on Waterkloof was effectively none of the business of 
20 
members of parliament, that is extraordinary.  Are you 
quite clear that you have reflected correctly what he said?  
I am not saying – I am not meaning you recall word for 
word but that is the point he made.  Are you quite clear 
that that correctly reflects what he said? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 38 of 212 
 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, Chairperson, so this is reflected in 
the Hansard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JOHNSTON:   And more specifically, if I just may 
elaborate on that, it is - you know, it is difficult to reflect 
the precise tone of a minister speaking in the National 
Assembly but it was a tone of dismissal, in that the issue 
was being dealt with elsewhere and therefore the member 
of parliament did not need to concern themselves with that 
issue. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what is this story that a matter is 
being 
dealt 
with 
by 
the 
Public 
Protector 
therefore 
parliament should not or cannot carry out its oversight 
function?  I seem to have some difficulty with that.  So, in 
order to make sure parliament will not be seized with a 
matter you must just refer it to the Public Protector or take 
it to court. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then parliament will never exercise its 
parliamentary oversight responsibilities in regard to that 
20 
matter. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, Chair, that is the tone that came 
across in my view. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If it is taken to the Public Protector, the 
Public Protector investigates, sometimes it might be for a 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 39 of 212 
 
year or two years or whatever the period, she issues her 
report.  If her report is taken on review in the High Court 
could be five years before there is – we see an end to the 
litigation.  By that time how does it help for it to go back to 
parliament?  So it seems to me that if you say if a matter is 
before the Public Protector or if a matter is before the 
courts, parliament cannot debate it, cannot perform – I 
mean cannot debate it and cannot demand answers or 
explanations from the executive.  It means that in that way 
you are depriving parliament of the opportunity to perform 
10 
one of its very important functions over the executive.  
What is your comment on that or am I missing something?  
Mr Johnston, do you have any comment to…? 
MR 
JOHNSTON: 
 
 
I 
completely 
agree 
with 
you, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes 
but 
you 
say 
that 
after 
…[intervenes] 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I can go further and say… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, go ahead? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Sorry, I think there is a lag.  Yes, I 
20 
think that is exactly the point and later on in the affidavit I 
emphasise this, that it is actually precisely four or five 
years later that the issue of this family and how they 
relate to important decision-makers in government was 
actually picked up substantively only by some.  So that is 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 40 of 212 
 
the period of time that passed and in that time it was our 
view that that was the zenith of state capture.  But 
consistently, when this issue was brought up, it would 
always by downplayed, it would be purposefully ignored or 
some external authority would be referenced to justify 
dropping the issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Freund, continue? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now on the 
question of delay, in your paragraph 5.3, which has many 
subparagraphs, 
you 
deal 
with 
the 
manner 
in 
which 
10 
parliament has or has not dealt with, allegations pertaining 
to Mr Bongani Bongo, a complaint that was lodged and the 
lack of progress to this date that you are aware of in 
respect of parliament’s response.  Could you just briefly 
summarise the story there please? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, my understanding of the complaint 
itself and the substance of a complaint is that Advocate 
Vanara, who used to be the registrar of the joint committee 
on ethics and members’ interests as well as the evidence 
leader of the portfolio committee on Public Enterprises 
20 
inquiry into Eskom, that he was bribed in parliament by Mr 
Bongo to tone down the heat, if I can put it that way, and 
what transpired subsequently is to me an illustration of a 
problem of parliament’s culture and that problem is that Mr 
Bongo went to the High Court, if I remember correctly, and 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 41 of 212 
 
basically made the case that it is unfair that the process of 
the ethics committee’s inquiry into said complaint is taking 
so long and what the judge found, in essence, was that it 
is a result of his case in court that the process was further 
delayed.   
And the point I wanted to illustrate with that, and 
that issue still has not been resolved, according to my 
knowledge, but the issue that I am trying to portray is that 
members themselves, members of parliament, do not 
respect the processes and the internal accountability 
10 
mechanisms that are there.  For example, the ethics 
committee’s proceedings.  These are not respective and I 
think there is an understanding, especially the ruling party, 
who effectively controls each and every disciplinary and 
ordinary committee in parliament, that any complaint that is 
levelled against a member of the ruling party, if you are on 
the right side of things, will lead to nothing and this is an 
illustration to me of that problem. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So if I can just refer you more 
specifically to paragraph 5.3.7?  There the honourable 
20 
justice hearing that case records that Mr Bongo’s own 
complaint is inexcusably slow progress.  That, of course, 
was quite some time ago from today, well over a year, I 
think, am I correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I think so. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 42 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   You say, if I understand correctly, in 
paragraph 5.3.10 is that as yet no steps have been taken, 
no outcome has been communicated in respect of that 
extremely serious complaint which, if the complaint is 
valid, would be the most egregious violation of the duties 
of an MP and of a minister. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, precisely.  And I do not want to pre-
empt where we are going but this is a small example and 
one that we are less directly involved with, as an 
organisation.  As an organisation we submitted two very 
10 
(indistinct – recording distorted) substantive complaints, 
that this we received any substantive feedback.  We have 
no indication of anything that has happened to those 
complaints to date. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I want to just interrupt you just to refer 
you to the parts of your affidavit that deal with that.  Would 
you go to paragraph 5.7, I think point 19.  Let me check 
that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second, Mr Freund?  Just one 
second.  Can I find out from the stenographers whether 
20 
they hear what Mr Freund and Mr Johnston say quite 
clearly because there are quite a few times when it looks 
like there are glitches.  Mr Johnston was making a 
comment a minute ago and half of what he was saying I 
think could not come out clearly.  They can hear?  Okay, 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 43 of 212 
 
alright.   Given these technical glitches I think from your 
side, Mr Freund, I can hear you quite clearly now.  Mr 
Johnston, being aware of these technical glitches, do your 
best to speak up and do so clearly.  Thank you, you may 
proceed, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Johnston, would 
you please turn in your affidavit at page 258 to paragraph 
5.7.19?  
MR JOHNSTON:   I am there. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And does that paragraph deal with the 
10 
evidence you were just giving about two complaints that 
were furnished by OUTA and is it correct that they were 
complaints against the former Minister of Communications, 
Faith 
Muthambi 
and 
the 
former 
Minister 
of 
Mineral 
Resources, Mosebenzi Zwane.  Is that all correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now can I ask you to move further into 
your affidavit to paragraph 5.8.104?  You will find that at 
page 298. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I am there. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say there that those two 
complaints were lodged with parliament’s joint committee 
on ethics and members’ interests on the 16 and the 25 
October 2017 and you actually annex them, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 44 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you say as of the date of 
opposing to this affidavit which was in November of 2020, 
no tangible disciplinary action have been taken against 
either of the former ministers, they have since been 
appointed as the Chairpersons of the Portfolio Committee 
on cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs and the 
Portfolio Committee on Transport in the National Assembly 
of parliament respectively, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And as of today, to the best of your 
10 
knowledge, have you been advised of any outcome of 
either of the complaints that you lodged in October of 
2017? 
MR JOHNSTON:   No, we have not. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Let me take you back now to 
paragraph 5.5.16.  You deal – and that is at page 237 of 
volume 1 – you deal at some length over the next four 
pages 
with 
a 
presentation 
by 
Eskom, 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee on Public Enterprises on the 31 August 2016, is 
that correct? 
20 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now we do not have time to go through 
all the detail of what you set out there, but it seemed to me 
in fairness to Ms Rantho who testified earlier, that we 
should point out that you make the point that at this 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 45 of 212 
 
meeting 
when 
opposition 
party 
members 
were 
endeavouring to raise difficult questions pertaining to 
alleged corruption or state capture at Eskom, Ms Rantho 
was the Acting Chair and that she did allow those 
questions, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I think see that in paragraph – 
that is at paragraph 5.5.20.  At paragraph 5.5.23 you deal 
with the stance adopted by Dr Ngubane who I think was 
then the Chair of Eskom, is that correct? 
10 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say that his attitude was the 
following: 
“He said that the members of the committee should 
trust Eskom and the portrayal of Eskom as being 
captured was unfair and total nonsense and that he 
introduced a counter-narrative by saying that the 
state had been captured in 1948 when the National 
Party came to power.” 
Is that broadly reflective of his stance? 
20 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, it is.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And did you get a sense that that 
stance was rejected by the committee? 
MR JOHNSTON:   No, I did not, not by the majority of its 
members. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 46 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you make a point in paragraph 
5.5.32 that there is a structural problem here.  You say in 
the second sentence of paragraph 5.5.32 first that: 
“There is serious flaw in the procedural setup of 
parliamentary oversight in that oral testimony serve 
as the primary source of information for members to 
pass 
judgment 
on 
the 
adequacy 
of 
executive 
conduct in regard to state owned entities.” 
And you say further: 
“The 
tone 
of 
responses 
from 
high-ranking 
10 
employees of major SOEs illustrates that they do 
not consider themselves to be accountable to 
parliament.” 
Would you just like to elaborate on that a little please? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, very much.  This is an important 
point I make throughout the affidavit and basically the 
primary source of information that members rely on is 
verbal accounts of what is happening from the very people 
who are supposed to be held to account, so obviously 
there is a conflict of interest but this is not something that 
20 
cannot be solved.  There are various organisations that 
are nonpartisan, apolitical, like ourselves, who have 
substantive information on issues at state owned entities 
like this, but parliament does not routinely request such 
information, it does not entertain external sources of 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 47 of 212 
 
information  and I will get to this point later on, so I do not 
want to elaborate too much but there is a very obvious 
problem in that people who are in managerial or executive 
positions of state owned companies are obviously more 
knowledgeable about the operations of that entity and so 
members of parliament, even if they have the intention to 
actually oversee what is happening there, they would have 
a difficult time comparing their knowledge of the subject 
matter with the knowledge of those who are actually in 
those positions and this is also, in my view, a political 
10 
problem since the deployment of members of parliament to 
particular committees is not always a function of their 
expertise, it is more often a function of their political 
inclination and that I see as a fundamental problem. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I would like to take you now to page 
243 to paragraph 5.5.35 and following.  You deal here 
with a meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Public 
Enterprises with Denel in respect of the VR Laser issue, is 
that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you do furnish to the Commission 
the PMG minutes, you say see annexure 3.5, you say that 
in the third line of that subparagraph and, Chair, that 
annexure is to be found in volume 1 at page 375 to 381. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 48 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am not going to take you there 
immediately.  But what narrative then describes is that 
this meeting had been prearranged in order to get to the 
bottom of the VR Laser/Denel controversy.  It had been 
preceded by an earlier meeting and fingers were pointing 
in 
different 
directions, 
the 
Department 
of 
Public 
Enterprises, 
the 
Treasury, 
ministers 
of 
those 
two 
departments, the old board, the new board, so this was a 
specially 
arranged 
meeting 
to 
bring 
all 
the 
parties 
together so that the committee would have an opportunity 
10 
to probe and get to the bottom of the matter.  Is that a fair 
summary? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now this you indicate in the fourth 
line, paragraph 5.5.35, was chaired by the then chair of 
Public Enterprises Portfolio Committee, Ms Letsatsi-Dube, 
but she was also accompanied by the Chairperson of the 
select 
committee 
on 
Public 
Enterprises 
and 
Communications Ms Prins, that select committee being a 
structure of the NCOP, is that correct? 
20 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So must have been an important joint 
meeting and what emerged, at a very early stage at the 
meeting, is that the chairperson informed the committee 
that the Minister of Public Enterprises Ms Lynne Brown 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 49 of 212 
 
and the Minister of Finance, Mr Pravin Gordhan, had 
forwarded their apologies for not attending the meeting 
and I might indicate, Chair, that if one looks at page 378, 
which is in the annexure, one sees that the notification 
from the Finance Minister, according to the Chair, was on 
the 2 September, in other words some days before this 
meeting.  
 
And you also reflect that the committee had been 
unable to get the previous board members of Denel to 
attend this very meeting, is that correct? 
10 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And so the fact that the two ministers 
were not there and the former board was not there, 
notwithstanding that this is an arrangement that had been 
made by agreement from months earlier, to finally try to 
get to grips with the Denel VR Laser, that at least of the 
members 
present 
were 
extremely 
disappointed, 
Ms 
Motsane, for one, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And so you describe in your affidavit 
20 
how Ms Motsane and other members of the opposition 
objected in strong terms to the nonattendance of required 
participants and the fact that no alternative arrangements 
had been made notwithstanding prior notifications to the 
chair that certain person would not be able to come and 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 50 of 212 
 
an argument developed and eventually the opposition MPs 
all walked out of the meeting, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Must (indistinct – recording distorted) 
to them walking out of the meeting.  The Denel leadership 
were then invited to make a submission which, as it were, 
reflected their side of the story, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I want to take you to paragraph 
5.5.42 because this reflects, according to your evidence, 
10 
the conclusion that was expressed.  Now here at this 
stage could I ask you please to go to the actual source 
document, the annexure, which is in bundle 1 at page 381.  
Perhaps in fairness, just for us to get our bearings, 
perhaps we should start at page 376, which is the 
beginning of the document. 
(Break in recording) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Freund?  Oh, okay.  How much 
time will be needed?  Okay, alright.  Well, I think 
…[intervenes] 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   ...was that essentially the conclusion 
reached at this meeting? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund?  Mr Freund?  I think he cannot 
hear me.  Mr Johnston, can you hear me?  I think Mr Johnston 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 51 of 212 
 
cannot hear me either.  You cannot hear me? 
MR JOHNSTON:   I can hear you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can hear me?  You can hear me, Mr 
Johnston? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I can, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Freund cannot hear me. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I can hear now, Chair, there was a brief 
moment when I could not, but I now hear you clearly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes well you both disappeared from the 
screen for maybe a minutes or two or a minute or so and I 
10 
think from your side you may have been continuing with your 
questions and Mr Johnston giving you answers but I could not 
hear.  So I think we will need to take the tea adjournment now 
because it is the right time but give the chance to the 
technicians to attend to the technical problems.  Maybe I 
should not have said in the morning that we have been doing 
quite well in terms of technical problems, maybe I invited the 
technical problems.  Okay, let us take the tea adjournment and 
we will resume at half past eleven.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have Mr Freund on the other screen 
and not on this one, is that going to change or what has 
happened, it is blank on this one, I prefer to see them on 
the one that is near and not the ones on the wall.  I can 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 52 of 212 
 
see Mr Johnston; can you hear me Mr Johnston? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   Mr Freund can you hear 
me? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Loud and clear Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright, let us proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Chair when we 
broke you indicated to me that you believed, I am sure 
correctly, that I had asked some questions of Mr Johnston 
that may not have been transmitted.  Can I enquire from 
10 
you Chair whether you heard me refer the witness to the 
document in the bundle that starts at Bundle 1, page 376, 
the minutes of the Denel Asia meeting with the PCPE? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I did hear, that is where I am. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, then I will pick it up from that 
point if I may. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.   Mr Johnston the 
document that starts at page 376 is the PMG minute of the 
presentation on the Denel Asia issue, which was intended 
20 
to be attended by the Denel Board by the National 
Treasury and the Department of Public Enterprises.  Is that 
correct?  
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And this meeting of the 7 t h of 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 53 of 212 
 
September 2016 had two Chairs, Ms Letsatsi-Dube, who 
was the Chair of the Portfolio Committee on Public 
enterprises, and also Ms E Prince who chaired the 
Corresponding Select Committee of the NCOP.  Is that 
correct?  
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And I think that before the interruption, 
you had confirmed that essentially what happened was that 
certain expected role players were not there, that this led 
ultimately to a walkout by the opposition members, and 
10 
that the ANC members stayed on in the meeting and that 
there was then a presentation by the representatives of 
Denel, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I think we were really at that point, 
when communication lines were apparently dropped.  I 
would like to take you to the end of that document, to page 
381.  And I just want to read into the record and invite your 
comment. The record says: 
“Ms Prince, the Co-chair of the meeting, said it was 
20 
quite clear that there was nothing close to a 
scandal in the Denel Asia deal.” 
Is that the basis on which the meeting concluded? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, it is and I would just like to 
comment a little bit further on that.  The persons who 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 54 of 212 
 
represented Denel were Mr Richard Seleke and Mr Daniel 
Mantsha.  Now we have laid criminal charges against Mr 
Seleke as well and I would just like to extract the core 
narrative of that meeting, and that was one where this deal 
between the Denel and VR Laser Asia was being pushed 
very strongly by Mr Seleke in particular. 
And he went so far as to acknowledge well, firstly 
we negated comments or allegations that the Gupta family 
were major shareholders in that Asian company.  But he did 
not deny that Mr Salim Essa was the majority shareholder 
10 
of that company, Mr Salim Essa we have also laid criminal 
charges against and he is a very close associate of the 
Gupta family.  
And clearly in my view, Ms Prince in particular was 
on Mr Seleke’s side and very much agreed with his 
sentiment, despite the fact that it was on record there that 
the National Treasury did not approve of this deal and they 
said that it was in transgression or not in alignment with 
the Public Finance Management Act. 
ADV FREUND SC:   In fact, it went further, did it not.  It 
20 
was acknowledged at that meeting on behalf of Denel that 
by statutory law, it was imperative if that was to proceed 
for the approval to be obtained of the National Treasury 
and it was acknowledged that it had not been that that 
approval had not been received, am I correct? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 55 of 212 
 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct and further Mr 
Seleke bemoaned the fact that they are already operating 
in a very restrictive legislative environment.  And what he 
is saying in essence is that he is irritated by the rule of 
law, and that he would prefer that these restrictions would 
not be there and clearly he had a very strong intention to 
have this partnership happen, despite the fact that it was 
in contravention of the laws that really govern how public 
officials spend taxpayer ’s money. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And all of this was apparent needs the 
10 
transcript, 
the 
PMG 
transcript, 
and 
it 
precedes 
the 
conclusion by the Co-chair Ms Prince, that it was quite 
clear that there was nothing close to the scandal in the 
Denel Asia deal.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, and I think it makes it quite clear 
that there was a preconceived or premeditated conclusion 
to this meeting, and whether or not the opposition members 
were there and whether or not they objected, and whether 
or not they decided to leave, that would have been the 
conclusion.  
20 
And this is one of the problems that I have 
observed in Parliament very frequently, is that actual 
decisions 
are 
not 
taken 
on 
the 
record 
when 
these 
deliberations are happening, these decisions are taken 
beforehand, and then they will act it out when the meeting 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 56 of 212 
 
actually occurs. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, I want to move on to a 
different issue, if you would turn please to page 259. 
MR JOHNSTON:   I am there. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I mean you will see in paragraph 
5.7.20 and following that you start to deal there with what I 
will refer to as the Frolick letters, a set of letters from Mr 
Cedric 
Frolick 
who 
then 
the 
House 
Chairperson 
of 
committees, to the Chairs of various Portfolio Committees, 
requesting that…[intervene] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Freund, I thought you said - 
what did you say 259? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Page 259 in Bundle 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, I did hear you correctly, but I 
went to 359 instead of 259.  That was not your fault.  Okay, 
what paragraph did you say, did you refer us to? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Five, sorry 5.7.20. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you I have got it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in that paragraph, Mr Johnston, 
you deal with a topic that has already been canvassed with 
20 
certain earlier witnesses, which is to say a set of letters 
issued in mid-June or thereabouts to the Chairpersons of 
the Portfolio Committees in which they were requested in 
their committees to investigate what we can broadly refer 
to as allegations of State Capture or the like, insofar as it 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 57 of 212 
 
related 
to 
the 
areas 
of 
jurisdiction 
of 
those 
four 
committees. Is that correct?  
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, you do annex those letters I am 
not going to necessarily need to take you to that.  But what 
I would like to take you to is to paragraph 5.7.23 because 
this particular piece of information is not canvassed in the 
evidence of any of the other witnesses, and this relates to 
a press statement which you actually annexed to your 
affidavit. 
10 
You annexed it as Annexure 4.2A, I am not going to 
take you there because you quote, the relevant part in your 
affidavit.  And what this says and perhaps I should read it 
into the record: 
“In the light of the recent accusations of State 
Capture 
linked 
to 
alleged 
emails, 
involving 
a 
number 
of 
Ministers, 
Parliamentary 
Committees 
have been directed to urgently probe the allegations 
and report back to the National Assembly.” 
And it then goes on to explain how this is in accordance 
20 
with the rules and it says in the penultimate paragraph: 
“While no specific deadline has been set for the 
submission of the outcome of these investigations, 
the committees have been urged to begin with the 
work and report the recommendations to the House 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 58 of 212 
 
urgently.” 
And then it continues: 
“Parliament as a representative body of the people 
of 
South 
Africa 
shoulders, 
the 
constitutional 
responsibility of ensuring that matters of public 
interest are dealt with as expected by the people.” 
So you can confirm can you not that that is the media 
statement that was issued in which is annexed to your 
affidavit? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I can confirm. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, a great deal of your affidavit 
from 
that 
point 
onwards, 
consists 
of 
monitoring 
the 
progress in those four committees and certain other 
Portfolio Committees.  Am I correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I, for reasons of time I am not going to 
take you through all of that, I am going to be selective.  
But I do wish to refer you to your reference to the secret 
ballot judgments which we see in paragraph 5.8. 4 of your 
affidavit that is at page 263.  And you quote, a little more 
20 
extensively than a previous witness a pertinent extract 
from the Constitutional Court's judgment.   
And you then go on thereafter to make a judgment.  
This is in paragraph 5.8.5, perhaps you might read into the 
record the first two or three sentences of that paragraph 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 59 of 212 
 
and then speak to that point. 
MR JOHNSTON:   So I set out to contend: 
“That this conflict between upholding constitutional 
values and party loyalty occurs in Parliamentary 
Committees daily.  We argue that this imperative 
that says party political representatives must as 
their absolute and unfaltering priority, enable the 
people together through them is not being realised.” 
Would you like me to go further? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, please. 
10 
MR JOHNSTON:   “How members of the parliamentary 
office  
have 
witnessed 
countless 
instances 
of 
party 
political decision making, both within and outside of 
formal parliamentary fora that are in no shape, or 
form, taking the public interest into account. On the 
contrary, we have witnessed decision making that 
knowingly contradicts the explicit best interests of 
the public at large, but serves party political 
purposes over the short, medium and especially the 
20 
long term.” 
ADV FREUND SC:   In fact you can also deal with the next 
sentence. 
MR JOHNSTON:    
“This cannot be considered separately from the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 60 of 212 
 
Qaeda deployment and electoral system at play.” 
And then I referred to the recent case of independent 
candidates having to be allowed to be elected to the 
National Assembly.  Would you like me to…[intervene] 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, that would be fine.  Now, when you 
met with that, with respect damning criticism, do you feel it 
is a fair criticism and do you feel that you can substantiate 
that from your personal experience and the observations 
made by your organisation not only relying on what you 
have seen written in PMG reports, but in sessions that you 
10 
have personally attended? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I can I mean I can give a very 
concrete and immediate example of that and that is not 
covered in much depth in this affidavit.  But I think I do 
cover it somewhere, and for instance there was a planned 
inquiry into the Department of Water and Sanitation, the 
former department, this was something…[intervene] 
ADV FREUND SC:   Let me just stop you there.  I will refer 
you to paragraph 5.9.4 of your affidavit.  And really, from 
5.9.4 all the way through to 5.9. 13 I think this is the 
20 
portion of the affidavit in which you address this issue.  So 
let us deal with this issue now. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Okay.  I can summarise it.  There was a 
very explicit intention to hold this inquiry and we were very 
welcoming of it, as well were other stakeholders and there 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 61 of 212 
 
was an entire procedure.  There were several meetings 
that I personally attended in planning this inquiry. 
What was the intended scope of inquiry? 
MR JOHNSTON:  It was the financial governance of the 
Department of Water and Sanitation, I think, particularly 
under the custodianship of the former Minister Mokonyane 
and this was something that was going to be conducted by 
both SCOPA and the then Portfolio Committee on water and 
sanitation, that was Mr Themba Godi and Mr Lulu Johnson.   
Now, Mr Lulu Johnson was the main man if I can put 
10 
it that way in this in this planning process and Mr Godi and 
his committee SCOPA would be supportive.  And we in 
preparation for this compiled very substantial submissions 
for these committees to consider and there was a draft 
schedule, and everything was really in place. And I think 
there was some representations from the SIU as well, that 
was in camera.  So I am not sure what transpired there.  
But that happened and ultimately it was cancelled and 
there was no notification as to why this, this is happening.  
So in the meeting that I attended, I urged a 
20 
journalist sitting next to me to approach the Chairperson 
and ask him why this is no longer happening.  I figured that 
he might not want to tell me, and he told her that it was 
because the elections were coming up.  I think this was, 
yes this was in March and I think the elections were in 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 62 of 212 
 
May, 
it 
was 
sometime 
soon. 
 
And 
Mr 
Johnson 
acknowledged to her off the record that That is why the 
committee will no longer proceed with their investigation or 
with the inquiry.  And we tried subsequently to re-establish 
this and we were still in the process of trying to revive this, 
but it has not yet come to pass. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I want to take you back to where 
we were in your affidavit back to page 264 and in 
paragraph 5.8.6 you deal with the question of current 
electoral system and the impacts on accountability to 
10 
Parliament.  You may have heard this morning that that 
issue was debated with a previous witness.  I do not want 
to deal with that at length. But in crisp summary, what is 
your stance on this issue? 
MR JOHNSTON:   So I think I should get to this toward the 
end.  But in short for now I can say I do not think that 
electoral reform, whilst I think it is an essential thing that 
needs to happen.  I do not think it is a panacea for this 
issue 
but 
what 
I 
put 
here 
is 
that 
the 
obsessive 
prioritisation 
of 
equality 
in 
political 
voice 
that 
has 
20 
precipitated in the system of proportional representation 
through political parties has nullified any possibility of real 
accountability in Parliament.  
And that is my view, it is in almost every instance – 
I am also going to refer to this later on.  But when we come 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 63 of 212 
 
to the code of conduct and the rules of the National 
Assembly and the NCOP, you can see quite clearly that in 
every process including disciplinary processes, there is a 
rule of majority that can override any finding.  This is the 
case when it comes to findings of the Ethics Committee 
and it is the case in virtually every, every inquiry that has 
been held.  And my view is that because there is a majority 
that consists of a single political unit being the ruling 
party, in this case having very large majority it means that 
they have absolute power.  
10 
That means that, regardless of any information put 
before them, any allegation, they can simply decide not to 
do anything about it and that is what we have seen in 
practice and I have observed this myself personally.  This 
is not based on what I have read in PMG at all, I have seen 
this, there have been bills that come to Parliament from 
the various departments and there is a unilateral decision 
of what that bill is going to do, where it is going to go.  
And in many instances there seems to be a 
meaningful debate on a certain issue, whether it be an 
20 
issue of oversight or an issue of policymaking and there 
would be a pause when there is some confusion, members 
of the ruling party would step outside and make a decision 
amongst themselves by consulting probably a political 
directors, come back into the room and announce a 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 64 of 212 
 
different decision or a particular decision.  
And 
that 
is 
in 
my 
view 
what 
really 
limits 
Accountability because in the executive, where I say that 
State Capture has transpired when money really flows, that 
is the same case.  So I think it is a system that is being 
exploited, where comrades are expected to hold one 
another accountable and that simply does not work. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, thank you.  I want to move on 
to paragraph 5.8.7 of your affidavit, page 265 and you refer 
there to a 175-page report that OUTA published and 
10 
submitted to the Speaker of the National Assembly on the 
28 t h of June 2017, which was entitled no room to hide and 
sought to substantiate allegations of State Capture.  You 
made such a submission, I take it?  
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, we did.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you deal then in paragraph 5.8.9 
following with a meeting of the Portfolio Committee on 
Public Enterprises.  This of course was fairly shortly after 
the 
date 
on 
which 
that 
committee 
according 
to the 
evidence we have heard of Ms Mazzone and of Ms Rantho 
20 
had decided to start a process of inquiry into allegations of 
State Capture.  And did you attend this meeting on the 25 t h 
of July? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I think I did. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say in paragraph 5.8.10.  But 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 65 of 212 
 
both of them know, when to report to the committee 
presented a summary of its contents for consideration.  
And you then go on to explain, as it were the nub of the 
various allegations in your lengthy report.  And that was 
considered, as I understand it, and taken into account by 
the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on that 
occasion 
and 
presumably 
it 
informed 
some 
of 
their 
subsequent work. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I believe so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, let us turn to the Portfolio 
10 
Committee on mineral resources and I want to take you to 
page 267 and starting at paragraph 5.8.18 and I think it is 
necessary for me to make clear both to you and to the 
Chair that on this issue it is not currently anticipated that 
politicians who were directly involved will be called to 
testify about the events of this particular committee.  
And so for present purposes, we rely quite heavily 
in relation to this committee on the content of your affidavit 
and that is why I am going to focus on that in some detail 
in your evidence that now follows.  Now, if we can look at 
20 
paragraph 5.8.18, you refer in the fourth line to Annexure 
4.7A and that is the letter from Mr Frolick I think we will 
find that at page 531, let me just check that please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is 500 and? 
ADV FREUND SC:   531 but perhaps I should take you to 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 66 of 212 
 
530 just to set the context.  Now, this is the PMG minute or 
summary of the meeting of the Portfolio Committee on 
mineral resources and energy on the 16 t h of August 2017 
Chaired by Mr S Nosipho, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If you then go to page 531 through to 
532.  We find that there was some discussion on that 
occasion about a letter.  If you go to the middle of page 
531, under the heading letter from House Chairperson, 
State Capture allegations.  Do you see that?  
10 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I do.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And it says the following: 
“The Chairperson read a letter from Mr Cedric 
Frolick the House Chairperson, which had been sent 
to the committee on 20 June 2017. The letter was 
not circulated to the general public attending the 
meeting.  In essence, the letter was a request for 
the committee to investigate the various allegations 
in the media on the State Capture of organs of the 
State, some implicating the Minister of Mineral 
20 
Resources.  He wanted the committee to report 
back to the National Assembly at the soonest 
opportunity once the investigation was done.” 
Now let me just pause there and say this, there does not 
seem to be any controversy from anybody that such a letter 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 67 of 212 
 
was sent to the Chair of this particular committee, as we 
see reflected here.  But for reasons unclear to me, we 
have been unable to come up with the copy of that very 
letter but it seems clear, does it not that the letter was 
sent and drawn to the attention of this particular Portfolio 
Committee? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what do you then deal with in your 
affidavit from paragraph 5.8.19 is that Mr Nosipho reports 
to the committee and you are really here summarising what 
10 
we find in more detail in the PMG report.  Mr Nosipho 
reported that he had responded to the House Chairperson 
by asking for terms of reference to guide the committee in 
its investigations and that is what you discern from the 
PMG reports.  Is that correct?  
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I take it Mr Johnston, that 
although you attended many meetings, you are not certain 
that you attended this meeting. 
MR JOHNSTON:   I am not quite sure because I was trying 
20 
to spread myself between all these inquiry meetings. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So you were able to rest here largely 
on the PMG report? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I would say so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then you say in paragraph 5.8.20 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 68 of 212 
 
shows that several ANC MP’s present advanced arguments 
against conducting the requested investigation.  You say 
Mr. Mandela, a member of that committee said that the 
committee should wait until more terms of reference were 
in place and also said that he was not sure what emails 
were being referred to and what media was being referred 
to 
and 
one 
sees 
if 
one, 
if 
one 
goes 
to 
page 
531…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Freund, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think when you were reading, I do not 
know whether it was deliberate but it does not seem to be 
very clear you skipped a line where you said, he was not 
quite sure what I think the next line is what the House 
Chairperson wanted the committee to do.  You went to the 
next line, what media was being referred to, I got. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, yes I stopped…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it deliberate? 
ADV FREUND SC:   …at a particular, but you are correct it 
does continue and it…[intervene] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought it was not deliberate, if it was 
deliberate, that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, it was deliberate because at that 
point Chair I wanted to take you to the source document 
for that particular point.  
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 69 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  
ADV FREUND SC:   This document page 531. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Five four one? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Five three one, 531 in Bundle 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh that is where I am. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And in the fourth last paragraph on that 
page you will see that that is the source of what Mr Johnston 
is setting out in his affidavit and that Mr Mandela says that 
he referred to the rural village Nveso in his constituency 
10 
where newspapers and other forms of media were not readily 
available. He was adamant that the committee should not be 
seen to be chasing rumours and had to rely on facts which 
as I understand it was put up as a reason not to exceed to 
Mr Frolick’s request that this committee at this time should 
pursue this inquiry.  Is that how you understand it Mr 
Johnston? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes it is and I think – I will get into more 
detail but this is the beginning of an extremely extensive 
series of excuses that were put forward not to hold an 
20 
inquiry or not to do – not to implement substantive oversight 
but what one could interpret from what Mr Mandela is saying 
here if he does not know what it means to carry out oversight 
of this issue and I will get to that point later on but perhaps 
that is a valid point. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 70 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright let us – let us lay a foundation for 
that.  Let us go to the next paragraph in your affidavit at 
page 268 and that is the paragraph 5.8.21.   
MR JOHNSTON:  I am there. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And there you refer to the fact this PMG 
report that we have shows that Mr Lorimer of the DA then 
handed out sealed envelopes marked Gupta emails to 
committee members and that this provoked an angry reaction 
from amongst others the Chairperson of the Committee and 
Mr Mandela as being so they said in breach of Parliamentary 
10 
and Committee protocols.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes that is the argument that was put 
forward. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 And 
then 
the 
Chairperson 
says 
something interesting that you deal with in  paragraph 5.8.22 
because he is quoted in this report as saying: 
“That asking for Terms of Reference and 
further clarity should not be seen as stalling 
or evasive.” 
And he said that and I quote from the minutes: 
20 
“There was already broad agreement within 
the government that there had to be an 
investigation.  All that was needed from the 
Committee’s perspective would be how to go 
about investigating the issue and he closed 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 71 of 212 
 
the discussion by proposing that a letter be 
drafted 
to 
the 
House 
Chairperson 
for 
guidance.” 
In other words the Chairperson was not disputing in fact was 
proclaiming that what he called the government was in broad 
agreement that there had to be an investigation.  You agree? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now in paragraph 5.8.23 you refer to a 
subsequent letter from Mr Frolick to Mr Lizipo [?] dated the 
23rd August 2017.  You refer to that as Annexure 4.7B and 
10 
could I refer you to page 535 please in the Bundle?  I am  
going to read this letter into the record. 
“Dear Honorary Chairperson.  Your letter 
dated 18 August 2017 as at hand and refers.  
I confirm that we have met and discussed the 
contents thereof in a meeting earlier this 
afternoon.  We also agreed to an approach in 
dealing with the matter at hand.  Over the 
last two months serious allegations has been 
made in the public domain about state 
20 
capture and the alleged role of certain 
members of the Executive.  The sources of 
authority 
of 
the 
National 
Assembly 
is 
contained in Rule 2 and is primarily derived 
from 
the 
Constitution 
of 
the 
Republic.  
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 72 of 212 
 
Parliament is amongst other legally bound 
and empowered to exercise oversight over 
the Executive and to keep it accountable for 
executive action.  Allegations against any 
member 
of 
the 
Executive 
warrants 
the 
attention of the relevant committee to clarify 
issues 
under 
contestation. 
 
A 
relevant 
member of the Executive must be to provide 
with – must be provided  - my mistake – must 
be provided with a fair opportunity and 
10 
platform to respond and where possible 
clarify allegations in the public domain.  This 
should be the point of departure before the 
committee determines its next course of 
action.  Furthermore the committee must 
perform its functions in terms of Rule 167 the 
Rules of the National Assembly.  Finally the 
committee must determine the resources 
required and communicate the needs to my 
office.” 
20 
Now the existence of that letter and what was conveyed in 
that letter was then drawn to the attention of the committee 
itself as you deal with – with this way – there does not seem 
to be any controversy that that letter was drawn to the 
attention of the committee in due course.    Now what I want 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 73 of 212 
 
to know if you want to is the next meeting which you deal 
with at page 269 paragraph 5.8.24 and following and there 
we see that that letter that you have just been referred to 
was discussed and that it was clear on the need that the 
letter, Mr Frolick’s second letter was clear on the need to 
first call the Minister to account and that the committee 
should then seek legal advice on the way forward.  There is 
then some discussion and you indicate towards the foot of 
the page that the ruling party majority voted to allow the 
Minister to come to the meeting and account.  And what they 
10 
really wanted was the Minister which is Minister Zwane to 
come there and then to that very meeting and be called to 
that meeting.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes I can comment further if you would 
like? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes I – that is exactly what I would like 
you to do please. 
MR JOHNSTON:  Okay.  So my view is that there had been a 
strategic decision to get the Minister to come as soon as 
possible and this was obviously was not standard procedure.  
20 
As you can see virtually every other committee that either 
intended to or actually held an inquiry there would first be a 
plan of how the inquiry would go and what exactly they would 
talk about and what they intended outcomes would be 
obviously.   
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 74 of 212 
 
 
In this instance from this moment on onward and this 
is very early in the process there was a decision taken that 
the Minister must come immediately or as soon as possible. 
 
Now my view as to why they did that and why it work 
in the favour of the Minister and organisation he represents 
is Section 58(1) of the Constitution which really makes 
members of Parliament and Cabinet members immune to any 
civil or criminal proceedings resulting from anything they say 
in Parliament.   
 
So when we get there I will refer to this again but 
10 
some of the utterances made by the Minister when he 
ultimately came – he came one time and he … 
ADV FREUND SC:  Please let us wait until we get there.  Let 
us just deal with where we are for the moment.  If I can take 
you back to paragraph 5.8.25 you say we see this from the 
fourth line of that paragraph that Mr J Lorimer and Advocate 
H Smit of the opposition argued that the Minister should not 
be summoned until the proper processes had been put in 
place and the committee had received advice from the 
Parliamentary legal advisor.  
20 
 
So there was some debate and argument about 
whether it is appropriate just to call the Minister immediately 
or that there should be certain processes put in place but the 
decision by the majority is we call the Minister immediately 
to this meeting now. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 75 of 212 
 
 
Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes.   
ADV FREUND SC:  As it happens the Minister was unable to 
come immediately to that meeting and so he did not come to 
that meeting as the majority had been 00:09:22 is that 
correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you resume dealing with this issue 
at page 271 of your – of the Bundle paragraph 5.8.33 where 
you deal with the meeting of the Portfolio Committee on 
10 
Mineral Resources on the 18t h October 2017. 
 
And you refer to the annexure – Chair just for your 
convenience if it is already in your papers the Annexure 5.1 
is in Bundle – in this bundle at page 545.  I am not going to 
go there at the moment. 
 
But what is reflected in that minute and recorded by 
you is that at the outset of this meeting – I am reading from 
the fourth line of this paragraph. 
“At the outset of this meeting the Committee 
Chairperson stated that there had been a 
20 
command – that is what he says from the 
House Chairperson to have a meeting with 
the Minister convened and for him to respond 
to the allegations of state capture.  And in 
the 
light 
of 
this 
directive 
says 
the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 76 of 212 
 
Chairperson the primary task was to ask 
questions related to accountability of the 
Executive.” 
That is a fair summary I give is it? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And what then happens is that the 
Minister does present himself and is questioned on a 
diversity of issues where there were allegations in the public 
domain that had some bearing on his Portfolio or his 
personal experience.  And you deal with that at quite some 
10 
length in this affidavit.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now one of the points that the Minister 
made and you deal with this in paragraph 5.8.36 and when I 
refer to the Minister here we are referring to Minister Zwane.  
The Minister made was that he asked whether he was being 
put on trial publicly without allowing the legitimate structures 
like the courts to do their work.   
 
And 
he 
– 
on 
that 
occasion 
and 
other 
similar 
comments were made he was really suggesting as I read the 
20 
report that whilst he was not disputing that this committee 
could call him and ask him questions he was really asserting 
that it was not their proper role.  That the proper – the 
proper structures to deal with these issues were the courts, 
the Hawks and other entities rather than the Portfolio 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 77 of 212 
 
Committee.  Is that a fair summary? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Absolutely and similar to what was said in  
2013 by Minister Jeff Radebe.  He also gave the impression 
that this is not an issue that is relevant and that this is not 
something that really affects South Africans and therefore 
Parliamentarians need not concerning themselves with this 
issue. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I need to jump forward through to 
paragraph 5.8.41.  The Minister had been asked a number of 
questions which you deal with in your affidavit and he 
10 
responded so you say that he had answered these questions 
more than ten times on different platforms and he said he 
wished members would take notes so they do not bring them 
up again.  And he then went on to deal with those questions 
that have been put to him and one of those questions related 
to the Glencore Tegeta Transaction, am I right? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And in the middle of page 275 his 
assertion was that the owners of the company had been 
Glencore that he Mr Zwane was looking for an interested 
20 
buyer and he was told that only one company called Tegeta 
showed interest so he took it upon himself to bring the two 
companies together to try to resolve the matter and this is 
when the trip to Switzerland occurred because he was told 
that the owners of Oakbay resided there.  Correct? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 78 of 212 
 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes he said so. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then he was asked about the Vrede 
Dairy issue and he – he was asked we see in paragraph 5.80 
– 5.8.44 which is on page 277 he was asked about the 
Waterkloof Airbase issue.  We see in paragraph 5.8.45 that 
he really thought that this was not an issue that should be 
canvassed with him on this occasion.  And I – I want to take 
you now to paragraph 5.8.46.  Because there has been as 
the minute shows and as your affidavit reflects there has 
been an extensive period of questioning of Minister Zwane at 
10 
this meeting.   
 
But in paragraph 5.8.46 towards the middle of the 
paragraph the committee has now beginning to reflect on 
well where do we stand and where will we go.  And you say 
that the Chairperson reiterated questions that the Minister 
did not answer.  He noted that after the process had been 
completed the Committee will have to assess the answers 
provided by the Minister and then in the beginning of 
paragraph 5.8.47 you report that members of the opposition 
parties were dissatisfied by the Minister’s answers in 
20 
particular about the role he and or his advisors played to 
assist the Gupta family in the acquisition of Optimum Coal 
Holdings and the facilitation of the pre-payment from Eskom 
for coal supply from OCH.  So that is what the minute show 
was then discussed once the questioning of the Minister was 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 79 of 212 
 
completed.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And if we move on to paragraph 5.8.49 it 
seems that that conversation we have just referred to took 
place while the Minister was still present.  In fact if we go to 
5.8.48 we see as we often do the Minister or the person 
concerned invoking the sub judice rule is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Certain question he did not want to have 
to answer because of the sub judice rule and then it seems 
10 
that what came to the fore what is referred to a certain set of 
emails it seems if one reads this with some other knowledge 
this must be a reference to what had come to be known as 
the Gupta Leaks that as for the emails that were referenced 
the Minister said that he had not had an opportunity to 
respond to them and he questioned by whom these emails 
were validated.  Perhaps he added these emails should be 
tested before he can be probed about the content contained 
in them.  He asked if they had been tested sufficiently to 
declare that they are admissible in court.  And he was 
20 
reluctant to be drawn into an engagement as to what the 
emails purported to show.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes I would just like to highlight that he 
was dictating this conversation and there was no objection 
that he should very much be able to comment on the veracity 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 80 of 212 
 
of those emails if he were presented with any of those 
contents.  He simply said that that is not something that he 
is willing to discuss because there is not necessarily a 
legitimate sort of evidence. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And then if I take you to paragraph 
5.8.51 the person you say said that the committee would 
write to the Minister officially to engage further but noted – 
oh well I will leave it at that.   
 
So there was to be a further communication to the 
Minister.  And I want now to move onto the events of the 25t h 
10 
October 2017 which you then deal with at page 280.  And 
what you report there is that the Chairperson of the 
Committee informed the members of the Committee that a 
further engagement date had been requested with Minister 
Zwane to discuss allegations of state capture and the 
Chairperson’s hope was that this would be on the 1s t 
November 2017.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  If I can then take you to the next page 
the meeting of the 1s t November 2017.  And what you then 
20 
deal with in some details is that it had been expected that on 
this occasion Minister Zwane would face further questions as 
had been agreed at a previous meeting.  But that he had 
written on the previous day the 31s t October to say he was 
unable to attend the meeting citing a Cabinet meeting and 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 81 of 212 
 
other business issues and that arising from that the 
Committee agreed that a new date had to be agreed with the 
Minister urgently and an agreement was reached within the 
Committee that it first had to con – it had first to conclude its 
questions to the Minister before it could decide on an 
appropriate course of action based on its findings.  Is that 
correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And in paragraph 5.8.58 you make the 
point that the Chairperson recorded that the members had 
10 
not finished questioning the Minister so this had to continue 
to enable the Committee to conclude phase 1 of its 
investigations and move on to phase 2.   
 
So the intention was get the Minister’s position on 
record, understand the Minister’s position and thereafter 
embark on what might be called a more intensive inquiry into 
the issues.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes that is the way it came across. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now there was then a further meeting on 
the 8t h November which you deal with later at page 282 and 
20 
it is recorded in paragraph 5.8.60 that the Director General 
had written to the Committee confirming that the Minister 
was available on the 28t h and 29t h of November for this 
resumed questioning of the Minister.  And there was 
consensus that it was it was regrettable that the 30t h – that 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 82 of 212 
 
this was so far away into the future because the 30t h 
November was the last day before leave but nonetheless 
those – the Committee members present all agreed that 
since the Minister had proposed the 28t h and the 29 t h those 
were the dates on which the Minister would be expected to 
come and to continue to face further questioning.  Is that 
correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes they were already trying to bend over 
backward in order to get him to come and account. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So he was supposed to be there on the 
10 
28t h.  Now you make no entry in your narration about the 28t h 
but you deal with the 29t h.  And you say in paragraph 5.8.63 
that on the 29t h November the Committee held a further 
meeting.  During its meeting the Chairperson said that the 
Committee had been supposed to deal on the previous day ie 
the 28t h to which we have just referred with questions to the 
Minister so that it could finalise matters and deal with the 
way forward.   
 
But the Minister had declared his unavailability with 
reasons and the meeting had therefore been shifted to the 
20 
29t h and then in paragraph 5.64 the Chairperson asked the 
secretary to read out the reason for the unavailability of the 
Minister at that day’s meeting which is to say the 29t h the 
second of the two days scheduled and the secretary said 
that the correspondence from the Minister’s office stated that 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 83 of 212 
 
the Minister was still recovering from illness.  That is what 
the records reflect.  Am I correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So if I take you to paragraph 5.8.69 after 
much discussion the Chairperson suggested that the Minister 
be given the date of the 24t h January.  If he did not appear 
the Minister would be expected – would be asked to suggest 
an alternative date and if he did not appear on the 
alternative date then the Committee would decide what 
action to take and the Minister agreed to that proposal.  That 
10 
is how this meeting ended off.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes and I should note only at this point 
there was disagreement from opposition parties that this 
should be accepted and that these apologies are legitimate 
but members of the ruling party insisted that it should be 
accepted.  And the resolution that was there in every 
instance of this attempt to get the Minister to come and 
account was that we will deal with it later. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Now I am going to be taking you 
in a moment to paragraph 5.8.70 but before I do that can I 
20 
take you please to Bundle 1 page 574?   
MR JOHNSTON:  I am there. 
ADV FREUND SC:  That is the media report to which you are 
referring is it not at paragraph 5.8.70? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes it is. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 84 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  And that is the media report on the very 
date the 28t h that the Minister was supposed to have been 
the first of his attendance where the reporter – two reporters 
say this: 
“A jovial and joking Mosebenzi Zwane on 
Tuesday evening that is that evening became 
an ill Minister of Mineral Resources on 
Wednesday morning.  Mr Zwane was at a 
surprise ANC Free State Provincial General 
Council on Tuesday evening when News 24 
10 
saw him joking with ANC comrades.” 
And you draw attention to this as a factor suggesting that 
there be suspicion as to the genuineness of the excuse given 
by the Minister for not attending the meeting on the Tuesday 
the 28t h and Wednesday the 29t h, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes that is precisely correct and members 
of the Committee would also have access to this media 
article.  But they did not seem to care about it. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you then jump forward to the 21s t 
February bear in mind that what we had expected was that 
20 
this was going to happen in January but we now find 
ourselves at the 21s t February 2018.   
 
And by the way in the interim of course the present 
Commission of Inquiry had been formally established.   
 
On the 21s t of January according to the PMG minute 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 85 of 212 
 
which you have summarised the Chairperson and I am now 
referring to paragraph 5.8.72 – the Chairperson of the 
Committee said he had received two letters as to why the 
Minister 
would 
be 
unavailable 
to 
appear 
before 
the 
Committee.   
 
In the first it was claimed that the Minister was 
scheduled 
to 
answer 
questions 
in 
the 
NCOP. 
The 
Chairperson had pointed out in reply that there was no 
NCOP meeting that week and that the 21s t of February was a 
date requested by the Minister. 
10 
 
The Chairperson recapped to the Committee that it 
had not been able to proceed on the 14t h of January as 
initially intended because of member training.  So we cannot 
blame the Minister for that. 
 
The date had therefore been moved to the 14 t h of 
February.  But the Minister had said he would be writing 
exams on the 14t h of February and that was when the 
meeting had been shifted to the 21s t of February at the 
suggestion of the Minister. 
 
So the reason why we have had this long gap from 
20 
November to the 21s t of February is because the Minister 
had specifically requested this date. 
 
That is what the records show, am I correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Carrying on from your report in your 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 86 of 212 
 
affidavit. 
 
In the second letter a different reason was given for 
the Minister’s unavailability on the 22 n d of February.  
 
Namely that he had to attend a select committee 
meeting and then a Cabinet Committee meeting.  And you 
then in a page or two that follows in your affidavit you 
summarise the frustration by the members of the Committee 
at the actions of the Minister and especially you say the 
flimsy and possibly untrue reasons for being unable to attend 
meetings even when the Minister himself had set the date for 
10 
the meeting. And so the Chairperson says well we are going 
to have to decide what to do and there are various 
discussions and if I can pick up a narrative at the foot of 
page 286?  Members began discussing the possibility of 
moving towards an inquiry without delay.  The Chairperson 
pointed 
out 
that 
the 
Minister 
had 
already 
made 
an 
appearance 
before 
the 
Committee. 
 
It 
was 
says 
the 
Chairperson the dissatisfaction with his answers to members 
questions, his evasive manner of responding and the fact 
that members had more questions that had led to the 
20 
attempts to get the Minister to appear a second time. 
 
And then you make the point in paragraph 5.8.79 the 
Committee finally decided that the way forward lay in setting 
aside efforts to question the Minister again and to commence 
with preparations for a formal inquiry. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 87 of 212 
 
 
The Committee resolved to meeting the following 
week to determine the scope content and technical details of 
the inquiry. 
 
So it seems from your affidavit that their patience has 
now been exhausted and there is going to be the required 
inquiry.  Is that a fair summary? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes that is how it seems but it – it seems 
to me that it is a premeditated intolerance at this point 
because now more than six months have passed so suddenly 
there is dissatisfaction.  So my interpretation is that there is 
10 
a reason for that happening now.  As you say the 
Commission had then started then in the meantime other 
things have happened as well. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now what you then deal with under the 
heading 25 April 2018 meeting – a Terms of Reference for 
that inquiry were in fact then determined and if I can take 
you to page 584 in the record?  Perhaps we should start at 
page 583. 
MR JOHNSTON:  I am there. 
ADV FREUND SC:  At 583 we see that what we are reading 
20 
is the PMG Report on the meeting of the Portfolio Committee 
on Mineral Resources and Energy on the 25t h April 2018 and 
at 584 we see in the second paragraph and this is under the 
heading Terms of Reference for Oversight Inquiry. 
 
The PMG Report states the following: 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 88 of 212 
 
“The Committee agreed that state capture 
allegations were serious and resolved to 
institute an inquiry in line with the mandate 
of Parliament.” 
 
Now bear in mind that is the mandate given in June 
of 2017 and we are now in April of 2018. 
“The Terms of Reference were that there 
would be question and answer session to 
which – during which the Honourable Zwane 
and any other relevant persons would testify 
10 
before the Committee. The inquiry would 
focus inter alia on the role of Honourable 
Zwane and the DMR in facilitating the sale of 
Glencore assets, non-compliance with the 
PFMA resulting in fruitless and wasteful 
expenditure. Alleged breach by Honourable 
Zwane and of the Constitution – of the 
Constitution 
and 
the 
Executive 
Members 
Ethics Act as regarded conflict of interest. 
The handling of mining rehabilitation funds 
20 
by the DMR and the question of whether the 
dismissal of DMR officials were subject to 
external influence.” 
 
And then it talks in more detail about the logistical 
intended arrangements.  Is that correct? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 89 of 212 
 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now you then say in your affidavit at 
paragraph 5.8.21: 
“But OUTA was contacted in May 2018.” 
Perhaps if you just explain to the Chair what this is all 
about? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes Chair.  There was an interaction 
between myself and the Committee secretary Ms Ayanda 
Boss and she was interested to interact with us and I 
suspect although we did not reach the point of that 
10 
specificity but we were at the time involved in the Bank of 
Baroda case and I think we had laid charges against the 
former Minister as well and basically what Ms Boss was 
trying to arrange was for our legal team and the legal 
advisors of the Committee to meet to really help inform them 
about what Terms of Reference to adopt and really just to 
give them some information.   
 
And the arrangement that they had been seeking was 
to come to Johannesburg to actually meet with us physically 
there because it was they thinking that it would be much too 
20 
costly to invite all the potential witnesses to come to Cape 
Town because most of them were in Johannesburg so they 
figured it would be cheaper to actually go to Johannesburg 
themselves and meet with us there. 
 
So we started those engagements and we came very 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 90 of 212 
 
close to actually having that meeting but that never occurred 
and you will see why in a moment. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I am going to come back to that.  You 
just referred in passing to the Bank of Baroda issue.  That is 
not an issue that I have led you on but it is dealt with in your 
affidavit at paragraph – at page 270 to page 271 and you 
refer there to urgent litigation before the Pretoria High Court 
brought by OUTA and it had a bearing on the issues that we 
are now discussing, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now on the 25t h April 2018 the 
Committee has agreed the Terms of Reference for its inquiry 
and arrangements are now being put in place for your 
organisation and one presumes amongst others to furnish 
information of assistance to the Portfolio Committee in 
respect of the inquiry that it has now decided to carry on, 
would you agree? 
MR JOHNSTON:  Yes precisely. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But then what happens we see that the 
meeting on the 30t h May which you deal with from page 287 
20 
and follows.  I am going to just read into the record extracts 
from that.  Paragraph 5.8.83. 
“The Parliamentary” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Freund.  We have gone past one 
o’clock. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 91 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes indeed would this be the convenient 
time Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Let us take the lunch adjournment we 
will resume at ten past two.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am terribly sorry.  I lost track of time.  I 
thought we were still okay.  So that is why there has been 
a delay.  I am sorry about that.  Let us continue. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 
 
Thank 
you 
Chair. 
 
Chair...  
10 
Mr Johnston, we were at page 287 of Bundle 1.  We were 
about to deal with the meeting of the 30 t h of May 2018 from 
paragraph 5.8.82 onwards.  Could I ask you please to refer 
to the source document for this portion which is at page 
589 and following in Bundle 1.  Five, eight, nine.   
MR JOHNSTON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Are you with me Mr Johnston? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I am. 
ADV FREUND SC:   What we will see from the heading is 
that this is the PMG report on a meeting of the Portfolio 
20 
Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy dated the 
30 t h of May 2018 on issues pertaining to Optimum Coal 
Mine, Shiva Uranium Mine, Lilly Mine progress report on 
the State Capture Inquiry Programme.   
 
And if I could then take you to page 593 the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 92 of 212 
 
portion of these minutes which refer to the Inquiry into 
State Capture at the Department of Mineral Resources.  
Bundle 1, page 593.  Are you with me? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, may I just check that you have 
had an opportunity to find the reference? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said 593? 
ADV FREUND SC:   593.  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I am at 593.  Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now you will see 
10 
that under that heading the introductory portion is a report 
back from Ms Fatima Ibrahim, the Parliamentary Legal 
Advisor who has recorded the same that: 
“At 
the 
last 
meeting 
the 
department 
had 
indicated that they had set up preliminary 
meetings with potential witnesses to try and 
gather more evidence.   
Some were in response to submissions and 
other involved persons with the support staff 
had identified.   
20 
The support staff had been due to travel over 
the weekend to conduct those interviews but 
late on Thursday afternoon they had been 
informed that their travels were not approved. 
As a result, the trip had not taken place and 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 93 of 212 
 
they had not been able to meet with the 
relevant witnesses.” 
 
And it continues and I quote: 
“It appeared that this may had been due to 
budgetary issues which led to two problems.   
The first was that a budget was needed to 
conduct the inquiry. 
The department was not based in Cape Town 
and the majority of the relevant people were 
not based in Cape Town either. 
10 
Travel was therefore by no means a luxury but 
rather something that was necessary because 
it would not make sense to ask witnesses to 
come to Cape Town as opposed to three 
people 
from 
the 
support 
staff 
going 
to 
Johannesburg.” 
 
This is what you were referring to a little earlier, is 
it not Mr Johnston? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is right. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then Ms Ibrahim continues: 
20 
“The second issue was in the absence of those 
meetings. 
The support staff had been thrown off their 
work schedule as they were dependent on 
these meetings to assist them to close the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 94 of 212 
 
gaps that they had identified in their research 
and to start preparing their questions. 
She 
had 
prepared 
questions 
for 
certain 
witnesses 
but 
needed 
input 
from 
those 
potential witnesses.” 
 
And she continues.  And then the minutes record in 
the second paragraph at page 594 the following under the 
heading Discussion: 
“The chairperson said that he had met with the 
house 
chairperson, 
that 
would 
have 
been 
10 
Mr Frolick, and in the discussion it had been 
indicated that no money was allocated for 
issues of oversight. 
The other issue was that with the schedule 
they had that no arrangements had been made 
to have a member remaining behind to do this 
unless there was a very strong motivation 
beyond legislation. 
Thirdly was the issue of a cost exercise where 
the starting point would have been to call the 
20 
new Executive and establish whether work was 
being done on the basis of what it had been 
presented to it.” 
 
And so it goes.  So basically, what is being reports 
is that nothing can happen because no money has been 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 95 of 212 
 
allocated to oversight.  Is that your understanding? 
MR 
JOHNSTON: 
 
 
Yes, 
it 
is. 
 And 
that 
was 
not 
communicated directly to us.  That is something that we 
only came to understand afterwards.  But I would just like 
to digress here because this is something that falls quite 
squarely in our mandate as an organisation. 
 
We analyse the financials of Parliament and I 
would like to highlight that this institution gets about 
R 2 billion of taxpayers’ money per annum and the vast 
majority of that money goes to the facilities and travel 
10 
expenses of MP’s.  So the suggestion that there is no 
money for oversight is quite farfetched.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Johnston.  You say the 
bulk of that money, if I understood you correctly, goes to 
travelling by MP’s and what else? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Chairperson, it is a range of things and 
we try to really dissect exactly what it is used for but it is 
not so clear but we have come to understand or we were 
trying to understand the funding of constituency officers 
because the Joint Standing Committee on the Financial 
20 
Management of Parliament has issued several reports 
saying that even though money is being consistently 
allocated to those officers, there is no clarity on whether 
they operate.   
 
And in some instances, there is no clarity on 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 96 of 212 
 
whether they even exist but political parties are in control 
of those budgets.  So we try to get more information of 
exactly where the bulk of this money goes.  It is not 
immediately clear and now we are waiting for political 
parties to tell us exactly what they do with that money.   
ADV FREUND SC:   But I think you did ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Freund.  Is your point 
Mr Johnston that you are not – you have not found 
anything to suggest that there was money that had been 
allocated for oversight but was not used.  But your point is 
10 
that:  Yes, it was not allocated for oversight but they could 
have taken money from somewhere, from some items and 
allocated part of it to oversight.  Is that your point? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, Chairperson the latter is my point 
exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR JOHNSTON:   And in the budget breakdowns, as we 
see it, there is no dedicated chunk of money that goes to 
oversight but there is substantial chunks of money that is 
dedicated to personal luxuries and facilities of members of 
20 
Parliament.  And we believe that that is the sort of money 
that can very easily be reprioritised for this sort of expense 
but that was not the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The minute 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 97 of 212 
 
continues quoting Mr Lorimer and opposition MP who said 
that: 
“This was unacceptable because why would 
Parliament want an inquiry - and bear in mind 
that this was the mandate that they had been 
given - and not allocate a budget?  The 
committee needed to write to Parliament and 
request that a sufficient budget be allocated.” 
 
And that is really where the matter stood.  Am I 
correct? 
10 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is exactly right.  And I would 
like to point out one more thing and that is that the support 
staff here and even senior legal advisors indicated that 
they are dependent on external sources of information.   
 
And I have had some direct contact with many staff 
members like this and they have indicated that when it 
comes to the point where they are on the verge of getting 
very 
useful 
and 
important 
information 
from 
external 
sources that are obviously A-political, that they would be 
prevented from doing so because that would obviously 
20 
expose issues that politicians might not want to have 
exposed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And...  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Can I just ask this question 
Mr Johnston?  For members of Parliament to perform 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 98 of 212 
 
effective oversight, they need to have relevant information 
to be able to ask pertinent questions to the Executive.  And 
to do that they might need persons who could do some kind 
of investigation prior to them having a meeting with a 
Minister or a DG or a board or an SOE.   
 
For example, if there are allegations that are in the 
media that fall within – that relate to a department or an 
SOE which accounts to that committee, I can imagine that 
if a committee immediately said that we want to see the 
Minister before there was some homework that had been 
10 
done, they might not really be able to ask proper questions 
or challenge whatever the Minister tells them.   
 
It may be that they need people, I guess some of 
them might be lawyers, some of them maybe might be 
accountants, I am not sure, who could go and interview 
witnesses and collect affidavits or statements or collect 
whatever information and make sense of the information in 
a document that is given to the members so that they can 
then ask proper questions.   
 
Now I do not know – I suspect that researchers do 
20 
not 
do 
that 
because 
I 
understand 
they 
have 
got 
researchers 
even 
though 
maybe 
they 
might 
not 
be 
adequate.   
 
But people who could go to Eskom, Transnet where 
there are issues that the Portfolio Committee is interested 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 99 of 212 
 
in, interview people and the people at Eskom would be 
obliged to cooperate or people at Transnet will be obliged 
to 
cooperate 
if 
those 
people 
who 
are 
employed 
by 
Parliament to all the information.   
 
Are there people like that that are available to 
various committees or is it only the researchers? 
MR JOHNSTON:   So there are Content Advisors.  I think 
each committee has a Content Advisor.  But in Parliament 
there are – there is a small group of Legal Advisors and I 
think the number is 11 and the number of committees they 
10 
serve is 40.  So obviously they are disadvantaged in terms 
of the workload.   
 
But an important point that I want to make, as I go 
towards the end Chairperson is.  It need not be something 
that is financed by taxpayers.  There are many civil society 
organisations like us who are sources of external capacity 
and information that would love to provide this sort of 
assistance to these committees.   
 
And we made our availability and willingness to do 
exactly 
that 
very 
clear 
when 
we 
engaged 
with 
the 
20 
Committee Secretary.  And we were on the verge of having 
an entire day in meeting to do exactly that but when the – 
one can presume the chairperson and members of the 
committee came to understand that this is what is going to 
happen, they made a decision that resources cannot be 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 100 of 212 
 
allocated to that.   
 
So another point I think and I do appreciate in this 
Commission is that members of Parliament seems to have 
complete discretion and they can completely arbitrarily 
decide on what money should be spend.   
 
And when it comes to their salaries, which are 
exorbitant in my opinion, there is never a question of 
whether there is enough money.  There is always enough 
money of that.  But when it comes to oversight there is not 
necessarily enough resources.  And I think that is just 
10 
illogical Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now we have been 
dealing with the meeting on the 30 t h of May 2018.  The 
next date that you refer to which is at page 289 is the 
12 t h of September 2018 which is quite some months down 
the line.  And you refer to the meeting on that date of the 
Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources.   
 
You say that was the last time they met with the 
focus on the allegations of state capture.  And you refer to 
20 
Annexure 5.5.  And then all the way through to page 297 
you deal in some detail with what happened at that last 
meeting.   
 
And I would just like for present purposes to jump 
to the end, which is at page 297, paragraph 5.8.101.  And 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 101 of 212 
 
there, at the end of that paragraph, you say the following 
and this is reflected in the source documents as you have 
furnished.   
“The chairperson said that members were 
proposing that the committee write a letter, 
requesting a decision from the house chair, 
that is to say Mr Frolick, on the budget to be 
given while still continuing to seek clarity on 
the status of the four areas that it had 
requested...” 
10 
 
And you deal with that earlier in your affidavit.   
“The members agreed and the meeting was 
adjourned..” 
 
And then you continue in the next paragraph: 
“The inquiry was never carried out.” 
 
So is that really the end of the story? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, it is.  We tried to get an explanation 
from the committee staff who we had engaged with before 
as to why this was no longer going ahead but they just did 
not answer us.  And I presume that it is because it was not 
20 
their decision and they were probably been told not to 
relay any explanation because no explanation could be 
justifiable.  But that was the end of it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So let us just go back and just look at 
some of the highlights of that meeting which we know now 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 102 of 212 
 
it ended.  Let us go back to page 289, paragraph 5.8.86.  
What we see in the second half of that paragraph is that 
the Parliamentary Legal Advisor, Ms Ibrahim, had been 
instructed to prepare a draft budget in consultation with 
the Committee Secretary.  They had done that.   
 
But up to this point in time, 4 September 2018, 
there 
had 
been 
no 
indication 
whether 
it 
had 
been 
approved.  So no further work had been done.   
 
However, there had been in the previous three 
months some developments.  And so they looked in the 
10 
course of this meeting at some of those developments.  
One of those is that the Minister had told the committee – 
this is now a new Minister I take it – had told the 
committee that the department had taken certain steps to 
address corruption.   
 
And there was a reference at the top of page 290 
of your affidavit.  It refers to the Zondo Commission that 
started looking into allegation into state capture which she, 
which is to say I think the legal advisor, believed would be 
related to the former Minister Mosebenzi Zwane and the 
20 
committee 
enjoyed 
benefit 
of 
sufficient 
resources, 
technical expertise and investigative capacity.   
 
And so the suggesting was then made at the end of 
that sub-paragraph that I have just been reading from that 
the committee may wish to review the terms of reference 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 103 of 212 
 
and to narrow the issues down. 
 
And so there was then a discussion in the course 
of this meeting of a more limited inquiry.  And what I think 
you have told us is that effectively even that did not 
happen. 
MR JOHNSTON:   No, id did not.  We had sight of those 
revised terms of reference and they were quite specific.  
So I believe it would not have taken a lot of resources to 
carry out that exercise but that is the way that it was 
presented. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   So let us just sum up where we got to.  
Mr Frolick has signed a set of letters in June of 2017 to the 
chair of this committee, amongst others, saying it is an 
urgent necessity to investigate and report back into 
allegations relating to alleged state capture. 
 
Here we are a year later.  The committee is 
frustrated by the non-cooperation of the Minister primarily 
accountable, wishes to proceed with an inquiry.  Makes 
that very clear.  So the documents indicate.  And no inquiry 
takes place.  Is that the summary in a nutshell? 
20 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is it.  And in the meantime, I 
think it was Dr Khoza who referred to the recycling failure.  
What had happened was that Mr Zwane was going to be 
replaced with Mr Mantashe as the Minister and suddenly 
there was no more interest to speak with Mr Zwane simply 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 104 of 212 
 
because he was no longer in that position.  And this is 
something that happens very frequently.   
 
We have seen it in state owned entities, in 
municipalities, 
in 
provincial 
government 
and 
in 
the 
departments.  It happens all the time that when someone 
becomes tarnished with allegations that have not been 
resolved they simply shift that person to a different 
position in the hope that that issue would be forgotten.  
That is basically how it ended.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And where did Mr Zwane end up?  
10 
MR JOHNSTON:   Excuse me? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Where did Mr Zwane go? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Immediately afterwards I am not sure.  
But I know eventually he was appointed as the Chairperson 
of the Portfolio Committee of Transport which is where he 
is today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he was not appointed to 
President Ramaphosa’s Cabinet at the beginning of 2018, I 
suspect.  Is that your recollection as well? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, Chairperson.  The majority of 
20 
tarnished Ministers ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR JOHNSTON:   ...that I deal with in my affidavit as well 
were sent to Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 105 of 212 
 
MR JOHNSTON:   But the point that I wanted to get to is 
that Parliament has become kind of like a cooling off zone 
for tarnished politicians.  So even though they did not 
feature in government, they were still at the very top of the 
political party list.   
 
And 
they 
ended 
up 
as 
the 
chairpersons 
of 
committees in Parliament and I think their salary today is 
R 1.4 million per annum and that is paid for by taxpayers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you deal at the top of page 200...  
10 
I am sorry Chair.  Can I presume? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  You deal at top of 
page 298 with an issue you have already referred to, the 
budget of Parliament.  And you say that Parliament receive 
no less than R 2 billion per annum from the fiscus to 
finance its operations.  Is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And it is matter...  Well, let me not put 
that.  Now I would like to move and deal briefly with certain 
20 
other streams of inquiry.  You deal with the PRASA issue 
on paragraph 5.8.1 and 4 which is at page 300 of Bundle 1.   
 
And you deal in particular with a meeting on the 
24 t h of November 2017 and it is a meeting that we have 
touched on briefly in the evidence of Mr De Freitas 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 106 of 212 
 
yesterday but you were also present at this meeting.  Is 
that correct?   
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I was. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And at this meeting, there was an 
engagement with the so-called Interim Board of PRASA, a 
legal animal(?) [00:23:39].  [Speaker not clear.]  The 
definition which I have some difficulty in understanding.  
And you then deal at page 302 and following with what 
happened in this meeting.  You say in paragraph 5.8.118: 
“Committee members explained that they have 
10 
been waiting for answers for over a year which 
explained their level of anxiety.” 
 
And that is in the context of all the various 
preceding paragraphs in your affidavit.  And then you really 
come to your conclusion in paragraph 5.8.119.  Perhaps 
you should just explain in your own words what the point is 
that you are trying to convey in this sub-paragraph. 
MR JOHNSTON:   So would just like to place this in 
context. 
 The 
fact 
that 
MP’s 
have 
been 
waiting 
is 
something that members of Parliament tend to do but both 
20 
in terms of the Constitution and in the Rules of Parliament, 
they have the power to require someone, anyone, to 
appear before them at any time.  So they obviously choice 
to wait.   
 
But the point I made in 5.8.119 is that the actual 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 107 of 212 
 
content of the investigation has been done by Werksmans 
Attorneys were not discussed at all.   
 
The only point of discussion, and it was quite clear 
that it was a decision made beforehand, that this would be 
the focus of the discussion by the ruling party, was the fact 
that they had contracted a law firm to do this investigation 
at some extent as supposed to getting some organ of state 
to do it for them instead.   
 
Chairperson, I would like to raise an issue here  I 
think – it is now common knowledge but at this point only 
10 
people on the inside of what was happening would know, 
that many law enforcement agencies and offices such as 
the Office of the Chief Procurement Officer which could do 
these kinds of investigations were also purposely hollowed 
out and incapacitated as part of the State Capture Project.   
 
And in my view that is why this is the very strong 
preference of the majority of members in the committee is 
that Werksmans Attorneys should not do this investigation.  
And regardless of what they find that they should not be 
paid but that they should rather be handed over to an 
20 
organ of state. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And apropos of the substance of what 
Werksmans discovered and were reporting on.  The 
majority party MP show any interest al in inquiring into 
what substance was and pursuing the issues that had been 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 108 of 212 
 
raised by them? 
MR JOHNSTON:   No, that was not my experience.  Until 
this day, even though I was in that meeting and others, I 
had no idea what the investigation actually entailed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I was going to take you to paragraph 
5.8.121 but really I think you have already made that point.  
You have already also referred and did so at an earlier 
stage in your evidence and so I took you to the part of your 
affidavit that dealt with Water and Sanitation.  The 
intended inquiry did not happen, so we will not repeat 
10 
ourselves there.   
 
But I would like to take you now to the question of 
communications and Ms Faith Muthambi at paragraph 
5.9.14.  It starts at the bottom of page 309 but immediately 
moves on to the next page.   
MR JOHNSTON:   I am there. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now there was a meeting on the 
27 t h of March 2018 
of 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Communications.  This is not a committee to which we had 
previously referred.  And this meeting, apparently, so it is 
20 
said, was requested by your organisation.  Is that correct?   
MR JOHNSTON:   I am not sure that we requested it but 
we very much wanted it to happen.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you refer to Annexure 10.1 and 
Annexure 10.1(sic), page 672.  And once again, you have 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 109 of 212 
 
detailed PMG minutes of this meeting.   
 
Now the minute show and you refer in your 
affidavit to the chairperson of that committee providing an 
introduction as to what is called alters allegation which 
was that Ms Muthambi had sent confidential Cabinet 
decisions and related information to the Gupta family.   
 
Is that a fair summary of the sting of what you 
were alleging and what you wanted to have investigated 
and dealt with? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes.  Although I was not a party on that 
10 
but I think that was the main point. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Are you alluding to the fact that there 
was another OUTA person involved with this particular 
issue? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  I understand.  And when we 
look at paragraph 5.9.16, we see that a member of the 
ruling party, one Mr M Kalako was suggesting that the 
letter from the Deputy Speaker suggesting this deliberation 
was vague.   
20 
 
So it seems as if the Deputy Speaker had asked 
that there should be an oversight by this committee on this 
issue.  But Mr Kalako said it was clear that your 
organisation that laid charges against ...[indistinct – word 
cut off] He said Ms Muthambi had lied to the ad hoc 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 110 of 212 
 
meeting dealing with the SABC and he did not understand 
why her issue was being circulated and he said that the 
report of the ad hoc committee had made recommendations 
on actions that had to be taken, it was conclusive in his 
view. 
 
I think, as I recall, that was a recommendation that 
the President give consideration to maybe relieving her of 
her duties in that particular portfolio.  Is my memory 
correct in that regard? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then he says, he noted that: 
“OUTA has provided evidence and the decision was 
simple that Ms F Muthambi should be charged and 
sent to prison.  There was no need for an inquiry to 
investigate, it would be a waste of parliamentary 
resources.” 
And then the Chairperson says: 
“There was a clear by you on how Ms…” 
When I say you, your organisation. 
“…how Ms Muthambi had violated the confidentiality 
20 
of cabinet.  It fell under the ethics committee.” 
Now we dealt with that earlier, did we not?  That is a 
matter 
that 
your 
organisation 
referred 
to 
the 
ethics 
committee, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes that is and we had sent them to 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 111 of 212 
 
them about six months earlier. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And your evidence this morning was to 
this day you have had no response to that, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   No, we have had no responses. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So, in short, what came of this request 
that this committee should investigate and take – and 
exercise 
proper 
oversight 
over 
and 
require 
proper 
accountability by Ms Muthambi, what came of it? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Nothing has come of it and Chairperson, 
I would like to highlight this point because this is not only 
10 
non action resulting from our allegations, which we do not 
know whether the ethics committee has dealt with them or 
not, but it is also the ad hoc committee’s recommendations 
which I think occurred quite long ago as well.   
Those recommendations were made by a committee 
of parliament and nothing happened.  On the contrary, Ms 
Muthambi was then put in a Chairperson’s capacity in 
parliament subsequent to that. 
 
So what Dr Khoza said before I think is quite 
relevant here again and that is that, apparently, for the 
20 
kind of transgression that we have seen and that we have 
noted, that we have alleged, that we have put formal 
complaints together on, that people are rather rewarded for 
this kind of behaviour as opposed to being punished for it 
and I think that really speaks to the discretion afforded to 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 112 of 212 
 
members 
of 
parliament 
and 
political 
parties 
more 
specifically.  It is obvious that the ruling party, of which 
she is a part, shows not to institute any punishment or any 
consequences against her.  On the contrary, she enjoys a 
very high public office to this day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is like people can just engage in 
wrongdoing and not only nothing happens, not only that 
there are no consequences, adverse consequences, but 
they continue or get given higher positions and nothing 
happens.  It is like there is complete impunity. 
10 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, Chairperson, that is exactly right 
and it goes beyond the recommendations and the sub and 
the 
submissions 
we 
have 
made 
as 
a 
civil 
society 
organisation but the recommendations made by internal 
parliamentary 
staff, 
who 
I 
believe 
really 
carry 
the 
institutional memory of parliament, these are ignored as 
well and those people are disempowered as well.   
Some of those people have committed suicide and 
many of those people have resigned from their positions in 
parliament saying that they are frequently manipulated and 
20 
abused by senior members of parliament.   
So 
these 
individuals 
are 
not 
only 
free 
from 
consequences, but they are also free to abuse the staff of 
parliament, people who I believe are really capable and 
willing to do their work in the public interest but they are 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 113 of 212 
 
not allowed to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This culture of impunity that you are 
talking about, is it a result of a situation where in order 
for action to be taken it depends on the majority in the 
committees or does it – are there other factors?  In other 
words if, for example, the majority party does not want its 
members to be disciplined then obviously no matter what 
minority parties say, then there would be nothing that 
happens or are there some mechanisms within parliament 
that do not depend on their level of representation of the 
10 
political parties which are given the power to make 
decisions or implement …[intervenes] 
MR JOHNSTON:   Chairperson, it is the former.  There is 
no accountability mechanism that I am aware of that is 
independent of a majority’s consensus.  For example, I 
also indicated this and I will probably get to it later on, but 
in the challenges that I see in the code of conduct that is 
really championed by the ethics committee in parliament, 
when the registrar makes a finding, and he could have a 
finding really based on concrete evidence and he could 
20 
present that evidence.  Firstly, it is confidential so the 
public would not know but then he could present that report 
to the ethics committee and they can, according to the 
same code of conduct, they can simply choose not to 
anything with her, they can simply say that well, Mr 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 114 of 212 
 
Registrar, we do not like what you are saying, so please 
stop it, close the report down and let us move on and that 
is what I suspect is happening and there is no oversight of 
that. 
And one of the key recommendation I would like to 
make and my organisation has consistently tried to make is 
that there must be public oversight and for that to 
happened there needs to be transparency, the ethics 
committee’s deliberations are confidential, always, so we 
have no idea what goes on there and I think a simple 
10 
systemic 
intervention 
would 
be 
to 
empower 
both 
parliamentary 
staff 
in 
parliament 
and 
civil 
society 
organisations or representatives of the public to really 
have some oversight of what parliament does itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Presumably on the ethics committee 
issue that you are contending for is that that should not be 
in secret, that there should be transparency as to the 
proceedings and the outcomes of proceedings before the 
ethics committee, is that correct? 
20 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct.  I mean, in the 
beginning I tried to appreciate what reasons there might be 
for that and one can understand that some investigations 
required confidentiality and that an investigation could be 
jeopardised 
if 
all 
its 
details 
were 
known, 
that 
is 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 115 of 212 
 
understandable but after about four years of complete non-
response from this committee, complete non action, which 
they are free to do, I think my perspective has changed 
and I think that that committee’s deliberations should be 
transparent and open to the public. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am concerned about what you say 
happens or does not happen in the ethics committee but at 
the same time I am keeping an eye on not going beyond 
what is the terms of reference of the Commission and in 
order to – I mean, we are looking at the parliamentary 
10 
oversight on the basis that if the Commission finds that 
levels of corruption that we have reached and that there 
was 
state 
capture, 
one 
would 
want 
to 
say 
what 
recommendations should the Commission make to try to 
make sure that state capture does not happen again or to 
make sure that the levels of corruption are brought down 
and that is when then says okay, let us look at what 
structures have a role to play, then you go to the question 
of parliamentary oversight but one must just be careful.   
So I want to ask you because you may be able to 
20 
say well, you would think that how the ethics committee of 
parliament deals with complaints against members of 
parliament, this is how it would come in, into the issue of 
parliamentary oversight or – so that then one can see okay, 
it falls within because if it falls without maybe one would 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 116 of 212 
 
just be unhappy but not be able to do anything about it.  
Are you able to say anything? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, Chairperson, I understand that 
there is a limit to this inquiry’s scope and various 
Constitutional Court judgments have also made the point 
very clear that it is not the place any judge to say how 
parliament should do its work and I think that is reflected 
in the constitution as well.   But what I think someone in 
your capacity has the position to say, is whether or not 
those 
mechanisms 
that 
are 
there 
are 
being 
used 
10 
appropriately and whether those mechanisms that are there 
actually give expression and proper manifestation of what 
the constitution demands and in my view, it does not.  But 
that is my view, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  You may continue, Mr 
Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair.  Mr Johnston, is 
there any reason why you would think that the ethics 
complaints 
that 
you 
have 
been 
referring, 
that 
were 
unresolved, have any relationship to the question of the 
20 
proper oversight by parliament in respect of alleged state 
capture or corruption?  Is there a connection or not a 
connection and if there is a connection why would you 
think there is a connection? 
MR JOHNSTON:   I would think there is definitely a 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 117 of 212 
 
connection.  The joint committee on ethics and members’ 
interests are almost solely responsible the conduct, ethical 
conduct of members of parliament and if there are 
instances whether either someone external or someone 
internal is saying that members of parliament are not 
carrying out their oversight and, as a result, state capture 
is left unabated. 
 
It that is not followed up, if nothing is done about 
that, then the ultimate consequence is that state capture 
continues and I have noticed that many of the witnesses 
10 
who come here have said that in their view it is continuing 
at this moment and I believe the ethics committee’s non 
action and their confidentiality are very easy masks behind 
which our leaders can hide and I think it is a key reason 
why state capture is continuing.  
 
But it is more general issue, I think the ethics 
committee is really where the buck stops and they should 
have brought in consequences and they still should for the 
fact that other members of parliament and committee 
chairperson in particular are not doing their work or they 
20 
did not do their work in the past and, as a result, there was 
looting in the public sector and taxpayers’ money was lost. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now we take you back to a paragraph 
that we have already touched on earlier at page 298 and it 
is paragraph 5.8.104. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 118 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, what paragraph? 
ADV FREUND SC:   5.8.104. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Do you have that, Mr Johnston? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I do. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The two specific complaints that you 
have alluded to, lodged by your organisation to the ethics 
committee related on the one hand to the Minister of 
Communications, Faith Muthambi, and on the other hand – 
she was the former minister and also, on the other hand, 
10 
the former Minister of Mineral Resources, Mosebenzi 
Zwane.  What was the nub of the allegation against Faith 
Muthambi? 
MR JOHNSTON:   I would prefer to give that to the 
Commission in writing, if that is alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, we can go to annexure 5.6, if 
you prefer which is at page 606 and it runs through to page 
627, it is an affidavit presented by Stefanie Fick of OUTA 
and it refers to what Mr Zwane is accused of doing and, in 
short, it seems to me on a quick reading, that it is at the 
20 
very heart of alleged state capture or corrupt activities.  
Do you agree? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, I agree. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is in respect of Mr Zwane.  In 
respect of …[intervenes] 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 119 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was in respect of Ms Muthambi, is 
it, Stefanie Fick or both – both Ms Muthambi and Mr 
Zwane? 
MR JOHNSTON:   No, on a quick reading, Chair, of this 
particular affidavit and this particular annexure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It seems to refer to Mr Zwane only but 
I believe that we have referred elsewhere in your evidence 
today, Mr Johnston, to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have seen one that relates to Ms 
10 
Muthambi, I am not sure where it is but I have seen it and 
I have read it and it is very useful affidavit by the same 
deponent, I think Ms Fick. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I do not propose, Chair, to 
belabour the point, the material is before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, but I think the point you seek 
to highlight or to raise with Mr Johnston is …[intervenes] 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, we …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is you think the proposition that if the 
complaint that is referred to or one, it is that to the extent 
20 
that the ethics committee’s jurisdiction is wide enough to 
include conduct that relates to state capture if members of 
the executive or members of parliament are alleged to 
have been engaged in acts of state capture, corruption 
and so on, then that – then it would be important to look 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 120 of 212 
 
at what the ethics committee does when those issues – 
those complaints are referred to it because if it does 
nothing, it does not deter the members of parliament 
concerned from continuing because they know there will 
not be any consequences. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Indeed, Chair, that is the argument. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you would recall, Chair, that we 
referred only a few minutes ago to the material at page 
310 
and 
following 
of 
this 
bundle 
where 
the 
communications 
committee 
thought 
that 
OUTA 
has 
10 
presented such and open and shut case that they should 
not – it should go to the ethics committee, so they 
certainly had the view, rightly or wrongly, that it was a 
matter with ethics committee’s mandate. 
Bear in mind, Chair, that these ministers were at the 
time of the alleged misconduct members of parliament and 
are to this day 
chairs of portfolio committees and 
members of parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I have just found Ms Fick’s 
affidavit that relates to I think Ms Muthambi, it starts at 
20 
page 682, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair.  It is a very 
comprehensive affidavit.  May I ask Mr Johnston, is Ms 
Fick still with OUTA? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, Chairperson, she is.  
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 121 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, because I think that the 
Commission may wish her to – I may wish her to come and 
testify based on her affidavit, so that is why I wanted to 
find out whether she is still there.  Her affidavit is very 
comprehensive, I found it would be quite useful.   But that 
is fine, the relevant – somebody in the Commission will be 
in touch with her. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now I just want to 
10 
go back to another issue in which you engaged the Chair 
a few minutes ago when we were talking about the 
question of impunity and there was some discussion about 
to what extent is this the responsibility of parliament and 
to what extent might the responsibility lie elsewhere.  Now 
I want to refer you to the evidence of several former 
witnesses.  One that comes to mind is Ms Khoza, Dr 
Khoza.   
 
She says if you look at the rules, the rules provide 
that the chairs of each portfolio committee are determined 
20 
by a vote of the members of the committee, in other words 
the MPs have the power to determine who would become 
the chair of a commission but she also said, if I remember 
correctly, and the record will how that I am right or wrong, 
she also said that in reality the decision is made by the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 122 of 212 
 
ANC’s deployment committee, that the MPs who come to 
these committee meetings, portfolio committees, when 
they are going to elect chair, come with instructions from 
the portfolio committee or some other structure of the 
African National Congress as a party as to who is to 
appointed so that I want to put to you for your comment 
that the ultimate accountability for the impunity, if it is 
impunity, of people who have been accused and against 
whom there is apparently a prima facie case of serious 
misconduct, when they are put back as chairs of portfolio 
10 
committees, the accountability must lie with the political 
party.  What is your view on that? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is exactly right and it does not 
come as a surprise at all.  As I said before, it is very clear 
very often that deliberations on record and the formal 
meetings that someone like myself, who is not part of a 
political party, are able to attend but the proceedings 
are not real and what I mean by that is that decisions 
are taken beforehand and then they are acted out as if 
they were being taken in that meeting and the selection 
20 
of a Chairperson, I have no doubt that that is exactly the 
case, that they would be chosen beforehand.   
And yes, as I said, it is not so much mysterious 
anymore, that I think many members of the ANC and 
perhaps they are not the only political party that 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 123 of 212 
 
operates this wa y, but your alignment must be first and 
foremost with that constitution of that political party, not 
with the constitution of the country and if those two are 
in 
conflict 
then 
you 
must 
invariably 
stick 
to 
the 
constitution 
under 
demands 
and 
directives 
of 
the 
political party not the constitution.   
So yes, I would say the accountability and the 
responsibility lies very much with a political party. 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I want to move on and deal with a 
new issue which is the portfolio committee on Home Affairs 
10 
and I could possibly deal with it only very briefly.  You will 
recall that in June of 2017 it was a letter from Mr Frolick to 
the chair of that committee requesting an investigation 
within that committee’s remit of the allegations of state 
capture and corruption and in particular, it seems, the 
concern was about the speedy naturalisation in unusual 
circumstances of members of the Gupta family and related 
persons.  Have I summarised that fairly? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now what you deal with at page 313 
20 
and 314 and 315 are two meetings that took place.  The 
first on the 12 September 2018 which is very much more 
than a year after June of 2017 and the second on the 12 
March 2019, it is obviously considerably later and the net 
result we find, it seems, at paragraph 5.10.5 and this is 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 124 of 212 
 
only in March of 2019 that this point is reached.  There you 
say: 
“The inquiry revolved around the allegedly improper 
relationship between the former Minister of Home 
Affairs, Malusi Gigaba, and the Gupta family.  Their 
fast-tracked 
naturalisation 
served 
to 
lay 
a 
foundation for their intentions to enter into lucrative 
business 
relations 
with 
the 
South 
African 
government.” 
And then make the same point, which you make over and 
10 
over again: 
“Mr Gigaba has not suffered any consequences as a 
result 
of 
the 
improper 
waiver 
of 
certain 
requirements.” 
Which I think is what the committee ultimately found had 
taken place, is that correct? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, that is correct and I would just like 
to qualify that very briefly.  His discretion was something 
that 
was 
legally 
permissible 
and 
I 
think 
the 
main 
recommendation that came as a result of this inquiry was 
20 
to actually change that provision in the Act that allows for 
ministerial discretion on early naturalisation and not only – 
once 
again, 
not 
only 
Mr 
Gigaba 
not 
faced 
any 
consequences but in my understanding he has been 
deployed to Luthuli House as the head of policy.  The same 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 125 of 212 
 
with former Minister Mokonyane. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now that completes the evidence I 
propose to lead from you on what we might call issues of 
fact but you do also deal at the conclusion of your affidavit 
in part 6, it starts at page 315 with what you call 
parliamentary oversight challenges and you then go on to 
deal with recommendations.   
Now, Mr Johnston, you will appreciate that we are 
under quite considerable time pressure so I would like you, 
if you could just to speak very briefly to one of your main 
10 
points and it seems to me that one of your main points is 
this, 
that 
the 
rules 
empower 
oversight 
by 
portfolio 
committees but they confer enormous discretion on the 
committees and your concern is that whilst they are 
empowered, the rules, as it were, impose no obligations 
and I think the argument you advance is that the breadth of 
the discretion and the absence of obligation is something 
you think needs to be considered.  Is that a fair synopsis 
of your first core point? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes, it very much is and I would just like 
20 
to say that one of the core problems that I see in that is 
that the empowerment of members of parliament and the 
empowerment of the public is affectively juxtaposed and 
obviously that is the opposite of what the constitution 
really demands, which is that parliament is supposed to be 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 126 of 212 
 
the institution through which the public can find its 
expression in political discourse and that just is not the 
case. 
 
I would build up to this but one of my main 
recommendations is to really better emphasise Section 
59(1) of the constitution which says that the National 
Assembly 
must 
facilitate 
public 
involvement 
in 
the 
legislative 
and 
other 
processes 
obviously 
and 
its 
committees and we are very much of the opinion that they 
do not do that adequately and that that is one of the main 
10 
reasons why they have been able to operate with such 
impunity. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If I can just interrupt you there, Mr 
Johnston, it seems to me that you are merging two 
different 
points. 
 
The 
point 
you 
have 
now 
been 
emphasising is a point that you emphasise in your affidavit, 
it is a point about the desirability of permitting public 
participation and civil society organisation participation in 
the processes during which oversight takes place.  Is that 
one of your core views? 
20 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes it is. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Okay.  But I was actually trying to deal 
with a slightly different point which is the first point that 
you made and it strikes me as a separate point.  If I can 
take you back to paragraph 6.2 of your affidavit, it is at 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 127 of 212 
 
page 315, there you cite the fundamental constitutional 
provision of relevance, Section 55(2) which says that: 
“The 
National 
Assembly 
must 
provide 
for 
mechanisms to ensure…” 
And then you underline the words “to ensure” 
“…that 
all executives’ 
organs 
of 
state 
in 
the 
national sphere of government are accountable to 
it.” 
And you underline the word “accountable” and I had the 
impression, on a reading of your affidavit, that a point you 
10 
were trying to emphasise, leaving aside civil society 
participation, is that whether it is the rules or the culture, 
the fact of the matter is, there is enormous discretion as to 
whether in fact exercise proper oversight and that is one of 
your many complaints.  Am I correctly paraphrasing and 
summarising one of your points? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Yes and I also qualify that be referring 
to the separation of powers which I think is something that 
comes to the fore very frequently in the mobilisation of the 
sub judice rule, for example, where the suggestion is that 
20 
if courts or the Public Protector or anyone else, any other 
authority beyond the realm of parliament is dealing with a 
particular issue that either cannot or should not deal with 
that same issue and I disagree with that and even though 
Section 
52(2) 
of 
the 
constitution 
says 
that 
National 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 128 of 212 
 
Assembly must provide for mechanisms, it does not really 
make it explicit that they must use them and I think that is 
the nub of the problem, is that that is precisely the 
interpretation that members of the ruling party have taken 
is that yes, we must provide for those rules and in my view 
those rules are there, there are mechanisms for oversight 
but they simply are not used. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Johnston, I do not propose to ask 
you any further questions save for this.  I am well aware 
that you have put a lot of time and effort into drafting this 
10 
affidavit and I am aware that there is a great deal that you 
deal with in this affidavit that we have not dealt with 
explicitly in this hearing.  Is there any one or two points 
that you feel that should have been emphasised and that 
you have not yet had an opportunity to emphasise? 
MR JOHNSTON:   Thank you, Mr Freund.  Most of the 
points I want to emphasis I have but the one that I made 
pen-ultimately on the inclusion of the public and the 
empowerment of the public and parliamentary staff I think 
is one that I should emphasise again and I also would like 
20 
to make it clear that both in terms of the finances of 
parliament and in terms of the laws that govern parliament, 
members 
of 
parliament 
are 
the 
only 
ones 
who 
are 
effectively empowered and in – I think it is – let me be very 
clear on that, in Section 58(1) of the constitution it say 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 129 of 212 
 
that: 
“Government 
members, 
deputy 
ministers 
and 
members of the National Assembly have freedom of 
speech in the assembly and its committees subject 
to its rules and orders but are not liable to civil or 
criminal 
proceedings, 
arrest, 
imprisonment 
or 
damages for anything that they said and produced 
before or submitted to the assembly or any of its 
committees or anything revealed as a result of 
anything that they have said and produced before or 
10 
submitted to the assembly or any of it committees” 
And I would like to just give my view on that.  I think that is 
a provision that has been exploited and I think that is also 
a reason why a minister would be called before a 
committee before any terms of reference have been put 
together simply because one can admit wrongdoing and 
explicitly one would be protected and I think that many 
people who are in parliament, chairpersons in particular, 
are people who would rather belong in prison but there is 
really nothing for the public to do about that and I believe 
20 
that is something that should change. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Mr Johnston, I have no 
further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Mr Johnston, for 
availing yourself to assist the Commission, we appreciate it 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 130 of 212 
 
very much, you are now excused. 
MR JOHNSTON:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, the next witness is Mr Frolick. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Who was logged in, I just want to 
check that he is presently accessible.  Yes, he seems to be 
on line.  So we can deal with evidence as soon as you are 
ready to deal with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I would like us to take ten minutes 
10 
adjournment and then start with him.  Let us take a ten 
minutes adjournment, it is twenty five past, so twenty five 
to.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair, the next witness will 
be Mr Cedric Frolick. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Perhaps before I ask Mr Frolick any I 
20 
want to draw your attention to the fact that Mr Frolick’s 
affidavit forms part of Exhibit ZZ1 from page 1 and 
following of Bundle 1, but you will recall Chair that there is 
a set of affidavits from representatives of the African 
National Congress of which this was just one.  I would 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 131 of 212 
 
propose, subject to your views that in due course I move to 
have admitted the entire exhibit even though not all of the 
deponents to affidavits will necessarily testify, they have 
submitted this and I will be moving, if you so approve, for 
the entire exhibit to be admitted as a single exhibit. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
But 
the 
other 
affidavits 
are 
not 
annexures to his affidavit are they? 
ADV FREUND SC:   No they are not, if I can take you to 
page 1 of Bundle 1 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I am in Bundle 1. 
10 
ADV FREUND:   So the cover page that I have as page 1  
shows that there are actually nine sub-exhibits you might 
call them, each one of which is a self-standing independent 
affidavit, so for example the second one is the affidavit of 
the Late Jackson Mthembu ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay sorry, I think we are ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   For example ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think we are not looking at the same 
page, but I have in front of me Bundle 1, but Bundle 1 – oh 
okay, no, now I see, yes page 1. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you will recall Chair, and I will 
deal with this through the witness, but you will recall that 
the Commission, through the 
Commission’s 
secretary, 
issued 
invitations 
to 
political 
parties 
to 
submit 
both 
evidence and representations and the African National 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 132 of 212 
 
Congress responded to that by in due course presenting 
really as a package the affidavits that we see in ZZ1, they 
are nine separate individual’s affidavits of whom I am only 
proposing to call as witnesses four or five, and one of them 
you 
have 
already 
heard 
from 
but 
nonetheless 
my 
submission will be in due course, subject to your views, 
that it should be admitted as an exhibit regardless of 
whether the deponents to all the affidavits actually testify 
orally. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which ones are we going to have the 
10 
benefit of their oral evidence, that you ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Well Chair we have already had the 
benefit of Ms Rantho which was ZZ1.8 and the content of 
that affidavit so overlaps with the contents of her earlier 
affidavit that she was not taken in any detail through that 
but you have heard her evidence and she has confirmed 
orally really the content ZZ1.8.   Mr Jackson Mthembu we 
would of course have called but as you are aware tragically 
passed away so we certainly have him.  The editorial view 
that the Commission  has taken is that it is not necessary 
20 
to call Bengu, Exhibit ZZ1.4, Noluleka, Exhibit ZZ1.5, as 
regards Exhibit ZZ1.1 there is an affidavit there from the 
Secretary General of the African National Congress, Mr 
Magashule, it is uncertain whether he will testify or 
whether that testimony might be given by somebody else, 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 133 of 212 
 
that we don’t yet know.  Ms Letsatsi-Dube was scheduled 
to testify but was for various reasons unable to do so this 
week, and Ms Magadzi is available to testify after Mr de 
Freitas. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay that is fine, let’s go ahead and 
– 
so 
the 
ones 
you 
will 
call 
are 
Mr 
Frolick 
and 
...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   It was the intention ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...on Mr Smith? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Frolick, Mr Smith I do intend to 
10 
call, Ms Letsatsi-Dube if she becomes available.   Ms 
Budzi and Mr Magashule as things stand at the moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   Okay, let’s – let me 
admit them, I guess that we can regard the admission as 
provisional and that can be made final in due course once 
we know who is the – who has been able to testify orally 
and who has not.   
 
Okay, I think let us proceed on that basis.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes thank you Chair.  As I say Mr 
Cedrick Thomas Frolick is available and I think we should 
20 
take the affirmation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Frolick, good afternoon Mr Frolick. 
MR FROLICK:   Good afternoon Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t know whether to say welcome 
back because you have testified before me before, but on 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 134 of 212 
 
that occasion you were here physically and on this 
occasion I suspect you are in Cape Town or you may be at 
home? 
MR FROLICK:   I am at home Deputy Chief Justice, thank 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  Registrar please 
administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR FROLICK:   Cedric Thomas Frolick. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to making the 
10 
prescribed affirmation? 
MR FROLICK:   No. 
REGISTRAR:    Do you affirm that the evidence you will 
give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the 
truth, if so please raise your right hand and say I truly 
affirm. 
MR FROLICK:   I truly affirm. 
CEDRIC THOMAS FRELICK:   [Affirmed] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes thank you Mr Frolick.   Mr Freund 
you may proceed. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.   Mr Frolick have you 
been furnished with a hard copy of your own affidavit which 
you submitted to the Commission with the Commission’s 
pagination 
numbering 
evident 
on 
the 
hard 
copy 
you 
received?  
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 135 of 212 
 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And is it correct that the affidavit you 
received on page 47 through to ...[indistinct – distorted] is 
your affidavit and that the signature at page 55 is your 
signature. 
MR FROLICK:    That’s correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And can you confirm the correctness of 
the facts in your affidavit? 
MR FROLICK:   I do confirm. 
ADV FREUND SC:   In the light of what we have just 
10 
discussed I presume this affidavit may be admitted as 
evidence in its own right but provisionally together with the 
rest of Exhibit ZZ1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the affidavit of Mr Cedric Thomas 
Frolick at page 47 will be admitted as Exhibit – are we 
going to say ZZ1 point whatever 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well Chair strictly speaking ZZ1.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, why don’t we stick to that and we 
will see at the end of it needs to change for now or do you 
have another proposal? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, no I am happy to refer to it as 
ZZ1.3 and therefore it equals the whole of ZZ1 is also 
admitted, it will still form part of that ZZ1 bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so Mr Frolick’s affidavit will be 
admitted 
together 
with 
annexures 
if 
it 
does 
have 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 136 of 212 
 
annexures, it doesn’t look like it does and it will be 
admitted as Exhibit ZZ1.3.  The other affidavits that is now 
the affidavits of Mr E S Magashule, Mr J Mthembu, N R 
Bengu, Richard Smith, H P Maruleka and D P Letsatsi-
Dube are also admitted provisionally as exhibits and the 
exhibits to be – they will be marked as in the case of Mr 
Magashule’s one Exhibit ZZ1.1, in the case of the affidavit 
of Mr J Mthembu as Exhibit ZZ1.2, in the case of the 
affidavit of N R Bengu as Exhibit ZZ1.4, the affidavit of H P 
Maruleka as Exhibit ZZ1.5, that of Richard Smith as Exhibit 
10 
ZZ1.6 and the affidavit of D P Letsatsi-Dube as Exhibit 
ZZ1.7. 
 
You said the one for Ms Rantho Mr Freund has been 
taken care of or is this another one? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair I think strictly speaking although 
I intended it to be admitted formally I am not certain that I 
requested you to do that so in the interest of safety and 
prudence I ask that you admit ZZ1.8 as well.  The point I 
make is that when one reads the content of that it is 
subsumed into the content not only of her larger affidavit 
20 
from which she was led but also into the content of her oral 
testimony before the Commission, so on that basis I would 
ask for the sake of formality to admit Ms Rantho’s second 
affidavit as ZZ1.8. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and that – and the affidavit Ms D Z 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 137 of 212 
 
Rantho as Exhibit ZZ1.8, I think would be admitted finally 
because she has testified, ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.   May I proceed Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes you may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Now Mr Frolick we see 
from your affidavit that it was deposed to on the 12 t h of 
October 2020, is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct.  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if we go back to paragraph 5 of 
your affidavit, to page 47 of the bundle we see that a few 
weeks before that you were informed by your organisation, 
the ANC, that this inquiry had invited the ANC to make 
representations on how it had been carrying out its 
constitutional oversight obligations over the Executive, and 
holding it accountable for the performance of its functions 
and the exercise of its powers.   Is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in fact, I am not sure if you are 
20 
aware of this, but there were several letters addressed to 
the African National Congress at an earlier stage inviting 
such 
representations 
but 
due 
to 
miscommunication 
problems they didn’t – they were not received by the 
proper persons or they were not – it didn’t come to the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 138 of 212 
 
attention of the persons concerned and so when it finally 
did come to the attention of the African National Congress 
you were one of several people, one of nine to be exact, 
you were asked by the African National Congress to 
depose to affidavits as it were in response to the request 
from the Commission to the African National Congress, is 
that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   May I just make clear for the record 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Freund it is appropriate for me 
to say that we appreciate that the African National 
Congress responded to that invitation because many 
political parties represented in Parliament did not respond, 
but as I understand the African National Congress, DA as 
well or technically not, the DA ...[intervenes]  
MR FROLICK:   Chair if I may say so the DA were – 
instructed 
Ms 
Mazzone 
to 
represent 
them 
and 
the 
comments that she made in her affidavit were made on 
behalf of the DA. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes so the DA also responded positively 
to that invitation.  So I am not aware of any other political 
party 
represented 
in 
Parliament 
which 
were 
invited 
because I mean, I know that the IFP was invited, the EFF 
was invited, quite a number of them I think were invited but 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 139 of 212 
 
it seems only the ANC and the DA responded positively.  I 
do not think we received any responses from the other 
political parties.  Is that your, your understanding as well? 
MR FROLICK:   Chair to the best of my recollection, the 
Commission 
did 
receive 
a 
certain 
responses 
by 
correspondence 
indicating 
that 
other 
parties 
would 
probably be interested in making submissions or evidence, 
but 
to 
the 
best 
of 
my 
knowledge, 
that 
was 
never 
subsequently furnished. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. alright.  Maybe if there are 
10 
any other parties who, which I wrote to the Commission in 
response to that invitation and said whatever they said, I 
would like to see that just so that when I talk about non 
reaction or no response then I will be accurate because I 
thought that many of the - I thought all the political parties 
would 
embrace 
this 
opportunity 
of 
assisting 
the 
Commission to understand what the challenges are with 
oversight, 
performance 
of 
oversight 
functions 
in 
mechanisms 
that 
Parliament 
has, 
whether 
those 
mechanisms or oversight are adequate, or what challenges 
20 
are there and how should they be addressed.   
I thought that and what you experiences they have 
had of over oversight, performance of oversight functions 
but a number of them did not.  So I would like to just know, 
who responded and said what but otherwise that is fine we 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 140 of 212 
 
can proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair, we will endeavour to 
put that before you in a pack that contains the relevant 
correspondence.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now Mr Frolick you say in your 
affidavit, 
and 
this 
has 
been 
referred 
to 
by 
several 
witnesses before you have testified, that you are the 
House Chairperson committee’s oversight and ICT in the 
National Assembly and that you have occupied that role 
10 
from 18 November 2010 until the present, is that correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And precisely because you have 
occupied that role, you were requested by your party to 
depose to the affidavit pursuant to which you are now 
appearing before the Commission.  Is that correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct Advocate. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you say in your affidavit, that you 
wish to explain how the House Chairperson functions in 
Parliament.  I am looking at paragraph 7 of your affidavit 
20 
and perhaps with reference to what you say in paragraphs 
8, 9 and 10 you might like to explain the function of the 
House Chairperson.  Am I correct colloquially in the 
political world; the office has come to be referred to as the 
Chair of Chairs.  
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 141 of 212 
 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct the Advocate.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I am going to use that colloquial 
term, the Chair of Chairs and if you could just explain what 
the functions are, but perhaps it might assist you.  If we 
have regard to the rules to which you make reference, am I 
correct that you were furnished with a copy under the 
heading of a file under the heading legal framework bundle 
that you were furnished with the National Assembly rules, 
eighth edition, and National Assembly rules ninth edition?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Here those two sets of rules comprise 
the sole content of the legal framework file and in your 
affidavit, Mr Frolick in paragraph 9 you refer to Rule 262. 
Now, I asked you to turn to page 322 in this legal file, the 
top red pagination sequence, if you go to page 322 you will 
find I think a Rule 262.  Is that the rule to which you were 
referring in paragraph 9 of your affidavit?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And if we go back to page 170, keep 
your finger there but just go back to page 170 in the same 
20 
legal file you will see that that is the cover page of the 
rules of the National Assembly 9 t h edition.  Is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct, sir.  
ADV FREUND SC:   It we go to page 172, you will see that 
that 9 t h edition was adopted by the National Assembly on 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 142 of 212 
 
the 26 t h of May 2016.  Is that also correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct, sir.  
ADV FREUND SC:   But when you refer to a rule in this 
affidavit, you are understandably referring to the rules as 
they currently stand, which are the rules that were 
introduced with effect from the 26 t h of May 2016.  Do I 
understand that correctly? 
MR FROLICK:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But we must of course bear in mind 
that through some of the events of relevance to the 
10 
Commission and the evidence on parliamentary oversight, 
the previous edition, the 8 t h edition of the rules was in 
force.  Do you agree with that?  
MR FROLICK:   I agree. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Nonetheless, so far as I am aware and 
unless you have pointed out as we go along, my impression 
is that insofar as it pertains to the House Chairperson the 
rules as to the responsibilities of the House Chair, there 
have not been substantial changes between the 8 t h and the 
9 t h editions.  
20 
So I am going to assume unless you tell us 
otherwise, that it is reasonable for us to focus only on the 
rules as they have been since the 26 t h of May 2016 but if 
you feel at any point that it is necessary to draw attention 
to a difference between the rules as they stood at one 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 143 of 212 
 
period or another, then of course, you're free to do so.  
MR FROLICK:   Thank you.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, I took you to and I would like you 
to go back to page 322.  That is the rule as you have 
already told us, which talks about the scheduling function 
of the designated House Chairperson that is again another 
reference to the same office, what we refer to colloquially 
as the Chair of Chairs.  Do we agree?  
MR FROLICK:   I agree.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And what it says is: 
10 
“The House Chairperson designated by the Speaker, 
and that was in the period you have indicated 
yourself, 
must 
as 
delegated 
by 
the 
Speaker 
implement any policy directive or guideline on the 
scheduling and coordination of meetings of all 
committees and subcommittees.” 
Is that correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now if you would go back to page 309, 
in the same bundle.  We see that that is the portion of the 
20 
rules from Rule 225 onwards, which deals with Portfolio 
Committees and I might mention as distinct from certain 
other committees that are dealt with elsewhere in the 
rules, is that correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct, sir.  
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 144 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And then at - if we go back to para 9 
on the preceding page at 309, page 309 in the legal file, 
we find there is a reference to the forum of Committee 
Chairpersons which is established by Rule 221.  Is that 
correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And it provides in Rule 222 the forum 
of Committee Chairpersons consists of A, the House 
Chairpersons.  So who would those be?  
MR FROLICK:   The House Chairpersons include my two 
10 
colleagues, there is a House Chairperson responsible for 
internal 
arrangements, 
and 
there 
is 
also 
a 
House 
Chairperson responsible for international relations.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, so it consists of those two 
colleagues of yours and then in Sub B, this forum also 
consists of the Chairperson of each Assembly Committee 
and each assembly member who was a Chairperson or Co- 
chairperson of a joint committee, when assembly member 
of the committee designated by the Chairperson. 
If you could just explain that, to those of us who are 
20 
not familiar with parliamentary officers and officials? 
MR FROLICK:   Let me approach it first, from the 
perspective of the National Assembly, it will include all the 
Chairpersons of any Parliamentary Committee, we also 
include then include the other House Chairperson it says 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 145 of 212 
 
per invite and then it also includes any ad hoc Committee 
that may be formed for that Chairperson to become part of 
that committee.  
It also includes the other committees apart from 
Portfolio Committees such as the Standing Committees and 
at times, depending on the agenda we have developed the 
practice 
that 
the 
Chairpersons 
including 
its 
House 
Chairperson of the Council of Provinces, also at times 
follow part of these committees, depending on the agenda 
items to be assumed.  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   No you - if we look at Rule 223, that 
focuses on the Chairperson of that committee and that is 
you, is that correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And that provides in Sun-section 1 of 
the rule, the House Chairperson designated by the Speaker 
presides 
at 
meetings 
of 
the 
forum 
of 
Committee 
Chairpersons and then provision made for another House 
Chairperson to preside in your absence, is that correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now above and beyond the rules, to 
which I have now referred the Chair of this Commission, 
could you perhaps just explain a little more detail, as it 
were, the practical reality of what the post of Chair of 
Chairs comprises?  
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 146 of 212 
 
MR FROLICK:   Well, thank you, the Chairperson or House 
Chairperson of Committees, is a position that is delegated 
responsibilities by the Speaker.  And the Speaker as you 
have correctly referred to earlier, is directing the House 
Chairperson 
then 
to 
implement 
any 
policy 
directive 
guidelines on the shared link or coordination of meetings 
and also committees and sub-committees.  
In practice, what it means is, is that I work with the 
Chairpersons 
on 
a 
daily 
basis 
to 
oversee 
the 
implementation of the program of Parliament.  As far as the 
10 
scheduling of committees are concerned, the program of 
Parliament 
is 
determined 
by 
the 
National 
Assembly 
Programming 
Committee 
and 
then 
also 
the 
broader 
framework coming from the Joint Programming Committee.  
In practise what it would mean is, is that when there is any 
clarified scheduling.  If a Committee have planned and 
submitted a program to my office then that program must be 
implemented and the reason why it is implemented is – or 
must be implemented as submitted is because it gets 
published to the public in order to allow for anyone who wish 
20 
to follow a Committee meeting; to know that such a 
Committee will be sitting and the items that they may 
consider. 
 
They also then submit applications, that is the 
Chairpersons, to my office for… 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 147 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Sorry to interrupt you and say when you 
refer to Chairpersons if you would indicate Chairpersons of 
what because … 
MR FROLICK:  Chairpersons of Committees.  I refer to the 
Chairpersons of the Portfolio and Select Committees in the 
National Assembly specifically. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right thank you. 
MR FROLICK:  So they will submit their programs and other 
activities that they want to on the take.  On an annual basis 
it is also the responsibility of the House Chairperson 
10 
Committees in the National Assembly as well as in the 
National Council of Provinces to see to it that the budget is 
sub-divided 
to 
the 
different 
Committees 
and 
that 
the 
necessary resources are made available to the Committees 
to implement their programs. 
 
This budget is a – an allocation that the Committee 
section receive does not reside in my office it is a political 
budget that I preside over but the actual budget presides in 
the Committee section of Parliament. 
 
So the Committee section of Parliament will require 
20 
directives from myself and my colleague in the National 
Council of Provinces as to how that budget must be 
allocated. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right. 
MR FROLICK:  If there are any specific issue where 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 148 of 212 
 
Chairpersons require guidance on related to their Committee 
work they will approach my office for assistance or if they 
are busy with public hearings and there are certain issues 
that may arise they will also make contact with the office that 
I currently hold. 
 
That 
is 
broadly 
speaking 
the 
role 
and 
the 
responsibility of the office and all these activities get 
reported back to the Speaker of the National Assembly who 
have designated this function to me. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right.  Now I wanted to focus on 
10 
precisely that next.  To understand clearly the proper role of 
the Speaker and the proper role of the Chair of Chairs in 
relation to the issues of interests to this part of the 
commission’s investigation which is all about Portfolio 
Committees and oversight what is the role of the Speaker; 
what is the role of the Chair of Chairs if any? 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Freund and Mr Frolick.  
Thank you; you may proceed.  You may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Mr Frolick do you recall the question; did 
you hear the question? 
20 
MR FROLICK:  Can you just repeat the question again 
please? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes.  I am particularly interested in the 
issue of oversight by Parliament over the Executive and I am 
interested in that question in the context of the work of this 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 149 of 212 
 
commission which is in relation to allegations of state 
capture and alleged corruption. 
 
And what I am asking you is to explain to us the roles 
on the one hand of the Speaker and on the other hand of the 
Chair of Chairs when it comes to what practically is to be 
done about oversight functions. 
 
So let us start with the Speaker and then – because 
you talk about your function is to implement delegated 
functions.  So I am trying to understand what the Speaker is 
responsible for and what your office is responsible for? 
10 
MR FROLICK:  The Speaker is primarily responsible to see 
that whatever decision is taken in terms of specific oversight 
activities and the work of Committees is executed and 
implemented by my office. 
 
But that in practice will mean is if the Speaker 
through any form become aware of any specific issue that 
needs to be pursued by a Committee or oversight that must 
be conducted by a Committee she can bring it to my 
attention and there will usually be a discussion and I will 
contact the relevant and write to the relevant Committees to 
20 
transmit the instruction by the Speaker in terms of what 
needs to be done. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright well let us – let us deal with that 
in a little more detail because it seemed to me you started 
with the later before you dealt with the earlier. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 150 of 212 
 
 
The later is ensuring that resolutions of oversight 
activities are in fact implemented but the earlier must be the 
process of actually conducting that oversight and making 
recommendations. 
 
Now did I hear you correctly a moment ago that the 
Speaker 
can 
and 
presumably 
sometimes 
does 
issue 
instructions which you then pass on to Chairs of Portfolio 
Committees that they should – they should implement certain 
oversight activities? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct Sir. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  And do you also perform such a 
function?  Do you also apply your own judgment from time to 
time as to what types of oversight functions seem to be 
necessary and when you think such a function is necessary 
do you pass that on as a request or an instruction to Chairs 
of the relevant Portfolio Committees? 
MR FROLICK:  If there are any specific matters that is 
discussed in the different forums of Parliament which may be 
the Chief Whips’ forum, the Committee of Chairpersons, it 
could be a discussion that is being taking place in the 
20 
National Assembly Programming Committee or any specific 
matter that is being brought to my attention I will usually 
discuss it with the Speaker but also very importantly with the 
Chief Whip of the majority party that is also respond – that 
also has responsibilities in terms of the implementation of 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 151 of 212 
 
the program and seeing to it that there is a coordinated way 
in which we are working in Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And would that include discussions 
where 
relevant 
with 
the 
Chairs 
of 
particular 
Portfolio 
Committees? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now the structures that you have just 
been referring to if I understand correctly are really all 
official structures of Parliament as an entity.  The Chief 
Whips’ forum and the others that you mentioned, am I 
10 
correct? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  But there is another structure of which I 
have been told I think it is known as the Political Committee, 
is that correct – is that the correct name and if so could you 
explain what it is?  This seems to me to be an ANC 
structure. 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct the Political Committee is an 
internal ANC structure consisting of members of Parliament 
and members of the Executive who has been deployed by the 
20 
ANC to serve on that structure.  
 
That structure is usually chaired and convened by the 
Deputy President.  It includes the Speaker, the Deputy 
Speaker, 
the 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
National 
Council 
of 
Provinces as well as the Deputy Chairperson of the National 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 152 of 212 
 
Council of Provinces, the Chief Whip of the ANC, the Deputy 
Chief Whip of the ANC, the Chief Whip of the ANC in the 
National Council of Provinces and a few other members as 
identified by the National Working Committee in the NEC to 
form part of that structure. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now before we deal with the function of 
that Committee I just want to understand a little more clearly 
the composition of that Committee and you said members of 
Parliament and certain members of the Executive. 
 
Now if we focus on those who are members of the 
10 
Executive are those also required to be simultaneously 
members of Parliament in order to be participants in this 
ANC Political Committee? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So it comprises in addition to the Deputy 
President of the country who serves as Chair of this 
Committee and who is the leader of government business it 
comprises really some of the very most senior MP’s some of 
whom are Ministers and some of whom are not Ministers, 
would that be a fair summary? 
20 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now what is the function of the Political 
Committee of the ANC that you have just described? 
MR FROLICK:  The function of the Political Committee 
primarily is to give guidance and to oversee the work of the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 153 of 212 
 
deploys of the African National Congress in the National 
Assembly and also in Parliament – my apologies but also to 
deal with any situation that may occur that may require 
further political guidance. That is primarily the role that the 
Political Committee plays and it is also a forum where 
colleagues exchange their different experiences to see to it 
how the institution can function at its optimum. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Now going back to your affidavit 
in paragraph 12 you -  you say that the practice has 
developed over the years that the Chair of Chairs have 
10 
responsibility to provide procedural guidance and guidance – 
procedural advice and guidance to the Chairpersons of 
Portfolio Committees, that is correct is it? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  I want then go onto deal with in your 
affidavit is the fact that prior to the 2009 general elections 
the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces 
adopted what you refer to as the oversight and accountability 
model.  That is factually correct is it? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now once again I would like to refer you 
to a document that I believe was and should have been sent 
to you in the Reference bundle at page 1 and following we 
found 
a 
document 
that 
is 
labelled 
Oversight 
and 
Accountability Model.  Is that what you have in mind when 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 154 of 212 
 
you – is that what you are referring to in paragraph 13 of 
your affidavit? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Freund.  Yes thank you I 
have got it.  You may proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And would it be fair to say that prior to 
the adoption of this particular model by the National 
Assembly and by the National Council of Provinces there had 
been a period of reflection and debate and investigation as 
to how Parliament should execute what the constitution 
10 
requires 
of 
it 
namely 
to 
maintain 
oversight 
over 
the 
Executive and to hold the Executive accountable and this 
was the product of that reflection and this was ultimately the 
decision of the National Assembly and of the NCOP as to 
how these things should be done.   
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And you say in your affidavit at the foot 
of page 48  
“The moral service is a policy guide to 
Parliament on the procedures to follow in 
20 
order to conduct oversight over the Executive 
and to hold it accountable for its actions.” 
And then you say: 
“The oversight and accountability model of 
Parliament 
is 
premised 
on 
the 
sceptre 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 155 of 212 
 
oversight model you refer to it with the 
acronym SOM and ushered in a strong intent 
to grow Parliament’s capabilities to advance 
and continuously strengthen its oversight and 
accountability mandate and thereby realise 
the aspirations of improving the lives of 
South African citizens.” 
I presume you stand by that? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I would like to refer you to some 
10 
evidence given by the very first witness Mr Godi – when I 
say first witness the first witness in this stream of evidence 
and – just bear with me for a moment please?  Well perhaps 
before I do that can I take you in the Reference Bundle to 
pages 30 to 31?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Part 4.1.4 of this model which has 
become known colloquially as the oversight model, am I 
correct? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  and you say this was adopted in 2009 if I 
recall correctly, is that right? 
MR FROLICK:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And it starts at the top of page 30 in the 
Reference Bundle under the heading Oversight Advisory 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 156 of 212 
 
Section as follows.   
“In developing the oversight model the need 
was identified for Support Services relating 
to the monitoring and tracking of issues 
between Parliament and the Executive and 
on 
all 
other 
related 
matters 
within 
Parliament’s broader mandate.  An oversight 
and advisory section ought to be created in 
response to the need identified.  Its main 
functions will be to provide advice, technical 
10 
support, 
coordination 
and 
tracking 
and 
monitoring mechanisms” 
And I particular emphasise and tracking and monitoring 
mechanisms. 
“On 
issues 
arising 
from 
oversight 
and 
accountability 
activities 
of 
members 
of 
Parliament and the Committees to which they 
belong.” 
And then if we go down a little bit in the same page it says: 
“The foreseen objectives of the oversight 
20 
advisory section encompass the following.” 
And the second bullet point is  
“Tracking 
and 
monitoring 
Executive 
compliance 
in 
respect 
of 
issues 
that 
individual 
MP’s 
raise 
flowing 
from 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 157 of 212 
 
constituency work.” 
The next bullet point: 
“Assisting 
with 
tracking, 
monitoring 
and 
following 
up 
issues 
raised 
through 
the 
Parliamentary Democracy offices.” 
And so forth and then the third last bullet point in that 
section. 
“Assisting 
with 
monitoring 
and 
tracking 
Executive 
compliance 
with 
House 
resolutions.” 
10 
I want to emphasise that one.  Assisting with monitoring and 
tracking Executive compliance with House resolutions.  And 
then it talks further about the sub-divisions of this envisaged 
oversight and advisory section and you will see if you turn to 
the next page at page 31 that there is to be according to this 
document a tracking and monitoring unit which will address 
decisions in the Houses of the Committee – at committee 
level as well as issues – issues from – emanating from the 
floor of the Houses and from Committee reports that get 
tabled in the House and then the real nub of it at the end of 
20 
that portion before the section on the Reserve Bank. 
“It is therefore recommended that Parliament 
must speedily establish this section with full 
resources, capacity and personnel for the 
efficient 
fulfilment 
of 
the 
objectives 
of 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 158 of 212 
 
oversight and accountability.” 
That was a formally adopted decision of the National 
Assembly that this should be done, am I right? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Was it done? 
MR 
FROLICK: 
 
What 
happened 
was 
that 
the 
– 
the 
implementation thereof for its full implementation was costed 
by the administration and at a certain point they indicated 
that it will have to be a phased in implementation to realise 
the full objective that has been set. 
10 
 
Subsequently that function resorts under the National 
Assembly Secretariat the secretary to the National Assembly 
who together with the committee section is responsible for 
that.  
 
So that was not fully implemented due to the budget 
re-constraint that was identified at the time.  However I 
indicated in numerous forums that that situation is untenable 
for the simple reason that if you do not have enough warm 
bodies to focus on a daily basis on this important function 
then you going to have different or mixed outcomes.  It was 
20 
then decided to task the ICT section of Parliament to start 
developing and that is from about two years ago start 
developing and looking into putting in place a system to 
electronically track all the decisions that is taken by the 
National Assembly and I must also add the National Council 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 159 of 212 
 
of Provinces after committees have submitted their reports to 
ensure that we do get timeous feedback from the Executive. 
 
In practice what has happened is that after such 
decisions have been transmitted via the office of the 
Speaker to the Executive they will respond. 
1. To acknowledge receipt of the report and then secondly 
in certain instances there is a response as well that 
goes through to the relevant committee. 
 
However this is a mixed situation because you will find that 
certain departments and the Executive are very prompt in 
10 
terms of their response while others do not respond to these 
reports and the recommendations that has been adopted by 
the House. 
 
That is where we currently are as far as that specific 
function is concerned. We have made proposals that the 
budget that has been allocated to Parliament must be 
reworked and the current Speaker is paying attention to that 
so that this critical oversight function and I want to add here 
Advocate my speeches in the National Assembly when we 
discuss Parliament’s budget vote year after year reflect on 
20 
this in terms of the resources that are allocated to oversight.  
If you take into account that the National Assembly alone 
has plus minus 40 different Portfolio and Select Committees 
together with the National Council of Provinces the amount 
that is made available for oversight in its entirety is very, 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 160 of 212 
 
very little compared to what the expectations are. 
 
So we must continuously then ask for 00:22:06 to be 
done, for money to be moved around and I can confidently 
say that I believe that the budget allocation that are given to 
committees are not sufficient for them to implement and 
execute all their tasks that they are supposed to do. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now we have heard evidence with 
Parliament’s budget exceeds R2 billion, is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:  If my recollection is correct that is more or 
less the amount. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  What amount when you say the amount 
available for oversight over entities is very little, what is that 
amount? 
MR FROLICK:  That amount Advocate over the years has 
been incremental adjustments but it stays in the region 
between and this is out of a budget of R2 billion it stands 
between R50 to R60 million. 
ADV FREUND SC:  So somebody in Parliament or somebody 
speaking for Parliament has made a choice to allocate a 
mere R50 to R60 million to the oversight function out of the 
20 
R2 billion odd available to it, is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Who makes that choice? 
MR FROLICK:  Well there is a Budget Committee. There is a 
Budget Committee that works closely with the Executive 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 161 of 212 
 
Authority and it also includes the secretary to Parliament 
and they engage with the Chief Financial Officer with 
National Treasury on a usual – on a regular basis and then 
based on what is received by Parliament it is sub-divided 
into the different programs that are there. 
ADV FREUND SC:  And that R50 to R 60 million is intended 
to cover what?  Is that intended to cover all the financial 
requirements of all the Portfolios Committees? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct and if I may elaborate let me 
just give you a bird’s eye view of how that money is then 
10 
spent.  That money is allocated to the budgets of the 
different Portfolio Committees and the Select Committees to 
do the following: 
 
 
And that is to plan and also to implement and host 
their regular meetings that they will have. 
 
The second part thereof is when they want to 
advertise an advertisement to invite public comment on a 
piece of legislation. 
 
Now at any given time you will find that there are 
about between 30 to 40 bills in Parliament and part of the 
20 
oversight and accountability model also has a section that 
clearly sets out what public participation must be.  So 
advertisements is one element of that. 
 
Another 
element 
could 
be 
radio 
station 
advertisements and any advert going out to newspapers 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 162 of 212 
 
these days cost at least a quarter of a million rand per 
advert for public comment. 
 
Add to that also the oversight visits that are 
undertaken by the different Portfolio and Select Committees 
this 
include 
the 
travelling 
of 
staff, 
the 
members 
of 
Parliament, their accommodation as well as any other 
incidentals such as hall hire, such as the provision of basic 
refreshment such as water to participants and if you take 
into account the necessary measures that are in place for 
transport of members of Parliament it will include the airfare 
10 
if they are travelling by air, their ground transport as well as 
transport to get them back home again.  So the amount that 
is there is really to do most of those things. 
 
Now you come to a situation where we found 
ourselves in 2017 where a need was identified for Parliament 
to do specific work in terms of those four committees of the 
National Assembly. 
 
To implement that you must then go back into the 
budget forum and ask the powers that decide say to the 
secretary of Parliament let us find more money to fund some 
20 
of these activities and that is usually done in the forum of a 
00:26:37 from other programs that has either not been 
implemented or there is a delay in the full implementation of 
those programs.   
 
And this is not sustainable to exercise oversight. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 163 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well those are your words not mine.  But 
you 
have 
also 
said 
that 
you 
repeatedly 
raised 
the 
inadequacy of this budget if one was serious in requiring or 
wishing 
to 
capacitate 
the 
very 
numerous 
Portfolio 
Committees to exercise their oversight functions.  I take it 
that it is implicit in what you have said that you did not get a 
sympathetic response or that it did not change materially? 
MR FROLICK:  If there were any changes it was as I say it 
was simple viaments as the need may arise.  And I must add 
that the Chairpersons when they plan for these oversights 
10 
they – they go to their strategic planning sessions and they 
come up with what they want to do and you cost those 
programs then it usually exceeds by far the money that is 
available. 
 
And then usually my last point of call you go to the 
Speaker and the Speaker would say okay I will take it up and 
there will be a viament that needs to be done.  But that is 
not the way it is supposed to fund the oversight function. 
 
Oversight and committees should be one of those key 
priorities of how the budget of Parliament is divided and 
20 
allocated. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well I agree with you those are your 
words and not mine but can I put to you for your comment it 
seems to be the obvious coronary to what you have said that 
Parliament has simply not been serious about exercising 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 164 of 212 
 
oversight over the Executive.  If it was serious it would have 
re-apportioned the allocation resources.  What is your view 
on that? 
MR FROLICK:  My view is that the Committees and the 
numerous reports that are there that has been tabled by 
Committees have done a lot of work in terms of exercising 
oversight 
over 
the 
Executive. 
 
Under 
these 
difficult 
constraints they have exercised their oversight.  It is a 
matter of opinion whether that oversight work that has been 
done was sufficient or not but I cannot fault the majority of 
10 
these committees for going beyond sometimes what was 
possible to do their oversight function and execute their 
mandates. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well if it is a matter of opinion what is 
your opinion?  Is it ... 
MR FROLICK:  My opinion is if I may? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright carry on. 
MR FROLICK:  My opinion is that with the limited resources 
that has been made available the committees in Parliament 
and remember committee work is one element only of 
20 
oversight.  There is other forms of oversight that also 
happens in Parliament in the National Assembly and in the 
National Council of Provinces have under these difficult 
conditions they have gone very far to exercise their 
oversight in terms of what the rules and the constitution is 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 165 of 212 
 
demanding from them. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright now let us go back a step.  I took 
you to pages 30 to 31 of the overt model to the Tracking 
and Monitoring Unit that needed to be resourced and 
needed to be effective if oversight was to be effective.  Do 
you recall that? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   I now want to take you to the evidence 
of Mr Godi.  Mr Godi said in his affidavit that a matter of 
intense frustration to him and to his committee SCOPA was 
10 
the absence of tracking and monitoring of the multiple 
recommendations that that committee made for what you 
might remedial action.  Things to be done and to be 
reported back on.   
 
And he says there was simply no system in place 
that achieved that.  Now do you agree with him that his 
frustration and his concern was absolutely legitimate? 
MR FROLICK:   I can recall that I had a discussion with the 
Honourable 
Godi 
specifically 
around 
Monitoring 
and 
Tracking and the full implementation and realisation of 
20 
that.  That capacity was created in the office of the 
Secretary to the National Assemble for our purposes now 
and also in the committee section. 
 
However, that Monitoring and Tracking system had 
its 
flaws 
because 
it 
was 
not 
fully 
implemented 
as 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 166 of 212 
 
envisaged in the Oversight Accountability Model. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now onto being a little bit euphemistic.  
Was it not frankly a dismal failure?  Was it frankly 
completely unable to or perhaps unwilling to monitor and 
check the adequacy of the executive responses to the 
recommendations of portfolio committees which had been 
adopted by The House and therefore became House 
resolutions? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, from the position where I sit and the 
work that goes through the National Assembly, I know there 
10 
is very dedicated people working at that National Assembly 
table and also in the Committee Section who are dedicated 
to their work and we have never ever received any 
instruction as far as I am aware to simply ignore the 
reports and what has been sent through and to keep track 
of that.   
 
I do think that the full implementation of that 
Monitoring and Tracking mechanism by properly resourcing 
it and creating my view was, even though the model does 
not say that, was to create a dedicated unit of people who 
20 
know 
how 
the 
National 
Assembly 
Secretariat 
works 
together with the Committee Section and to be seized with 
that on a daily basis. 
 
Instead you would have found now that some of 
the Human Resources at the National Assembly table 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 167 of 212 
 
together with the Committee Section also became seized 
with that matter coupled with the other work that they were 
doing. 
 
And that made it extremely difficult for them to be 
effective and to give timeous responses in terms of what 
has been responded to.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Frolick ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   Let me read ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund.  Mr Frolick, why 
was that allowed to happen?  You are one of the senior 
10 
people in Parliament number one.  You have access to the 
Speaker.  You have access to the leaders of the majority 
party.  Why was that allowed to happen? 
MR FROLICK:   Deputy Chief Justice, I indicated earlier 
my frustration that I have shared, not only with my 
colleague who is also a House chairperson in the Council 
of Provinces because the same would apply there, and to 
share 
it 
with 
the 
Speaker 
when 
it 
comes 
to 
the 
implementation of these things. 
 
Also, with the Chief Whip of the majority party and 
20 
the late Minister Jackson Mthembu is also on record in 
terms of the poor resourcing.  So the decision makers who 
sit there and divide that budget of Parliament is where the 
problem is. 
 
For one reason or another, this was the allocation 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 168 of 212 
 
that was given and the monitoring and function was never 
implemented to the extent in which it was envisaged.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I still want to put to you what Mr 
Godi says. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund.  Just to – I want 
to make sure I understand what Mr Frolick is saying.  Are 
you saying, a certain structure, maybe it is a committee 
within Parliament has the task or had the task of allocating 
budget for these activities of Parliament but they simply 
did not allocate enough.  Is that what you are saying? 
10 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, Deputy Chief Justice.  And if I may 
add?  If I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR FROLICK:   What will happen is, is that once 
Parliament and this structure develops the budget proposal 
for Parliament it gets submitted to the National Treasury.   
 
And every year you will hear that Treasury has 
said they cannot give the amount that has been requested 
and that we need to cut back on the different programmes 
that are there based on the amount that the Treasury is 
20 
giving to the National Assemble.   
 
And as a result, you will find that there are certain 
key programmes such as this that we are talking about now 
who always are at the shortest end of what is allocated 
ultimately in Parliament its structures. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 169 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So as you see it, the source of the 
problem is lack of adequate funding for these activities? 
MR FROLICK:   That is one of the key reasons Deputy 
Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR FROLICK:   Because for committees to do this 
oversight work, they also need staff, they need the 
personnel.  And if you have a budget shortfall it does not 
only impact on the budget that the committee has but also 
on the support staff that can be appointed to assist them in 
10 
these critical functions. 
 
That is one of the primary reasons why we sit with 
a situation where I can make a statement confidently to 
say that the oversight function of Parliament is not 
properly funded. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, my own impression, and I have not 
reflected this on this extensively, but my own impression is 
that the oversight role or function of Parliament must be 
the second most important function of Parliament coming 
after the function of making laws.   
20 
 
And if that is so, one would have expected that 
Parliament and the majority party would be concerned if 
such an important function of Parliament was severally 
underfunded. 
 
Is my understanding of the oversight function 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 170 of 212 
 
being maybe the second most important close to your own 
understanding in terms of the functions of Parliament? 
MR FROLICK:   I concur with you Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR FROLICK:   Oversight includes different types and 
categories of oversight. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR FROLICK:   And what one of the key financial 
oversight. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR FROLICK:   So if you are constraint in terms of this 
and let me go further to use an example.  That when the 
budget is presented by the Minister of Finance and it runs 
now into trillions of rands, you need to oversee the 
expenditure, 
not 
only 
necessarily 
at 
the 
National 
Legislature, but the need to oversee the expenditure that 
takes place nationally, provincially and locally. 
 
And one would – I am of the firm belief that you 
will empower that oversight function to ensure that the 
intended objectives of the Minister of Finance and the 
20 
government is achieved. 
 
If you do not do that you run the risk that certain 
things may slip through or that you do not have the 
requisite capacity and tools to effectively monitor those 
budgets that are there. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 171 of 212 
 
 
And that is why we rely heavily, for instance, on 
the 
Office 
of 
the Auditor-General 
to 
assist 
portfolio 
committees also in that regard because we have a common 
approach 
that 
financial 
oversights 
are 
of 
critical 
importance if we wish to implement the programmes and 
improves the lives of the people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, just continue.  I think what 
you are going to be going into in terms of Mr Godi’s 
evidence will touch on some of these issues and I might 
have other questions connected with these issues later on 
10 
but I think just continue. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  But I just, if I may 
with your leave, I just wish to address some of the 
evidence 
just 
given. 
 
Mr 
Frolick, 
I 
understand 
that 
Parliament may wish to receive from Treasury’s proposed 
budget a bigger overall budget that it receives.   
 
It seems to be the iron law of political life.  
Everybody wants more from the Treasury.  But your own 
evidence, as I understand that, is that of the order of 
R 2 billion. 
20 
 
In others words, R 2 000 million is allocated to 
Parliament.  Are you still there?  I cannot see if you are 
still there. 
MR FROLICK:   I can hear you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And how many portfolio committees, 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 172 of 212 
 
select committees, incomparable committees are there in 
the National Assembly and the NCOP? 
MR FROLICK:   At any stage there is no less than 50. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Not less than 50.  And what you have 
told us is that of that R 2 000 million, R50 to R60 million is 
allocated to the oversight function.  Have I understood that 
correctly? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   So approximately one million rand per 
committee per annum.  Is that correct?   
10 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now that allocation decision is a 
decision entirely within the control of Parliament as to 
whether they have to prioritise oversight and allocate more 
than R 50 million to the oversight function.  Do you agree 
with that? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   So it is not Treasury but Parliament 
that 
has 
decided 
to 
so 
substantially 
downplay 
the 
resourcing of the portfolio committees which serve as what 
20 
many people call the Engine Room of oversight.  Would 
you agree? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now that is the context in which 
Mr Godi, the first witness in this stream, gave evidence.  
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 173 of 212 
 
And he gave evidence that, according to him, it was 
acutely aware, it is SCOPA was acutely aware of very 
substantial and deteriorating irregular expenditure as well 
as wasteful expenditure in the other categories dealt with 
in the PMFA.  Are you still there Mr Frolic? 
MR FROLICK:   Yes.  We are experiencing probably load 
shedding somewhere.  So at times my video gets blurred. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  If you do not hear me, please 
tell me. 
MR FROLICK:   I can hear you.  I will alert you if I cannot 
10 
hear you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  So Mr Godi’s evidence is.  
Objectively and accordance to the information furnished 
fully and correctly by the Auditor-General’s office, there is 
not a minor problem of irregular expenditure.  There is a 
huge problem of irregular expenditure getting progressively 
worse.   
 
And he says, SCOPA routinely issue reports which 
not only note the nature of the problems but make 
proposals for their corrections.  And he says but our 
20 
proposals are very largely ignored.  We receive no 
substantive feedback.   
 
Now do you have any reason to dispute factually 
that evidence by Mr Godi? 
MR FROLICK:   No, Mr Godi is correct sir.  As I have 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 174 of 212 
 
indicated, that with the limited resource and what – in 
terms of Human Resource of following the executive action 
that needs to be done and the mix response that we 
receive, Mr Godi – he came to the correct conclusion. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Alright.  Now Mr Godi says that when 
that – that when he experienced that problem, and he 
chaired SCOPA both in the 4 t h and 5 t h Parliament.  He said 
the following and I am quoting from page 116 in Bundle 1, 
paragraph 6.31 of his affidavit.  I do not think you would 
have this Mr Frolick.   
10 
MR FROLICK:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   He says this: 
“But there was no structured mechanism in 
place to follow up adequately and ultimate to 
hold the Executive accountable. 
In my view and the view of the committee, this 
severely hamstrung the exercise of adequate 
oversight. 
Committee 
members 
became 
increasingly 
frustrated with the lack of responsiveness of 
20 
the Executive. 
In an effort to remedy this, I approached the 
Chair of Chairs, Mr Cedric Frolick sometime 
during the 4 t h Parliament. 
He gave me an assurance that the office of the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 175 of 212 
 
Speaker would configure a dashboard which 
would keep track of deadlines and follow-up 
and 
ensure 
compliance 
with 
all 
House 
resolutions 
but 
no 
such 
dashboard 
was 
configured and no alternative mechanism was 
adopted by Parliament to monitor and enforce 
compliance with House resolutions.” 
 
Are you saying he is mistaken?  Are you saying 
there was a compliance mechanism? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, we had a discussion.  Mr Godi and 
10 
myself 
had 
a 
discussion 
around 
the 
matter 
of 
the 
Monitoring and Tracking and how it can be improved. 
 
However, that dashboard that he is talking about, 
as well as everything that goes with it, was implemented.  
It is only two years ago that – and well before Covid we 
were supposed to receive a report on it from the ITC 
Section, to on – at the click of a button to see what was 
happening. 
 
Instead in its place due to budgetary constrain that 
was there, that Monitoring and Tracking mechanism was 
20 
then put in place, not in a dashboard form but at the 
National Assembly Table supported by a certain section in 
the Committee Section. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, it is there that I am taking issue 
with you or at least seeking further clarification from you 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 176 of 212 
 
because I get the impression that the impression you are 
trying to convey is that it was not perfect but it was 
functional.  It was reasonable functional.   
 
And that there was a procedure which monitored 
and responded when there was inadequate executive 
response to the requirements of House resolutions.  And I 
want to put to you that cannot possible be correct just on 
what you have already told us.   
 
So I want to give you a final opportunity to tell us 
to what extent you agree that the mechanism that was in 
10 
place was in fact inadequate to monitor compliance and to 
report on non-compliance and to prompt the necessary 
action to secure compliance.   
MR FROLICK:   The mechanism that was put in place was 
to put a system in place not as a replacement for the 
Monitoring and Tracking as envisaged.  There were flaws in 
that system that are put in place because it takes time and 
there is a lot of paperwork going to and thro, and it could 
possible not achieve the original objective that was set. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, let us just consider this 
20 
conceptually and systemically.  The purpose of Portfolio 
Committee oversight and then reports on such oversights 
to The House is to identify malpractice and other problems 
and to propose what should be done to remedy that.  And 
that is as a matter of practice when the committees are 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 177 of 212 
 
functional contained in reports that they submit to The 
House for adoption.  Is that correct?   
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And as a matter of routine formality, 
The House is in the habit of adopting those committee 
reports.  Is that correct?   
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you say, and I do not think 
that Mr God for one would dispute this, is that the next 
step is for the Speaker to take responsibility to ensure that 
10 
those resolutions of The House are communicated to the 
relevant representatives of the Executive.  Is that correct?   
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, those reports, those resolutions 
of The House frequently required certain steps to be taken 
by certain persons by certain times.  Is that correct?   
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And therefore if one is going to 
exercise oversight effectively it is essential that somebody 
is responsible for ensuring that they know by when what 
20 
responses are required from whom.  Would you agree with 
me? 
MR FROLICK:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And to be effective, that system would 
need to have a mechanism to detect when there has been a 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 178 of 212 
 
failure to report back adequately and substantively by the 
specified time.  Do you agree with that? 
MR FROLICK:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you say that there are some 
departments that do, not only acknowledge receipt of the 
reports, they also respond substantively – and I suppose 
some of them must respond appropriately and substantively 
– and they must do what is required in some cases, at 
least.  Would that be correct? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   But I take it that you would agree that 
it is not at all uncommon for the representative of the 
Executive were required to take remedial action by a 
certain time.  Firstly, not to do so and secondly not to 
report back that they have done so as it is required by 
House resolutions.   
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And will you agree with me that 
despite the fact that that is true, there has not been in 
place an effective mechanism to address that problem and 
20 
to ensure that where remedial measures were required by 
House resolutions, the required remedial measures were in 
fact taken by the representatives of the Executive? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Let us then move on.  Chair, I do not 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 179 of 212 
 
know whether that is the time at which you would want to 
raise any further issues in that regard? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, let me just follow-up on your 
last few questions.  Mr Frolick, as I understand from your 
previous evidence – I did not check on this affidavit – you 
have been a member of Parliament from either late 1990’s 
or early 2000’s.  Is that right? 
MR FROLICK:   1999, Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, at least I was right about late 
1990’s.  [laughs] 
10 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, Chair.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that means you have been in 
Parliament for about 21-years or so? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So.  And half of that period, you were 
occupying the position of Chair of Chairs.  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
CHAIRPERSON:   That should give you enough experience 
of what is happening in Parliament to be able to tell me 
how long this has been going on, namely there being no 
20 
proper mechanism put in place by Parliament to follow-up 
and check resolutions that have been taken. 
 
Are followed up and that reports that are supposed 
to or responses that are supposed to be send to Parliament 
by members of the Executive, DG’s and officials and 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 180 of 212 
 
whoever, that they are properly monitored and checked.   
 
And if there is no – if those lines are not met, 
something happens.  How long has this situation been 
going on? 
MR FROLICK:   Deputy Chief Justice, when I was – when I 
arrived in Parliament the first time, that problem existed.  
And that is part of the reason why over the years leading 
up 2009 when the Oversight and Accountability Model was 
then formally adopted, was to address the problem that 
existed for some time.   
10 
 
And the problem that you have is, is that as you 
change and try to push to work in a new format and go 
ahead in a new format, it is not so easy to change people’s 
behaviour.   
 
And for that, you need the requisite support from 
all the relevant stakeholders who are there.  Everyone has 
a role to play in that.  But it is not a new problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course you, probably, can only speak 
about the time that you have been in Parliament but if you 
tell me that when you arrived in 1999, this problem was 
20 
there, probably the problem has been there from 1994. 
MR FROLICK:   That is quite possible Deputy Chief 
Justice.  As I said, when I arrived there it was there.  So it 
could not have all started in 1999. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is unlikely that there was such a 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 181 of 212 
 
mechanism before 1999 and it was stopped.  Probably, the 
problem has been there from 1994 and that means – is it 
26-years?   
 
How is it possible that Parliament would not 
address such a critical part or such a critical problem that 
would affect the effectiveness of its oversight?  How is it 
possible that that...   
 
I struggle to understand that, if Parliament took its 
function of oversight seriously?  How is it possible that a 
problem like this could go on for so long without being 
10 
addressed?   
 
It happens every year, year in and year out.  One 
term of five years in and one term of five years out and it 
is not addressed.  How is it possible?  What is the 
problem?   
 
I am tempted to say - and I want to say this before 
you respond so that you can deal with all of this.  I am 
tempted to ask the question whether it is not – the fact that 
the problem has not been addressed for so long, does not 
suggest that Parliament does not take the issue of 
20 
oversight, 
its 
constitutional 
obligation 
of 
oversight, 
seriously enough.  What can you share with me? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, Deputy Chief Justice.  As I have 
said, the 2009 oversight and Accountability Model was part 
of a number of interventions from the time that I can recall, 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 182 of 212 
 
1999 and onwards on how to address this dilemma and this 
problem.  It is a key-function of Parliament.   
 
And part of that oversight and Accountability Model 
has one monitoring and practising mechanism but it also 
gives then the other areas that has been implemented such 
as the budget office has then been put in place, the public 
participation process that has been in put in place.  The 
rules, for instance, that has been amended.   
 
And we are talking now to the – I think it is the 8 t h 
Edition of the National Assembly Rules that are there to 
10 
further strengthen the oversight.  But we deal with warm 
bodies of members of Parliament and also of staff who 
must work together towards one outcome to address.   
 
Also Parliament, Deputy Chief Justice, it is a 
political environment where there are political dynamics 
that are playing itself out there.  And members of 
Parliament belong to the different parties, to the majority 
party for that instance.   
 
Each one of them work in this environment where 
oversight is important and oversight over your direct peers 
20 
must be done.  And at time that is very, very difficult to 
achieve and to move towards...   
 
My approach was to find an improved and a full 
proof method to ensure that you do get the requisite 
responses by the time you need it because that will further 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 183 of 212 
 
empower the oversight work by the different committees.   
 
But due to the non-implementation of other key-
stakeholders where the budgets are allocated, this could 
not be realised.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But would it not be correct to say that 
the majority party in parliament wanted these measures to 
be implemented and was sufficiently committed to ensuring 
that these measures are committed that it would not have 
been a problem to implement them because in some cases 
the minority parties say we can say whatever we say, if it 
10 
does not get approved by the majority, there is nothing we 
can do, it gets defeated.   
 
So I am asking the question whether there is any 
reason 
why 
these 
or 
any 
other 
measures 
aimed 
at 
addressing this issue or problem why they would not have 
been 
effected 
if 
the 
majority 
party 
was 
sufficiently 
committed to solving these problems. 
MR FROLICK:   Deputy Chief Justice, I do believe that with 
the flaws that was identified, there has been a commitment 
to address the situation.  However, when we come to this 
20 
specific point, for me are crucial in terms of monitoring and 
tracking the reports and resolutions of the house.  That is 
where we have not achieved what we should have achieved 
by now and that would have demanded the support of 
everyone involved led by the majority party of course. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 184 of 212 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   At a practical level, apart from maybe 
some equipment, maybe what was referred to in Mr Godi’s 
affidavit as a dashboard, or was in your affidavit?  I think 
Mr Godi’s affidavit, it is what the two of you talked about, I 
am assuming it would have been some equipment where 
you could press some button then have a picture of 
compliance and the levels of compliance and so on and so 
on.  Apart from that, is the position that all that is 
otherwise needed to achieve this is to employ sufficient 
staff who are dedicated to this for the 50 or so committees. 
10 
MR FROLICK:   Deputy Chief Justice, apart from the hard 
infrastructure that was required and the staff that are being 
required, it is also and it remains the responsibility of each 
portfolio committee to also follow up and say but listen 
here, we have asked and our report has been adopted on 
x, y and z, why has something not happened and as part of 
the oversight and accountability model, we introduced a 
budget review and recommendation report process where 
committees throughout the year and it also is part of the 
previous reports of the committees where they have an 
20 
opportunity when they interact with the executive to go 
back and to say that but earlier on we have recommended 
the following, the report was adopted by the house.  That 
requires political leadership at the different political – oh 
sorry, at the different committee levels in parliament and 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 185 of 212 
 
that is also an area where you would find that there is 
engagement with the relevant members of the executive 
and I am not saying this because I monitor them every day, 
it is when we sit with the auditor general, for instance, and 
the auditor general gets invited to come and address our 
meetings at least twice a year to give us the audit 
outcomes and then the same chairpersons will say but 
there is regression taking place now in this department 
that we are overseeing and when our BRRR report that 
gets tabled in the house and gets sent to the Minister of 
10 
Finance, these are the matters that we have identified but 
it does not improve.   
 
So it does not only require the infrastructure to be 
put in place, it requires the political leadership of the 
chairpersons of those different committees to ensure that 
the recommendations that they have made and also that 
report that has been tabled has been driven but we also 
need to continuously reassess and assess and one of the 
assessments that I did regularly together with my colleague 
in the National Council of Provinces is that a fully 
20 
functioning, monitoring and tracking mechanism will add 
that capability to the arsenal that the different members of 
portfolio committees as well as the National Assembly have 
to follow executive action. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you touch on a point which I think 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 186 of 212 
 
is important, namely without even employing a lot of maybe 
admin staff, why is it not the function or the duty of the 
chairperson 
of 
each 
portfolio 
committee 
to 
monitor 
whether, for example, ministers in respect of whom his or 
her committee have made certain recommendations which 
have been approved by the initial assembly, whether those 
ministers have complied or not or if is DGs or CEOs of 
SOEs, why can they not do that? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, Deputy Chief Justice, that is exactly 
what 
the 
chairpersons 
or 
let 
me 
say 
most 
of 
the 
10 
chairpersons over the years that I worked with have 
continuously raised but it seems as if there is this view in 
terms of the separation of powers between the judiciary, 
the executive and the legislature, that the legislature has a 
more junior role to those other two arms of the state and 
that is a continuous battle the chairpersons will also have 
to ensure that exactly what you are talking about get the 
necessary attention. 
 
There has been numerous occasions where I know 
where the Speakers that I have worked with over the years, 
20 
after the chairpersons bring those frustrations to them, 
engage those relevant members who - from the executive 
and at times the committees engage the accounting 
officers that are there why certain actions are not being 
undertaken but we need to address the power relations 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 187 of 212 
 
between the legislature and the executive as far as this is 
concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I imagine that the separation of 
powers cannot prevent the Chairperson of a portfolio 
committee from saying to a minister or CEO of an SOE or 
whatever saying this is what the committee or this is what 
the National Assembly said you should do by a certain 
date, you have not come back to us to say you have done 
it or you have not come back to us to say I have not done 
it and these are my reasons.   
10 
It may be that they might even say well, I do not 
think it is parliament’s job to dictate to me which of various 
solutions I should choose in resolving this problem.  It may 
be that by virtue of the separation of powers they could 
raise that to say, well, there are various ways in which this 
can be resolved, you as parliament have said this is the 
way, I am entitled to see it differently and by virtue of the 
separation of powers you must leave it to me but at least 
they come back and report back to say what have we done 
about it and if they have not done anything and they refuse 
20 
to do so, at least let it be known that they have taken the 
stand that they refer or they might say this is what we will 
do to address the issue, not the way you, as the portfolio 
committee, have we should do it.   
But what should not be allowed, I would imagine, is 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 188 of 212 
 
a situation where a recommendation has been made by a 
portfolio 
committee 
and 
the 
National 
Assembly 
has 
approved that to say certain things must be done or should 
not be allowed to continue and the executive just keeps 
quite and the deadline goes by and they do nothing.  I do 
not think that that should be acceptable.  At least if they 
disagree they should come and say we disagree and then 
we know the executive and the legislature disagree but, as 
I understand the position in part from your evidence, in 
part from other witnesses’ evidence is it looks like very 
10 
largely there is noncompliance with many resolutions and 
that is the end and it is not a situation where they come 
back and say no, we have a different way of addressing it 
that we too would refer, what would you say to all of those 
remarks? 
MR FROLICK:   Look, Deputy Chief Justice, just in brief 
response and I tend to follow and agree with what you say 
is that I must reiterate that there are a number of members 
of the executives over the years have seen who does 
exactly what you are saying, to say that parliament, you 
20 
have made recommendations in this and that regard or to 
the portfolio committee but this is the reason why this or 
that cannot be done.  But our biggest problem remains the 
issues of financial oversight and the remedial action that is 
required and remedial action meaning acting against and 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 189 of 212 
 
the accounting officer taking up that responsibility acting 
against certain officials that through SCOPA reports or 
other reports are pointed to have fallen foul of what they 
should have done and that is a situation that needs to be 
addressed and I would say that we cannot be happy with a 
situation where it is happening in certain instances where 
there a number of departments are responding to what 
parliament say in terms of its recommendations, we need a 
situation that that must the standard and the norm and for 
that to happen, we need the cooperation of everyone 
10 
involved and the assistance of everyone involved.   
 
There is also at times when you find these type of 
difficulties where you would even engage through the 
leader of government business office to say that but you 
know what, there is a certain ministry or department that 
there is certain things that are not happening the way it 
should happen or they are nonresponsive about certain 
things.  So even that office gets engaged in various ways 
to address the situation but the situation is certainly not 
what it should be. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now you would 
agree with me, Mr Frolick, that for every department 
accountability rests on the minister.  
MR FROLICK:   Well, that is a point that has been debated 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 190 of 212 
 
over the years and they say when it comes to the issues in 
terms of financial accountability is the responsibility of the 
accounting officer which is the head of the department and 
the minister is responsible politically for what is happening 
in that department but the minister is the most senior 
person in terms at the political level who is in charge of… 
ADV FREUND SC:   Precisely.  I of course accept that if 
one looks, for example, at the PFMA, if one looks at the 
responsibility of accounting officers and accounting entities 
there are certain legal obligations where the buck stops 
10 
with 
them 
but 
the 
minister 
is 
accountable 
for 
the 
performance of all the accounting officers in the minister ’s 
department, am I correct?  Politically accountable. 
MR FROLICK:   The minister is politically accountable for 
what is happening in the department. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes and in fact our constitutional 
structure is that the executive is accountable to the 
legislature, am I right? 
MR FROLICK:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the leadership of the executive is 
20 
to be found in the ministers, correct? 
MR FROLICK:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now would you go please to the 
reference bundle at page 32? 
MR FROLICK:   Yes. 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 191 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   This is part of the OVAC responsibility 
which you have told the Chair was adopted by the National 
Assembly and the NCOP in 2009.  Paragraph 4.1.9: 
“Sanctioning noncompliance by the executive” 
I am going to read it into the record, the entire paragraph: 
“It is recommended that parliament develop rules to 
assist it further in sanctioning cabinet members for 
noncompliance 
after 
all 
established 
existing 
avenues protocols have been exhausted.  For 
example, 
naming 
the 
cabinet 
member 
by 
the 
10 
Speaker 
of 
the 
National 
Assembly 
of 
the 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
Council 
based 
on 
a 
full 
explanation.” 
Would you agree with me that no such rules have been 
developed? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And would you agree with me that 
what this very recommendation indicates is that by no later 
than 2009 and in all probability long before that the 
problem of executive failure to implement the requirements 
20 
specified in house resolutions was a well-known [indistinct 
– 
break 
in 
recording] 
assist 
in 
sanctioning 
cabinet 
members. 
MR FROLICK:   Advocate Freund, you broke up, I could not 
hear you clearly, can you repeat that please? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 192 of 212 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Would you agree that by no later than 
2009 it was already recognised that it was necessary to 
address this problems by means of developing rules to 
enable the sanctioning of noncompliant cabinet members?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Could you perhaps venture an opinion 
as to why, as you have confirmed, no steps whatsoever 
have been taken to implement such rules? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, that is the responsibility of the 
National Assembly rules committee that is chaired by the 
10 
Speaker of the National Assembly and I cannot off the cuff 
give an opinion as to why that did not take place.  We have 
had review of the rules and there is a committee, a 
subcommittee on the review of rules, they only met this 
morning again, which should be continuously seized with 
the implementation process of any decisions that has been 
taken in terms of the rules. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, let me put to you a similar 
question to the question put to you on a comparable issue 
by the Chair.  Would you agree that if the majority party, 
20 
the 
African 
National 
Congress, 
as 
represented 
in 
parliament wanted this to have happened they could have 
made it happen. 
MR FROLICK:   The majority party together with all the 
other political parties have a responsibility but it is 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 193 of 212 
 
important for the majority party to lead these processes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if they had wanted it, they had the 
capacity to bring it about. 
MR FROLICK:   As I said, I know there was a review of the 
rules with that edition of 2016 that you were looking at and 
they are currently again in the process, that subcommittee 
of reviewing the rules.  I do not have any explanation or 
reason why it was not done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but Mr Frolick the question is do 
you not agree that if the majority party was really 
10 
committed to having it done it would have been done, just 
like they are able …[intervenes] 
MR FROLICK:   No, I agree, I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You agree, yes.  Okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, I think it is fair to the witness 
that I should convey something that was conveyed to me 
before the witness started to testify. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is that the witness had other 
commitments for today but rearranged his responsibilities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I have been led to understand that 
he cannot continue beyond 6 p.m. this evening, is that 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 194 of 212 
 
correct, Mr Frolick? 
MR FROLICK:   No, thank you for bringing that to the 
attention of the hearing, Advocate Freund, in fact I have 
been on standby since Wednesday to deliver testimony in 
front of the Commission and I was not even given the way 
that the proceedings unfolded if I was going to give 
evidence today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   I was supposed to be a speaker deployed 
by the African National Congress in parliament at the 
10 
funeral of Ms Tozama Mantashe this morning and I had to 
indicate after discussions with Advocate Freund who 
indicated that I will testify today that I could not do it.  
Plus I also have another commitment, Deputy Chief 
Justice, at 6 p.m. this evening but I can probably for 
another half an hour after six o’clock, if you will permit 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so if we continue and stop at six 
you would be fine with that? 
MR FROLICK:   Absolutely, Deputy Chief Justice . 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, that is fine, I think we will 
need to accommodate you because we have kept you 
waiting for some time and if we do not finish I am sure 
arrangements can be made in the next few days, maybe if 
everybody is available for you to maybe come in either 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 195 of 212 
 
early in the morning or in the evening and evening session.  
You know, we have these evening sessions and on the 
basis of video link as you are giving evidence today, so we 
could finish one of these days, maybe next week, but Mr 
Freund would talk to you to check your availability. 
MR FROLICK:   I am at your disposal, Deputy Chief Justice 
, as long as the arrangements can be made timeously. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   So that I can complete the testimony for 
which you want me here. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  Let us continue then 
until six o’clock and then we release you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, may I also 
on the same issue indicate that there are two further 
witnesses who have been waiting patiently, Ms Magadzi 
and Mr Smith to testify. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It is my impression that we are not 
going to reach their evidence and my suggestion that we 
should release them if they wish to be released for today. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And we make arrangements with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine, we can release them 
and maybe I should mention this to you which I was going 
to mention later, the witness who was going to give 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 196 of 212 
 
evidence on Monday will no longer be able to give 
evidence because he is not well.  So to the extent that you 
might be available to make use of Monday, whether during 
the day or maybe evening session, or both, there is an 
opportunity to do that.  So if Mr Smith and the other 
witness for example are available and Mr Frolick is 
available for us to finish with his evidence on Monday, we 
can look at that. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, certainly, Chair, we  will follow 
that up after the conclusion of today’s session. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Frolick, can I take you to some 
different topics?  You deal from page 3 onwards of your 
affidavit with the various rules that regulate the powers 
and functions and duties of portfolio committees.  I do not 
think it is necessary to deal with those in detail because it 
is quite clear, is it not, that a portfolio committee has an 
obligation to exercise oversight and for that purpose it has 
a power to summon any person to appear before it to give 
evidence and to permit oral evidence and to conduct public 
20 
hearings.  They have got the powers they need. 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I want to explore with you the 
problem of what appears to be delay and quite possibly 
culpable delay in the legislation exercising appropriate 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 197 of 212 
 
oversight as regards allegations of state capture and 
corruption and I want to deal with this issue in the 
knowledge, that we all have, that during June of 2017, you 
issued certain letters to the chairs of four portfolio 
committees requiring them to, as a matter of urgency, 
commence investigations into then current allegations of 
state capture and corruption.  Have I got that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And I want to make clear that I have 
no difficulty at all with the propriety of the letters that you 
10 
sent, it seems to me to have been manifestly necessary at 
the time but I want to make equally clear to you that it 
seems to me at least to be arguable that there was a 
culpable delay to do similar things much earlier and I want 
to deal with that in a little bit of detail. 
 
Now I want to read to you from bundle 2 page 561 – 
and you will not have this, I do not think.  I want to read to 
you the first couple of paragraphs of a headline article on 
the front of the Sunday Times …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, Mr Freund?  I think my 
20 
registrar did not hear you refer to the bundle for her to 
give it to me. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It was bundle 2, Chair, bundle 2 at 
page 561. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you. Thank you, Mr 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 198 of 212 
 
Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I want to read to 
you, Mr Frolick, from an article published in the Sunday 
Times on the 27 February 2011 under the heading: 
“Ministers 
“shiver” 
went 
summoned 
to 
family’s 
home.”’ 
The article says in the first part: 
“A revolt is brewing within the ANC and its alliance 
partners against influence of the Gupta family over 
President Jacob Zuma and his government.  The 
10 
anger has become so widespread that some of 
Zuma’s traditional backers are privately intimating 
the controversy could hamper his bid for a second 
term as President.  Members of the top ANC 
leadership 
structures, 
the 
National 
Working 
Committee and the top six party officials recently 
raised concerns about senior appointments that 
were 
being 
made 
in 
the 
government 
and 
at 
parastatals when the party’s deployment was being 
sidelined.  The Sunday Times understands that the 
20 
Gupta’s role in influencing the appointment of CEOs 
and chairmen in key state owned enterprises was 
recently raised at an NWC meeting and will be 
formally at its next gathering in a week’s time.” 
And it continues.  What I want to put to you is, when 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 199 of 212 
 
allegations of that type are not only published in the 
newspaper but are regarded as so serious that they should 
be discussed in repeated meetings of the National Working 
Committee of the African National Congress, is that not 
material that ought to have been the subject matter of 
oversight activity on the part of the responsible portfolio 
committee? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, Advocate, unfortunately I do not 
have that article in front of me and I was also not furnished 
with a copy.  What usually happens is you will find that 
10 
there is a lot of different stories and articles that appear in 
the different newspapers.  You yourself make reference to 
it that in the article it is said that the matter will be 
discussed at the NWC and the NEC but there was at no 
stage ever anyone of the portfolio committee who took the 
matter up to an extent where the committees will look at it.  
I will have to go back in my record of that year to see if 
indeed there were any portfolio committee or standing 
committee that further delved into that matter but I cannot 
give you a clear response on what you are raising now. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now let me put the question 
this way.  Let us assume that the evidence shows to this 
Commission that, for example, the public – the portfolio 
enterprises did not raise that and did not seek to pursue it 
and did not seek to investigate whether as published, and 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 200 of 212 
 
apparently concerning to the NEC and the NWC it is true 
that the Gupta’s role in influencing the appointment of 
CEO’s and chairmen in key state owned enterprises 
whether you think it ought to have been the subject of 
oversight by the committee responsible for the oversight of 
public enterprises? 
MR FROLICK:   Advocate Freund you know over the years I 
have seen in some instances articles appear in certain 
newspapers, it’s either inside leaks coming from within 
certain meetings that’s going to take place in ANC 
10 
structures and I don’t want to work on that assumption in 
terms of, as I have indicated that I have not seen what you 
are 
referring 
me 
to 
now 
but 
ordinarily, 
ordinarily 
committees should be seized with issues and whatever 
there is and any political party can propose an item to go 
onto the agenda of the different portfolio committees and 
then they should have looked at it, but I don’t want to 
arrive at any assumptions at this stage. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But I just want to check that I 
understand what you have just said, when you said they 
20 
should have looked at it that implies that if the information 
I am giving you is correct that that is what was alleged and 
apparently alleged sufficiently to raise concern for the NEC 
and the NWC do you think it should have been looked at by 
the portfolio committee? 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 201 of 212 
 
MR FROLICK:   You know it is difficult for portfolio 
committees to deal with those type of sources where you 
have no clear indication as to where it is coming from or 
anyone is not specifically prepared to come forward, it is 
nameless people who you cannot put a face to, so what I 
am saying is ordinarily in the work of portfolio committees 
if there were any instances or indications that there were 
things happening then I would have expected that that 
would have formed part of the discussions of those 
portfolio committees, but not having seen the records of 
10 
the meetings of – in this or Public Enterprises Committee 
for that year or years I cannot come to an assumption that 
indeed it happened or it didn’t happen. 
ADV FREUND SC:  No, that I understand.  Now let me 
refer you again to material that you may not have, this is 
Bundle 2, page 541. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund don’t forget your 
question, I just want to go back to this newspaper article to 
which you referred Mr Frolick, may I understand this Mr 
Frolick, that you accept that any member of a portfolio 
20 
committee, I assume it might be more than one portfolio 
committee, that read this article and it seemed that there 
were matters, allegations made there which would fall – 
which would be the type of allegations that his or her 
committee should be concerned about, do you accept that 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 202 of 212 
 
anyone, any member of a relevant committee or relevant 
committees who read this article should have wanted their 
committee to discuss the  matter and see what should be 
done about it, because the allegations were quite serious.  
MR FROLICK:   Deputy Chief Justice I would say that any 
member of a committee and as I say I don’t have the 
article, I don’t know what it is exactly talking about, would 
have had an interest to that article. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   Would have had an interest in the article 
10 
and depending on how they approached the matter could 
have taken it to their portfolio committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, on that is fine, it is a pity you 
haven’t -  you don’t have this but as Mr Freund said you 
know the headline was “Ministers shiver when summoned 
to family’s home” and then it goes on to make allegations 
that the Gupta family as involved in the appointment of 
ministers and other functionaries, of course there could be 
some articles, I think nobody would say there are no 
articles that members of a particular portfolio committee 
20 
would look at and say well it falls within our jurisdiction but 
really this it does not appear to be something serious 
enough but certainly some articles might have allegations 
that are quite serious that committee members might want 
to look at and I would think that if an article with such 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 203 of 212 
 
serious allegations came up you know if I was a member of 
a committee that has jurisdiction on those issues I would 
certainly want these types of issues to be discussed.  You 
accept that if it talked about Ministers or people outside of 
government having – who have not been elected having – 
and who are not the ruling party having a say on the 
appointment of Ministers and calling Ministers to their 
home and Ministers shiver, that would be something that 
really 
should 
be 
of 
interest 
if 
it 
was 
within 
one’s 
committee. 
10 
MR FROLICK:   I agree Chief Justice that is what I 
indicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, thank you Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.    You also indicated 
Mr Frolick that the committees had the powers they need, 
they can summon any person and they have the capacity, if 
they wished to use that capacity to investigate allegations 
of that type by requiring it necessary people to testify, if 
necessary under subpoena, am I right? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I ask this as a follow up on that, I 
haven’t had a look at the rules I would imagine that the 
committees, portfolio committees also would also have 
power to require anybody to depose to an affidavit and say 
what they know about certain matters and send such an 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 204 of 212 
 
affidavit to the portfolio committee, even if they didn’t 
come to give oral evidence, is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   That is possible Deputy Chief Justice and 
that is why the legal services of Parliament is there to 
guide those committees in those processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:  yes thank you.   Just while we are on 
that question there are rules that regulate the powers of 
portfolio committees and one of those rules, I think it is 
referred to in your affidavit as Rule 227 and it says: 
10 
“A portfolio committee may monitor, investigate, 
inquiry into and make recommendations concerning 
any such executive organ of state and so forth.” 
So they have that power, they have the authority to make 
such investigations, you would agree with that?  
MR FROLICK:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And there are other rules that regulate 
not 
only 
portfolio 
committees 
but 
all 
Parliamentary 
committees, and you might know the rule far better than I 
do, can you just point me to the rule that confers the 
20 
relevant powers. 
MR FROLICK:   Rule 167. 
ADV FREUND SC:   167, Chair it is at page 286. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of which bundle? 
ADV FREUND SC:   The legal bundle Chair, that is the 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 205 of 212 
 
bundle that has only two sets ...[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, 256? 
ADV FREUND SC:   286 in the legal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have got it thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, and it says as follows, 
under the heading “General Powers”: 
“For the purposes of performing its functions a 
committee 
may, 
subject 
to 
the 
Constitution 
legislation and the other provisions of these rules 
and resolutions of the Assembly: 
10 
[a] 
summon any person to appear before it to 
give evidence on oath or affirmation or to produce 
documents” 
And then: 
[c] 
permit oral evidence and so forth.” 
So they have those powers, I think you would agree. 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you said a moment ago and I 
agree with you, that issues of this sort if they came to the 
attention of a member of a relevant portfolio committee 
20 
would be such that any member would be entitled to raise a 
concern about that issue in the portfolio committee and 
request that it be addressed, am I right? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if such a request were made in 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 206 of 212 
 
relation to allegations of that type do you agree with me 
that 
the 
responsible 
decision 
given 
that 
there 
is 
a 
constitutional obligation to exercise oversight over the 
executive, would be to accede to such a request and to 
conduct such an investigation? 
MR FROLICK:   That is the power of the committee as we 
refer to in 167. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes I know they had the power, but I 
am asking you a different question, should they not in that 
scenario that I painted, consider it for the moment an 
10 
academic scenario, a hypothetical scenario, should they 
not as a matter of political responsibility and legal 
responsibility exercise the power to conduct such an 
investigation where such a matter is drawn to its attention 
and where a request is made to please exercise your 
powers and to investigate and if necessary summon 
witnesses. 
MR FROLICK:   You would expect the committee to do so, 
the committee what usually happens Advocate Freund is 
that when a certain member raises something and they 
20 
want it to be added to the agenda the committee deliberate 
on the matter and they decide when to and how to proceed 
with the matter. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And with allegations of the type that 
we have been referred to the responsible decision would 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 207 of 212 
 
be to investigate? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now – and Mr Frolick it does appear to 
me that we are not going to finish your evidence today, if 
we are going to – so in fairness to you we will make 
arrangements in the same way as we did last night with 
certain other material to transmit to you before you next 
testify copies of documents to which I am now referring, 
but I have referred to one press article you hadn’t 
previously been alerted to and I want to refer now to 
10 
another such article, and if you feel after having read it 
when you come back that I have been in any way unfair to 
you then you can raise it and we will deal with it at that 
occasion, but for the moment I would like to refer you to 
page 541 in Bundle 2, which you won’t have, but this is 
part of the affidavit of Ms Rantho who has testified.   I 
don’t know if you had an opportunity to watch her 
evidence? 
MR FROLICK:   Advocate Freund I watched some part of 
her 
evidence, 
I 
did 
not 
watch 
everything 
that 
was 
20 
happening on that day.  
ADV FREUND SC:   So in paragraph 8.13 of her affidavit 
she is talking about the situation as pertained by March of 
2016 and I want to put to you that in my mind that is a 
critical moment in history, March 2016, and she says in 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 208 of 212 
 
March 2016 a host of allegations had been made public 
including the following; ...[indistinct] claim reported in the 
Sunday Times on the 13 t h of March 2016 and confirmed by 
his public statement of the 16 t h of March 2016 that the 
Guptas had offered him a R600million bribe in October 
2015 if he would take the post of Finance Minister and do 
their bidding which he said he had refused.  An allegation 
that the person then appointed instead of him as the new 
Finance Minister in early December 2015, Mr Des van 
Rooyen, 
was 
accompanied 
to 
his 
new 
post 
on 
his 
10 
appointment by Gupta linked aides.  Vygie Mentoor ’s 
allegation during a radio interview that in 2010 she had 
been offered Barbra Hogan’s job as Minister of Public 
Enterprises by the Guptas if she cooperated with them in 
assisting Jet Airways to replace SAA on the Mumbai route 
and Barbra Hogan’s allegation that there were definitely 
sinister forces operating behind her back when she was 
Minister of Public Enterprises until October 2010 and that 
she too had faced pressure regarding Jet Airways. 
 
You will recall those incidents and allegations at 
20 
about that time, am I correct? 
MR FROLICK:   I recall some of the Advocate Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now would you agree with me that by 
that time if the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises 
received a request that there should be an inquiry within 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 209 of 212 
 
that Committee to inquire into whether there was truth in 
these allegations and other allegations referred to in the 
evidence 
of 
some 
of 
our 
witnesses 
thus 
far, 
the 
responsible and appropriate response should have been to 
accede to that request and to agree to conduct such an 
inquiry within the portfolio committee. 
MR FROLICK:   Well advocate as I have said I watched 
part of the testimony of the Honourable Rhanto and I have 
not been furnished with the material that you are referring 
to at the moment but given the background that you have 
10 
given to then it would have been something that the 
Committee should have been seized with. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Should have been seized with, and 
does that mean should have investigated and utilised its 
powers to try to get to the bottom of? 
MR FROLICK:  Well depending on how the committee 
wanted to proceed on the matter on the matter, because 
also in terms of Rule 167, your 167 and [f] makes it clear 
that the committee can determine their own working 
arrangements.  
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   So it was entirely in the hands of the 
committee to decide how they wanted to proceed. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I accept that, and I want to make 
clear that not only do I accept that, I accept that it is not 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 210 of 212 
 
your function as the House Chair of Chairs to substitute 
your judgment for their judgment, they are entitled to make 
a judgment, I accept that, but what I am asking you is what 
judgment you think they should have made, and I think you 
would agree with me from what you have already told me 
that you think that if they were acting responsibly they 
ought to have agreed to investigate those allegations, am I 
correct? 
MR FROLICK:   The committee should have applied their 
mind to the matter, and should have decided what would be 
10 
the best way to proceed with that matter, in the absence as 
I said of the material that you are referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so I seem to – it seems that it 
would be better that you know exactly what material was 
before them, is that correct?  Mr Frolick? 
MR FROLICK:   Can you just repeat Chief Deputy Justice, I 
couldn’t hear you clearly? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes I am saying it seemed from what you 
are saying that you are reluctant to pass judgment or to 
say what they should have done without knowing what 
20 
material was before them, but if you were to ...[intervenes]  
MR FROLICK:   Correct Chief Deputy Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you were to be given the same 
material that was before them then you can take a view as 
to what the responsible was that they – you think should 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 211 of 212 
 
have happened? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Freund?  
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair that being the case, and it being 
five to six I would be amenable should you feel it is 
appropriate to take the adjournment now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alternatively I can proceed certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no that is fine, I mean five 
minutes is not going to make much difference, okay, let us 
10 
adjourn and then once you have, Mr Freund had chance to 
talk to witnesses and look at your own availability about 
Monday you will let me know during the weekend, the 
earliest you can let me know the better, because in case 
you are not able to use Monday there is a possibility 
another evidence leader from another work stream might 
be able to rearrange their programme in such a way as to 
be able to use Monday as well, but I accept that it is short 
notice so it might not be easy, but just do the best you can. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair I would think that there is a 
20 
reasonable prospect from my side that that can be done.   I 
have other commitments for Monday but I am hopeful that 
that can be rescheduled and so it will be a matter of 
checking with the witnesses and I will communicate with 
the structures of the Commission hopefully in the course of 
05 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 338 
 
Page 212 of 212 
 
tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine, but also to the 
extent that the day session might not – you might not be 
able to use it then the possibility of looking at some 
evening sessions next week that must be kept open if we – 
if all concerned would be available so we can try and do as 
much as possible. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright, thank you very much 
and thank you to everybody that we have been able to sit 
10 
until this time.  We are going adjourn and then on – next 
week from Tuesday at least I think up to the end of the 
week it would be evidence relating to Eskom that the 
Commission will be hearing, this is just for the benefit of 
the public, I am making the announcement for the benefit 
of the public. 
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 8 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
20 
