 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 314 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 297 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 3 of 297 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 27 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Chaskalson, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Chair we are ready. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  If maybe… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before we proceed let me just get 
one item out of the way.  A few weeks ago I just want to 
10 
make an announcement. 
 
A few weeks ago Ms Dudu Myeni gave evidence via 
video link in this commission and in the process of her 
evidence disclosed the identity of a witness whose identity 
I had ordered should not be disclosed. 
 
Subsequently she furnished the commission with an 
affidavit in which she explained her conduct.  Since then 
the legal team has looked at her affidavit.  I have looked at 
her affidavit and I have instructed the legal team to assist 
the secretary and prepare the documentation necessary so 
20 
that the secretary of the commission can lay a criminal 
complaint against Ms Dudu 
Myeni for the police to 
investigate a possible contravention of either Section 5 of 
the Commission’s Act or Regular 9 of the Regulations of 
the Commission and that process will be taken forward 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 4 of 297 
 
urgently. 
 
Okay that is the end of that announcement.  Mr 
Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair.  Just some 
housekeeping before we begin today.  We will be working 
in files FOF 2 and 3 today and we need to identify some 
annexures.  At the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Chair – sorry Chair.  In FOF 2 
there is a Regulation 10.6 Notice at page 390. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is Flow of Funds Bundle 2? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That is correct Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can I ask that that notice dated 
17 September be entered as BB – as VV3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page is it? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Page 390.  390.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You say it should be Exhibit? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  VV3.1.  Then Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Directive in terms of Regulation 10.6 
20 
of the Regulations of the Commission starting at page 390 
is admitted as Exhibit VV3.1 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then Chair there is a second 
exhibit – a second 10.6 Notice at page 395 if that can be 
VV3.2?  That is the notice calling for an affidavit it is dated 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 5 of 297 
 
5 October. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Directive in terms of Regulation 10.6 
which starts at page 395 is admitted as Exhibit VV3.2.  Is 
that right? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  3.2.  Okay. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
Then 
Chair 
Mr 
Makhubo 
furnished an affidavit in response to that second notice and 
this affidavit certainly does comply with Rule 10.6 Chair.  
That is to be found at page 404. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That one we will admit after he has 
confirmed his signature is it not? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Indeed.  There is that affidavit 
and the supplementary witness statement and a bundle.  If 
we can reserve. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  If we can reserve 3 and 4 for the 
affidavit and the witness statement. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if I might take you to the 
bundle which commences on page 610 – 610 of Volume 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 610 of the same bundle? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Indeed Chair and if that can be a 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 6 of 297 
 
bundle of document described as Annexure VV3.5? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it separate documents that stand 
alone? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is a bundle of documents from 
which we are going to put several documents to Mr 
Makhubo in todays’ session Chair like with Mr Ramosebudi 
yesterday it is a bundle of documents collected by the 
commission in due course.  They will all be proven by the 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  You – you want us to mark the 
10 
first one and the others will be marked with point 
something – point something up to the end? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Indeed Chair if we could… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then – but we will use the page 
number – pagination? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.  Did you want me to – to 
just mark the first one and then say we will say point 1 or 
whatever and then the rest will be done later? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Indeed Chair unfortunately it is 
20 
going to point 606 or whatever. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But yes please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright.  Exhibit VV stands – 
remains? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 7 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  VV remains yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And then it will be after VV what 
will it be? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  3.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:  3.5.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And Chair because there are – 
there is going to be pagination – that bundle in fact runs to 
the end of Bundle 2 and through the whole of Bundle 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Might I suggest that we create a 
10 
new annexure for Bundle 3 so we do not end up with 
duplicate page numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes I agree ja I agree. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And that would then be VV3.6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Okay so I have 
marked it as Exhibit VV3.5 at page 610. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And then do not forget to let Mr 
Makhubo’s legal team repre – place themselves on record? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Maybe if Mr Mphaga can do that 
now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja maybe you can do it from there ja. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  Thank you Chair it is Advocate Moses 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 8 of 297 
 
Mphaga SC briefed by Malanga Incorporated.  And Chair 
just as a matter of also explaining something?  It is in the 
founding affidavit – the first affidavit.  You will note that 
the – is there a paragraph which is titled… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Tell me the page first? 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  Page VV3 MGM016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh use the black numbers on the top left 
corner of the page. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  Top corner.  Oh I do not have the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not have? 
10 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  Yes but it is just… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay tell me the red one it is fine.  Tell 
me the red page number. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  VV3 MGM016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  016.  Okay I just want to get – Mr 
Chaskalson are you able to give me the black number or 
not? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It would be 405 Chair.  But I think 
for Mr Mphaga’s benefit we need to get him a bundle with 
the correct pagination. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Otherwise he is not going to be 
able to follow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is going – he will not be able to find 
the right documents. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 9 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can we just attend to that now 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Apparently there is a bundle 
here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja okay.  405 you said. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  Yes Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have found it. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  We have consulted with our client and 
he does not want to deal with those issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  Because they are legal arguments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, okay. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  And I think the request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja just to save time. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  The request for a ruling I do not think 
it is confident because there is no application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  So we will not be dealing with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV MPHAGA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  Mr 
Chaskalson. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 10 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair.  Then we are 
ready to commence and we will need Mr Makhubo to be 
sworn in but I understood that possibly before Mr Makhubo 
is sworn in he wants to make a statement to the 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think let him be sworn in and let us get 
it – let us get that part out of the way and then he can – I 
will allow him to make some remarks or statements after 
that.  Unless there is a particular reason why the sequence 
should be different?  There is no reason.  Okay please 
10 
administer the oath or affirmation first? 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Mobantoa Geoffrey Makhubo. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MAKHUBO:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
20 
will be truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the truth; 
if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me God. 
MR MAKHUBO:  So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Makhubo. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 11 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:  Good morning Chairperson and Mr 
Chaskalson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And thank you for availing yourself to 
come and assist the commission.  Thank you.  I understand 
that you would like to take about five minutes to say 
something before Mr Chaskalson leads your evidence. 
MR MAKHUBO:  yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I give you that chance now. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Thank you very much Deputy Chief 
Justice and good morning to all.  It is along the same lines 
10 
Chairperson 
that 
we 
would 
like 
to 
appreciate 
the 
opportunity to appear before the commission and give 
evidence and assist the commission wherever we can and 
to say that on the record that we support fully the work of 
the commission. 
 
Any reference to delays in submission of documents 
or comments on difficulties of accessing documents were 
not deliberate.  Some of the issues occurred between ten 
and fifteen years ago so – so we wanted to put on record 
that we are here to answer questions.  Clear things that 
20 
are on the public discourse and of course I mean the 
political space there will be political issues but I am here 
to assist the commission where possible. 
 
You know I have knowledge that I am duty bound to 
come and assist the commission by the position I hold.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 12 of 297 
 
Even though the issues that are being referred to precede 
my time in government and of course being the Executive 
Mayor but I understand that the current role brings 
attention to the matters and habitually elevates the matters 
to be matters of public importance even though they had 
been prior to me holding this position. 
 
So – so we just wanted to put that – that we are 
fully behind the commission and we will support its work.  
Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much – thank you very 
10 
much Mr Makhubo we appreciate that.  Thank you.  Mr 
Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Makhubo if 
we can possibly begin by simply confirming the two or the 
affidavit and the statement that you have submitted to the 
commission.  If I can ask you first to go to page 424 of that 
File 2 and just confirm that that is your signature on page 
424 at the end of the affidavit? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – he knows that he must focus on the 
black numbers Mr Chaskalson? 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  You do not have files?  Does it 
say 2 or 3?  3 oh I beg your pardon let me get a file 
through to you.   
MR MAKHUBO:  Which page is that? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  424. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 13 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:  424. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Any reference to page numbers Mr 
Makhubo will be a reference to the black numbers at the 
top left corner of each page.  You can disregard the red 
numbers unless Mr Chaskalson specifically refers to red 
numbers. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes it is my signature. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And that is a signature which you 
signed deposing to the affidavit that starts at page 404? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes those are my initials I can confirm 
10 
that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you.  Chair can we ask 
that that affidavit now be admitted as VV3.3? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Moloantoa Geoffrey 
Makhubo starting at page 404 is admitted as Exhibit VV3.3. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair.  And then Mr 
Makhubo on – in fact yesterday on the 26 November your 
legal team furnished us a supplementary statement which 
you will find at – just after page 606.  It is numbered 
606.1.2.3. 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:  Found it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if I can ask you just to 
confirm that that is in fact on page 11 that is your signature 
again at the – at the foot of there and I have been calling it 
a statement I see in fact it is an affidavit. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 14 of 297 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You saying page 11 you mean 606.11 
Mr… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  606.11 indeed Chair.  And then 
can I ask you just to confirm the correctness of that 
statement?  Sorry before you do – before you confirm the 
correctness can I take you just to page 6 because I think 
there may an error on 606.6 in paragraph 20.  I think I do 
not want to put words into your mouth but I think there is a 
reference to TSS that should be a reference to CCMA.  So 
in paragraph 20 you say: 
10 
“I have indicated in my founding affidavit 
that Molelwane Holdings was established 
together with Obakeng Shikhane Du Plessis 
Investment deals.  The TSS was the only 
deal concluded by Molelwane Holdings as 
per the teaming agreement referred to in 
paragraph 6.2 of the year submission to 
state capture.” 
 
Is the reference to TSS correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes it is. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is correct. 
MR MAKHUBO:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I apologise.  Then can I ask you 
to confirm the correctness of this statement?  This affidavit 
oh sorry. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 15 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:  It is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you.  And Chair can that 
then be admitted as VV3.4? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Moloantoa Geoffrey 
Makhubo starting at page 606.1 is admitted as Exhibit 
VV3.4. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then Mr Makhubo before we get 
into the details of your statements there is one issue that I 
would like to canvass with you in advance because it is an 
issue that is of particular importance to the commission 
10 
and I have indicated to your Counsel and I want to put it on 
record here.  That I am genuinely interested in your views 
as a – or I am – would hope the commission as someone 
who has been Treasury General of a region on this topic 
and I want to just make an undertaking to you that you 
speak completely freely and I will not refer to any of your 
answers in this section of your testimony at any other point 
in your testimony.  I am genuinely looking for the benefit of 
your views and not talking about facts here, we looking for 
views and possible advice. 
20 
 
And the issue that we – that I want to raise with you 
in this context is relating to political party funding which is 
why 
your 
experience 
is 
a 
Treasurer 
General 
is 
so 
important.   
 
And in your second statement you make a point 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 16 of 297 
 
which I think is a – a very good point in paragraph 26 of 
that second statement page 606.8.  And there you say: 
“As indicated in my founding affidavit I was 
elected 
as 
Treasurer 
of 
the 
ANC 
Johannesburg Region currently acting as 
the Chairperson.  As a member of the ANC I 
am expected to make contributions towards 
the 
movement 
at 
all 
material 
times.  
However 
as 
a 
Treasurer 
I 
have 
the 
obligation to raise money and ensure that 
10 
the financial needs and obligations of the 
ANC in my region are met.  These financial 
obligations are not only limited to the 
operational monthly costs but many other 
costs 
that 
are 
related 
to 
day 
to 
day 
requests 
by 
ordinary 
members 
and 
branches.  Some would refer to financial 
assistance for a burial of members.” 
 
I must apologise I am taking you to the wrong – I 
am taking you to the wrong paragraph.  There is a – there 
20 
is passage in your affidavit where you speak to the fact 
that the ANC needs donations to fund itself in certain 
respects.  And that the donations that it draws are 
primarily 
from 
black 
business 
people 
because 
...[intervenes]  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 17 of 297 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  It might be paragraph 31 Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you very much I – let me 
not put words into your mouth Mr Makhubo.  The Chair has 
directed me to the correct paragraph.   
“In so far as the funding of political parties 
are concerned sadly the regional offices are 
not receiving any financial assistance like 
the national office from local – from the 
10 
local municipality.  This creates a serious 
financial burden on the financial needs of 
regional offices.  Further it is not unusual 
for the treasurer of the ANC to make 
requests for donations from individuals and 
from mostly black owned companies that 
are sympathetic to the ANC.  Most of these 
black companies do not receive any work or 
tenders from the private sector but from the 
public sector.  It is therefore not unusual 
20 
that these companies would be enabled to 
contribute or donate monies to the ANC 
from funds derived from award of tenders.” 
 
Now I want to ask you some questions in that 
regard and I want to repeat that I – I am not going to refer 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 18 of 297 
 
to your answers later in this cross-examination.  Can you – 
can you give us an indication of what the budget – what 
the annual budget of your region was when you were 
Treasurer General? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Firstly I was – I was called a Regional 
Treasurer not the Treasurer General.  The ANC only has 
one Treasurer General who is based at head office and 
because we are a unitary structure the – the fund raising 
efforts, 
the 
funding 
policies 
would 
be 
the 
National 
Competency and the Treasurer General would be best 
10 
placed to – to speak on the funding of the ANC generally 
as an organisation. 
 
However as it relates to – to my responsibilities as 
a Regional Treasurer of the ANC the – the budget would 
differ from annual – year to year depending on the 
activities from – on that year. 
 
So 
we 
would 
normally 
fund 
the 
operational 
expenses of the region on a month to month basis but 
there will be peaks.  When there is a conference, when the 
elections as we mobilise for members to attend certain 
20 
events like January 8 events etcetera etcetera so ordinarily 
we would sit and focus at the beginning of the year.  Is 
there a Youth League conference, is there a Women’s 
League conference. Is there [00:24:02] Military Veterans 
Conference sitting – Veterans League is it sitting?  Cosas 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 19 of 297 
 
Sasko how do we help them?  So it is never a constant 
amount it depends on the activities planned for the 
particular year. 
 
And then of course there will be different campaigns 
that need to be funded and it is – you did not know from 
the statement of the President at the beginning of the year 
then you would know what the campaign should be of that 
year and what gives you that we would fund. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But just roughly?  I mean are you 
able to give us a sort of – just an approximate figure of say 
10 
– what was your last year as Treasurer as I understand it 
was 2000 – end of 2018?  Do you have a sense of what is 
the budget for the region was or – for that year? 
MR MAKHUBO:  I must think because normally we give a 
report for three years and I think because there were – 
there would have been elections and congress there would 
anything between 30 and 50 million. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I suspect it would have been 
more than that because we have seen – we have seen a 
letter just dealing with elections that talks about 50 million. 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes these were the 2016 elections – very, 
very difficult.  And of course the prices and costs increase 
and the sort of activities, the target – the targeted 
audiences – the sorts of events that were planned were 
very, very different from the past elections but for now you 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 20 of 297 
 
are correct I remember vividly asking for – for that amount 
of money and it was not the only money we were trying to 
source.  But just specifically for – for that election.  I 
thought you asking me what is on average the… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Let me tell you where I am. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  Just hold.  Although he 
is asking the questions Mr Makhubo you are telling me. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So do not. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Okay Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So for – you know for me to hear you 
properly it is better as you give the answers you face this 
side. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Okay Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I am interested in getting a sense 
of a complete budget including elections, included ad-hoc 
campaigns  How much would it cost to run a political party 
on the scale of the ANC in this region over each of those 
years?  And I am not – we are not going to hold you to that 
20 
at all but we just want to get a sense of it because … 
MR MAKHUBO:  Ja I really will have to go back to my 
records.  He knows that treasurer for a very long time so 
things have changed along the way.  Chairperson I – I was 
first elected in 2008 so will have seen different [00:26:57] 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 21 of 297 
 
itself changing, challenges being different, number of 
works increasing.  So I really do not want to speculate as 
we speak here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Well can I then ask a separate 
question?  How much of that budget is funded from 
membership dues and how much is funded from donations?  
Again I am not going to asking for anything exact but just a 
broad estimate. 
MR MAKHUBO:  You know there was an article by the 
Treasurer General in the Sunday Times a few weeks ago 
10 
who said nationally the ANC gets about 75% to 80% from 
the – from private donations.  We pay R20 a year as a 
member.  So if you have 50 000 members it really cannot 
sustain even one month.  So – so majority of our funding in 
Johannesburg would come from private donations. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  You see that – I mean that is 
what I would have imagined and it does seem to me that 
there is a potential problem there because the membership 
to whom the organisation should be accountable are in 
financial terms nothing like most important constituency in 
20 
terms of funding the organisation.  So that – would you 
comment on that? 
MR MAKHUBO:  I suppose that is the conference agrees 
on membership fees and it is R20.00 per annum.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry to interrupt.  I am not for a 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 22 of 297 
 
minute suggesting the membership fees should be more 
than R20.00 per annum because I do not think that 
membership should be a – if the membership fee should 
disqualify anyone from being a member.  I mean there is a 
reality that a large number of members are not going to be 
able to afford much more than R20.00 as a membership 
fee.  But I still want to go back to my other – my earlier 
question which is if you have a low membership fee to give 
access to everyone what that means is that membership 
dues are going to be a relatively small percentage of the 
10 
money that you need to run the organisation. 
MR MAKHUBO:  True Chairperson that the nature I think of 
political parties and I would like to think that all political 
parties in South Africa would have the same problem of 
having to go to the private sector to ask for donations 
hence I think Parliament has been debating this and there 
was [00:29:34] political funding deal or act now that is 
waiting for President to sign to regulate this political party 
funding over time I think there have been NGO’s and 
political parties talking about this reliance on the private 
20 
sector and the potential problems not the real potential 
problems it might bring. 
 
So that is...  I mean, my answer will be that, it is being a 
discussion at the moment.  I mean, in parliament, I think 
they have discussed, amongst political parties themselves.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 23 of 297 
 
 
There would have been one or two political parties who 
were against it but I think it was passed through maybe the 
ANC supporting it. 
 
But there should be some regulation of political party 
funding.  It is only national.  Local government council does 
not fund any political party.  I do not think the province funds 
any political party.   
 
So I am unsure how that will be able to cover, the 
entirety of the needs of all political parties, registered 
political parties, funding throughout the country.  So I do not 
10 
know what the future will bring.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But while we are on donations.  
That point that you make at paragraph 31 is, I think, a 
particularly an important point.   
 
I mean, we live in a profoundly unequal society.  And we 
still carry a massive legacy from our apartheid’s past.  And 
so the bulk of the membership and the supports of the ANC 
do not have large amounts of money.  It is not just the ANC.  
It is also the other parties representing black South Africans.   
 
And 
you 
make 
the 
point 
here 
that 
black 
owned 
20 
companies, generally, do not receive substantial work from 
the private sector but are dependent on the public sector.   
 
Would you say – I mean, that is your point, not mine.  
But I – I mean, you presumable – you have made it.  You 
must accept it.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 24 of 297 
 
 
What I want to put to you is that, if there is a model that 
depends on corporate donations for political party funding in 
a society like ours where the bulk of the population is still 
very, very poor and where the black companies, because of 
our legacy, our history, with very few exceptions, are 
dependent on public sector contracts for big contracts.   
 
Is there not a risk that because of our model of political 
party funding that issues of procurement and party political 
funding, may...   
 
I do not want to suggest that they do – that they do get 
10 
confused but is there not a risk that it can look like 
procurement is being directed for political party funding 
purposes? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chairperson, I suppose when you say there 
is a risk, there is always a risk.  Let me make an example.  
The mining entity would still government for licenses and all 
that. 
 
So do not really procure from government directly but 
they need regulatory environment, they need a particular 
policy framework, they need a license for carrying on with 
20 
their mining operations. 
 
So in any normal environment that risk could exist as 
well, that whoever is in charge at that point, would be 
lobbying for a particular type of policy. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Indeed. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 25 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   But it is not directly linked to procurement.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Your point is ...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   So I am saying that business, generally, 
whether buying from the state or private sector, would need 
a particular policy framework, would need a certain legal 
framework. 
 
I mean, there is a cry from business about labour laws 
and say, they are not encouraging investment and all that.   
 
So there is a lobby from business, whether it is 
10 
procuring from private sector or – not what is in the private – 
from the public sector which is in the private sector. 
 
So I am saying the risk, for me, is throughout that 
government, by its very nature, is needed for regulatory 
environment and then procurement. 
 
When you say there is a risk of a direct link between 
procuring from the state and supporting.  I can say, if we do 
– you take a procurement stand(?) list of any government 
department and you see, probably, how much goes through 
previously white owned companies and previously...  You will 
20 
be shocked. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, I would not be shocked.  We 
have been looking at the list for a very long time. 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
MR MAKHUBO:   The direct link, I think, for me.  Yes, it 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 26 of 297 
 
remains a risk but I do not think this casualty(?), it cause an 
effect there. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, let me turn it around 
because you are talking about regulatory frameworks as well 
as procurement.  My real point – the real point I want to put 
to you and get your comment on is.   
 
Do you not think that if we could move away from a 
model of political party funding that depend on corporate 
donations for the most part, we could think of a different 
model? 
10 
 
The potential for party policy to be influenced by big 
corporations, be that black or white, would be much less.   
MR MAKHUBO:   In an ideal world, I think that it will be 
slightly different.  The situation would be completely different 
- or slightly different, let me say.  I still believe that for the 
survival of business, generally, that economics politics nexus 
somehow and it is well right(?).   
 
It is not similar(?) in South Africa, Chairperson.  It is 
actually why – if you look at models in the Western Europe, 
in the US.   
20 
 
In fact, in the US it is actually quite worse that, when it 
is the Republicans, you know that there will be this lobby of 
the Republicans for this policy. 
 
So I think it is a debate, generally, the multi-lateral 
organisations must be discussing this.  How would you list(?) 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 27 of 297 
 
the business influence.  Although you need economics to 
run, you need the economy to grow. 
 
And of course, they need politics to be stable.  They 
need democracy to thrive.  So they have got an interest in 
the stability of the country. 
 
Businesses has got interest in the stability of the 
country.  It has got interest in the stability of our politics(?).  
The body(?) politics must be stable. 
 
And I think, in doing so, some of them would say:  I 
support democracy.  I know companies that will say:  I am 
10 
funding 
every 
political 
party 
that 
is 
in 
parliament 
in 
proportion to their representation. 
 
Because they are interested in a stable democracy.  And 
I think they must have a hand in stabilising our democracy.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I put a notion to you and I 
just want your comments?  What about a system, a party 
political financing that was in large parts based on central 
government 
grounds 
dispensed 
according 
to 
audited 
membership? 
 
So you work out what a party needs to run on an 
20 
efficient basis and you say if a party, you know, two million 
people nationwide would need this budget, if it – per 
member, central government or grant and political – and 
donations from the private sector will not be allowed.  We 
will cut that off. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 28 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   Is it possible that the fiscus can absorb 
that and be able to fund?  I think in the last elections we had 
60 or so registered parties and there were others that could 
not even raise because they did not have the funds but they 
wanted to contest. 
 
I mean, if you look at the IEC Portal.  I do not know how 
many parties have registered to the IEC but ...[indistinct] for 
those elections.   
 
If the fiscus is big enough to carry that and that is 
enough for political parties to run, it will be disadvantaged 
10 
...[indistinct] parties though because they will get a smaller 
proportion. 
 
And I suppose that is why the public – the public – the 
Political Parties Funding Bill is trying to address that very 
part that you... 
 
In fact, it is very specific that when you fund a political 
party over a certain amount, you must disclose it.  Everyone 
must know.  So it cannot happen in the dark, so to say.  I 
cannot happen in secret.  But anything below that amount... 
 
You know, if it is a Spaza shop in Soweto, funds a 
20 
branch, R 10 000,00 for their activity.  You know, they do not 
have to – there is no duty to declare. 
 
And I think those thresholds, for me, are quite important 
that we set.  I believe in hybrid.  I think the state must play a 
role.  I still think that business – in fact, business must play 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 29 of 297 
 
a role in funding political parties.  Regulated, maybe.  But I 
think the hybrid is quite important. 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You see, if state funding is 
dispensed according to audited membership – I mean, there 
remains a question of whether we would have the machinery 
to do that.  But if it was, parties would then become much 
more accountable to their members. 
 
When a member leaves, the ANC for EFF, the grant for 
that member goes to the EFF as well.  What is your comment 
10 
to that? 
MR MAKHUBO:   You see, it is an ideal situation.  I think 
that if for accountability Chairperson, it is quite important, 
irrespective of where the funds come from and how they are 
distributed and allocated. 
 
The issue of accountability to, firstly your members and 
secondly to the public is quite important which is why I think 
my organisation, its congresses being live and media is 
invited and we do account to the public. 
 
You will even find our reports, including strategy and 
20 
tactics were...  You know, we plan our strategies but we 
make it public. 
 
So I think accountability for me is key and central.  So 
whether you use funds to try and keep a member from 
jumping ship, I do not know.  I think when your values do no 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 30 of 297 
 
reconcile to the values of the organisation, you are free to 
leave.   
 
It should not be based on that you go and recruit on a 
sundry(?) so that you can get more money.  People must 
agree to your values.  People must want to be a member of 
the organisation. 
 
They must live the principles of that organisation.  It 
must not be based on funding.  I do not think it is proper.  
Even though, the proportion of the funds you get from 
political party funding would be based on your representation 
10 
in parliament which is a translation of the proportion of the 
votes you got during the last general elections. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, that is one model based on 
your electoral support.  Another one might be based on 
audited membership.  So the one is – would remunerate 
parties in proportion to their electoral support.  The other 
would remunerate them in proportion to their membership. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Which would then give the 
membership more power within the party.   
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Ja, maybe Chairperson, we should take 
this and put it in a discussion document in all political 
parties and then say, it is probably a model to promote the 
accountability to members. 
 
I think the accountability is more to society than it is to 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 31 of 297 
 
your own members.  [Indistinct] members.  As a Treasurer in 
the conference there are ...[indistinct] members through 
delegates but we have to account to the public. 
 
Especially public funds are used.  We really need some 
form of reports to Treasury.  Reports to parliament.  Reports 
to council.  Reports to the legislature in order to account to 
the public. 
 
So that is why...  The model might work.  It might be 
cumbersome.  Every time a member joins, there must be 
portals so that is can be audited. 
10 
 
You do not go to a graveyard and take names of – and 
dates 
of 
birth 
of 
people 
and, 
you 
know, 
for 
ghost 
memberships. 
 
So it needs to be a robust system for it to work.  Maybe 
South Africa should be the first to experiment with that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, you know, it is not really my 
role to [laughs] to put these out.  So maybe we should get to 
the questioning.  But I would welcome a public conversation 
around that because I do think that... 
 
What we have seen in this Commission is that the link 
20 
between political party funding and private donors can be 
abused in certain circumstances.   
MR MAKHUBO:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I then start the questioning 
which is now going to be less discursive and more focussed 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 32 of 297 
 
on very specific facts?   
 
You furnished a full statement to the Commission.  The 
Commission was really interested in a range of topics.  The 
relationship – primarily the relationship between your close 
corporation 
called 
Molelwane 
Consulting 
which 
was 
a 
corporation in which you held a 67% interest. 
 
And companies within the EOH Group and companies 
within the Regiments Group and the relationship between 
those companies and The City of Johannesburg. 
 
You furnished these two affidavits to us.  You have also 
10 
made a series of public statements on these issues because 
they have been issues that had been canvassed publicly. 
 
And I would like to take you to those statements and just 
to clarify that you stand by what you have said in those 
statements. 
 
So if I can ask you to go to – it is in File 2 at page 947.  
Sometime ago, I think it was in 2018, there were articles 
published by Ama(?) Bongani, raising questions about 
Molelwane Consulting and Regiments.   
 
And at page 974, you issued a response.  You did not 
20 
write a reply.  You issued a response at page 947.  Can I ask 
you to look at that and just confirm to me that you stand by 
the contents of what you said in that statement? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, large part.  Except that we should 
have said for some reason, which is what I said in my 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 33 of 297 
 
affidavit, that for some reason the Molelwane Consulting was 
not processed. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry.  Your resignation from 
Molelwane Consulting was not processed? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, as a holding member(?), ja.  But as an 
executive, I did, ja.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry.  As a holding member your 
resignation was not processed?   
MR MAKHUBO:   Was not processed. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   As an executive member...  I 
10 
mean, it is a close corporation, not a company. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you seized having an executive 
role in Molelwane Consulting. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And your interest as a member 
ought to have been...  Are you saying, you gave up your 
interest as a member? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, the issue here was that we seized to 
be a member but it was not processed and then it carried on.   
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So the CIPC continued to reflect 
you as a member where it should not have? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, let us not blame the CIPC.  
Administratively within Molelwane, it – your withdrawal as a 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 34 of 297 
 
member was not ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   It was not processed, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think that is a point that you are 
making because there were, in fact, four statements that you 
issued because it was a running story.   
 
Can I ask you to go to page 949, where there was a 
second statement.  And again, can I ask you to take a look at 
that second statement and confirm that you stand by its 
contents? 
MR MAKHUBO:   It will be exactly the same response that I 
10 
gave you the first time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is subject to the qualification 
...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
...that 
you 
resigned 
your 
membership interest...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...that you – but that was not 
processed.  You stand by that? 
MR MAKHUBO:   [No audible reply]  
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   There is then a third statement at 
page 951.  And there, in fact, you make the point about your 
resignation at the foot of page 952.  Can I ask you just to 
read the whole of that third statement and then confirm that 
you stand by it? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 35 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   It is a similar reply from questions from 
Mokopane(?).  I kept the same thing. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   And I still...  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I am not suggesting that there is 
any inconsistency in your reply.  I just want you to confirm 
that ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes.  Remember, it was – these were 
questions from the newspaper. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   To myself. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   And I was answering them in the manner 
that I was answering them for reasons best known to myself 
as well. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   So, yes ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But there is nothing that you want 
to correct in there?  There is nothing that was said there that 
was incorrect? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, no, no.  I am must saying, subject to 
that qualification.  Yes, the statement from Mokopane was – 
what I made, it is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  In fact, in the third – if I 
understand you correctly, in the third statement, you do not 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 36 of 297 
 
need that qualification because at the foot of what is page 
952, you say: 
“As stated previously, I tendered my resignation as 
a 
member 
of 
Molelwane 
Consulting 
and 
other 
business interests...” 
 
Oh, no.  No.  The point about not – the resignation not 
being processed, is not in the statement.  I am sorry.  I take 
that back. 
 
There is a very short fourth statement, again answering 
specific questions at page 954.  There is almost nothing said 
10 
there but can I get your confirmation that you stand by what 
you said there? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   My learned junior makes a point 
that you and I are having a conversation.  We know what we 
are talking about but the world outside does not.   
 
In due course, I am going ask you to explain your 
relationship with Molelwane and the relationship between 
Molelwane and Regiments and the EOH relationship to the 
extent that there was one. 
20 
 
But for now, I just want to clarify what potential points of 
dispute are and what are not.  So before we get into the 
details of your - well, of the relationship between Molelwane 
and Regiments. 
 
Can I ask you also to look at a series of schedules that 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 37 of 297 
 
had 
been 
prepared 
from 
bank 
transactions 
by 
the 
Commission?    They start at page 985 of that file.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 985? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   985. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the first schedule on page 
985 is a schedule of income that flowed from either 
Regiments 
Fund 
Managers 
or 
Regiments 
Capital 
into 
Molelwane Consulting.   
 
You have had this document for some time.  I just want 
10 
to know if there was anything on there that you want to 
dispute? 
 
I am not asking you to confirm the correctness of that.  
The bank statements, in due course, will be...  Or, in fact, 
the bank statements are in this bundle. 
 
But are there any items here that you would like to 
correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I must confess Chairperson, I...  It is 
correct that we have this document since last week but I 
have not ticked the ...[indistinct] figure, cross-referencing to 
20 
the ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You have not applied your mind? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I have not gone through the...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The figures. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I did see the bank statements but I 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 38 of 297 
 
was looking at the substance of what was being said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But for present purposes, you are 
not disputing the contents here?  I am not asking you to 
admit them but you are not disputing? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I have no reason to dispute them.  As I 
said, I have not particularly looked at whether they are 
correct or not.  But, ja.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   They look correct. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And what that schedule shows that 
over the period 2008 through to 2016, the total amount 
received 
by 
Molelwane 
from 
Regiments 
was 
R 35 710 919,00.  I am not asking you to admit that figure 
but for present purposes, I just want to clarify that you are 
not actively disputing it.   
MR MAKHUBO:   Chairperson, I am not sure what – I do not 
dispute - verify...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   What the difference is. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think from what you have said, the 
position is, as things stand, you do not have a reason to 
dispute these.  But you reserve your right because you have 
not had – you did not go through item-by-item. 
 
You would like to be able to dispute, if later on, you 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 39 of 297 
 
think you have got grounds to dispute.  Is that right? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is right, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Can it be on 
the same basis?  Can we go to the table on page 988 which 
refers to transfers from Molelwane into your account over the 
period 2011 to 2014?  I want to emphasise this.  It is from 
2011 to 2014 because there is a fuller schedule later that 
goes pass 2014. 
 
Again, reserving your rights at a later stage to dispute it 
10 
if you find errors.  At present, are you in a position to 
dispute that this table is – that this schedule accurately 
reflects those transfers? 
MR 
MAKHUBO: 
 
 
No, 
subject 
to 
that 
qualification 
...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Absolutely.  I think we must just 
work on the basis that you, you know, if you come back later 
and if you pick up an error later, you are always welcome to 
make that correction.  And so let us run...   
 
And that table reflects payments from Molelwane to your 
20 
personal account over this period, the period of 2011 to 2014 
of R 270 000,00. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I then go to page 989?   
MR MAKHUBO:   [No audible reply]  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 40 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And this table reflects payments 
from Molelwane to the ANC and, I am going to say a Lion’s 
organisation because I see, for instance, there is a donation 
to Posas(?) on one of the line items.   
 
Again, are you in a position – reserving your rights to 
dispute later?  Would you accept that the provision – you 
accept the correctness of this schedule? 
MR MAKHUBO:   As I say, it is subject to ...[intervenes]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  I am not suggesting 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   ...more but ja.  Subject to ...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the amounts of those 
donations is R 654 564,00.  Then the next – over the page, 
one sees a table...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that at 990? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   990.  That is correct Chair.  There 
were several tables.  The first table is a table of cash 
deposits into Molelwane over the period 2009 to 2019.  And 
20 
that reflects a total of R 592 000,00 over that period. 
 
Again, are you in a position to dispute – reserving your 
rights to do so at a later stage, are you presently in a 
position to dispute any of these – the records on that table? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I cannot even remember the, but ja.  I 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 41 of 297 
 
cannot dispute it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But the next two tables are – 
relate to TSS Management Services and ACSA.  I am not 
going to be dealing with them today.  So I do not – I am not 
going to ask you to respond there.  If we do get back to 
them, you will have an opportunity. 
 
Then, likewise, if we go over the page to page 991.  
There is a table involving Patrick Makhubedu and a table 
involving Zylek.   Again, I am not going to ask you to 
respond to those.   
10 
 
But can I then ask you to turn to the next file, Bundle 3?  
And go to page 847.   
MR MAKHUBO:   Okay.  What page again? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Page 847 in Bundle 3. 
MR MAKHUBO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And Chair, I am not sure if you 
have 847? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I do.  Thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And on page 847, there is a table 
that has the heading Annexure A.  And that looks at 
20 
transfers into Mlolwane from Regiments Fund Managers or 
Regiments Capital and transactions out of Mlolwane within 
a period of – I think it was 10 days after the transfers in 
from Regiments Capital. 
 
Again – or Regiments Fund Managers – are you at 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 42 of 297 
 
present in a position to dispute any of the entries on this 
table? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I am unable to – I cannot dispute 
because I would not – I have not gone through the details. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  It is a table that runs from 
2011 to February 2016, it is period 2011 to 2016.  What it 
shows is in that period the total inflows from Regiments 
Capital and Regiments Fund Managers were 18 871 570 
and the outflows that are recorded on the table are 
130 000 with the reference ANC donation.  Amounts that 
10 
are cashed is an aggregate amount of 850 000 and 
amounts that are transferred into your personal accounts 
are 5 917 183.   
Can we then go to – we can ignore annexure B 
because again that deals with Zylek, Mr Makhubedu and 
related organisations which we are not going to be 
concerned today but annexure C is another schedule that I 
want to take you to.  That is an extract of all transfers from 
Molelwane into – from the two accounts of Molelwane into 
your personal accounts.  It goes down from 859 to 850 and 
20 
it runs from 2011 through to 2020.  Can I ask again if there 
is anything on this table that you are presently in a 
position to dispute? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I have not even looked at schedule but I 
have no reason not to believe but [inaudible – speaking 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 43 of 297 
 
simultaneously] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If at a later stage you identify 
errors please feel free to come back to us. 
   What that shows in the period from November 2011 to 
January 2020 a total amount of R7 096 994 moved out of 
Molelwane into your account, your personal account.   
 
I think at this point it probably makes sense to 
come 
to 
the 
relationship 
between 
Molelwane 
and 
Regiments Fund Managers and can you briefly tell the 
Chair how Molelwane and Regiments Fund Managers came 
10 
to work together? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chairperson, as I say in my affidavit and 
in the statements that the Commission has referred me to 
confirm 
being 
asked 
from 
Amabhungane, 
Molelwane 
Consulting effectively started ’97 and by 1998 established 
it from scratch in the space of finance, accounting and six 
years later we came together with a person I got to know 
much, much earlier in the ‘80s, executive chairperson of 
Regiments Capital and I do say it in my affidavit, Mr Litha 
Nyhonyha who told me that they are moving into this space 
20 
and we need to explore opportunities together, he is 
putting together a team of highly skilled individuals in the 
fund 
management 
side, 
stock 
broking, 
that 
type 
of 
business which is something that I thought I wanted to 
explore and expand over because I only had skills in one 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 44 of 297 
 
component thereof and that was late 2004 early 2005 when 
we had this conversation and we of course started to look 
at opportunities especially in the public sector and when 
the RFP initially, you know, first went from RFI it was 
released by the City then, you know, or your thoughts on 
that redemption fund came through.  Again there was a 
response, this is our thinking, so the different types of 
funds, passive, active funds and how then do you deal with 
them.  
 
And later on an RFP was released by the City.  We 
10 
did our bit in contributing to the responses.  But as a small 
company with no – not enough balance sheet to deal with 
the items we came together, it was evaluated and I think it 
was awarded – we thought we did not have the necessary – 
some qualifying papers and we thought it should not be 
part of the main, the main tender.   
 
They 
got 
one 
company 
to 
deal 
with 
the 
administration to be part of the main tender that will, you 
know, still played our role.  So when it was awarded we 
started talking but we could not finalise the memorandum 
20 
of agreement because the pricing was not clear and that is 
how we came together. 
 
And then in 2005, late, we could not meet to sign 
the memorandum and early in January 2006 we right at the 
big kickoff of the fund itself, we came together, so that is – 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 45 of 297 
 
and it is detailed in my affidavit what we did. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you and you talk about 
the memorandum of agreement, can I ask you to go to page 
712 of volume 2 and just confirm that that was in fact the 
memorandum of agreement? 
MR MAKHUBO:   71…? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   712, but it is volume 2, I am not 
sure if that is volume 2 or 3. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Volume 2 and 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At 712 there is no memorandum on mine, 
10 
Mr Chaskalson, on bundle 3 or is it bundle 2 we should 
look at? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Bundle 2, bundle 2, Chair, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So that is the memorandum of 
agreement between you and Regiments Fund Managers 
and if you go down to page 714, clause 2.2, the obligations 
of Molelwane are set out under this contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Chaskalson, maybe let us take 
20 
the tea break now then you can go into more issues.  I 
realise it is time for the tea break. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Chair, I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take the tea break, it is about 19 
minutes past eleven, we will resume at twenty five to 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 46 of 297 
 
twelve.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Makhubo, 
I can I ask you go to clause 2.2 of that agreement at page 
714 of bundle 2? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I am there.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    And does that clause accurately 
describe the obligations that Molelwane had in terms of its 
10 
agreement with Regiments Fund Managers in relation to 
this Sinking Fund tender? 
MR 
MAKHUBO: 
 
 
This 
was 
what 
we 
agreed 
on, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Chaskalson, it might be helpful 
for either you or Mr Makhubo to just read that paragraph so 
the people who are watching can understand.  In full, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, Chair.  So it states the 
following and it is setting out the obligation.  Well, let us 
maybe start the previous page, 2.1 says: 
20 
“The respective roles and responsibilities of the 
parties in terms of this MOA are as detailed below.” 
2.2, it says: 
“Molelwane 
Consulting 
review 
and 
obtain 
the 
detailed understanding of the contents of the RFP 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 47 of 297 
 
and the disclosed information.” 
So that would be the RFP for the Sinking Fund contract 
and the information disclosed in relation thereto, is that 
correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, that is accurate, the initial things 
that we did in 2005, 2006, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    
“Identify and perform needs analysis of CoJ in 
terms of the RFP.” 
And 
I 
presume 
that 
would 
be 
done 
in 
advance 
of 
10 
submission of the tender because you are going to identify 
that needs so that you tender can match those needs.” 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, clarify in the RFQ, yes, that is right. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    
“Review and advise on the design of the Sinking 
Fund technical proposal to ensure that the needs of 
the CoJ as outlined in the RFP are met.” 
And again that must be before submission of the bid 
because you are looking – you are trying to refine a 
technical proposal to try to win a bid. 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    
“Review bid documentation and advise on relevant 
as considered appropriate.” 
Again, as I understand that, that would be part of putting 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 48 of 297 
 
together the final bid refining the final bid, is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    
Review the contents of presentations that may need 
to be prepared for CoJ and advise on relevant 
aspects as considered appropriate.” 
Are those presentations in the course of the bid or in 
implementation if you win the bid? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, if the presentation is called to come 
and clarify your bid and basically in the setup and all that. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, I did not hear you second 
part of the answer. 
MR MAKHUBO:   I am just saying in the setup if the client 
would want to know what the structure, the functionality 
because this was the first of its kind in that type of an 
active funding. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  And 2.2.6: 
“In considered relevant, make presentations jointly 
with Regiments Capital to CoJ as may be required.” 
Is that again presentations to a bid adjudication committee 
20 
or a bid evaluation committee 
MR MAKHUBO:   Ja and post, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And post? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, if relevant.  That is why it says 
where may be required, whenever they call you for a 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 49 of 297 
 
presentation. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Before or after awarded the bid? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Say again?  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Before or after or both, awarded 
the bid? 
MR MAKHUBO:   It would have been both but in this case 
it would have been before. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
So 
you 
did 
not 
make 
presentations after award of the bid? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then 2 …[intervenes] 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, we did not do jointly because they 
said where relevant. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    
“Maintain 
an 
ongoing 
basis 
all 
strategic 
relationships with CoJ before, during and after 
completion of fund management mandate for the 
mutual benefit of the parties.” 
20 
And what did that contemplate? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, though we saw it was that we need 
to at a strategic level ensure that we understand the client, 
we understand their needs, we try and grow the fund, we 
know the future needs or funding needs, infrastructure 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 50 of 297 
 
needs, etcetera, etcetera and just generally know the 
client. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And would it be fair to say that 
this was the only obligation that carried on after the 
successful aware of the bid that it had obligations that you 
performed after aware of the bid? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, 6 and 7 -  5, 6 and 7 were meant to 
– when considered appropriate 5, 6 and 7 would have been 
the ones that would have had to be active on. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But earlier you said there were 
10 
not any presentations. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The 5 and 6 did not – whereas 
there may have been an obligation it was not one that you 
ever performed after the bid. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, there was no presentation required, 
ja, at that time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  But his maintenance of 
strategic relationships, was that something that you did do 
after the bid? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, actively as I watched to see what 
was going on, I got interested in the funding patterns of 
this, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  And what were the 
payment arrangements in terms of this contract? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 51 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, the first it says there on paragraph 
3, it is a structuring fee and of course there is a 
management fee which it had split and the outperformance 
fee so the bulk of the fees would from the outperformance 
that we negotiated upfront with Regiments but the first 
where you would know how much they are because you 
would 
know 
the 
fund 
is 
under 
management 
but 
outperformance fee, which is the bulk of fees are risk-
based and unknown, that is how this fund is structured or 
was structured.   
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I – so the fee structure 
presupposes a successful bid.  If you succeed you then get 
fees, if you do not succeed you do not get fees. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, the 3.3 which is outperformance 
fees presupposes that what the City gives you as a 
benchmark, 
as 
a 
watermark, 
you 
would 
be 
able 
to 
outperform, so you will perform up to what they expect as a 
City. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Mr Makhubo, I think we 
might be talking past each other because I am not at this 
20 
stage talking about the fee structure in the ultimate 
Regiments’ contract with the City.  I will get there but now I 
am talking about your arrangement with Regiments.   
MR MAKHUBO:   It depended on their performance, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, no, no, no, it is not just the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 52 of 297 
 
outperformance, even the management fee, if you do not 
win the bid you get nothing from Regiments. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I suppose on winning the bid, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So the structure of you – well, 
let us start at you did win the bid, that is correct, is it not?  
This consortium won the bid. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the arrangement that the 
consortium had with the City was that the City would pay 
the consortium a monthly – I think it was a monthly fund 
10 
management fee which would be determined by assets 
under management, fixed percentage of assets under 
management would be your fee.  That would be the fund 
management fee, is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, it is normal in the industry. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, I am not [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
MR MAKHUBO:   Every fund manager gets a fund 
management fee.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   A percentage of funds under 
20 
management and then there was the outperformance fee 
and as I understand that, there were certain benchmarks or 
targets that were set an it if the fund performed than those 
targets a certain percentage of the margin above the target 
would be paid to the consortium, is that correct? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 53 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct, if you outperform the 
benchmark there will be a split the City taking like 75% of 
the outperformance of that proportion. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So 25% of the over target 
achievement goes to the fund manager and 75 % stays with 
the City.   
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if you do not beat the target 
10 
you get nothing. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes if you do not meet the target or if you 
perform at target you get nothing. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  Can I ask how the 
outperformance fee was structured?  Was it structured on a 
quarterly basis? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, there were – the evaluation 
happened on a quarterly basis, performance over a quarter 
and there would be the risk department of the City and 
evaluating together with the consortium and then they 
20 
would agree looking at the scripts and all that, yes, it was 
quarterly. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And so what you would do is you 
would look at the asset value at the start of the quarter, 
the asset value – the total asset value at the start of the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 54 of 297 
 
quarter, the total asset value at the end of the quarter and 
if it had increased above a certain target percentage you 
would look at that margin above the target percentage and 
turn it into a number and 25% would go to the consortium, 
75% would stay with the City, is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Simply yes but it is much more complex 
than this, this is an asset liability balance so remember 
even the liabilities themselves, the movement [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Ja, ja, call it net …[intervenes] 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   So that when the assets themselves have 
movement so you look at the net movements. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   And you see the value of the fund would 
have increased or not and then at that point that is when it 
is determined.  If the value of the fund has not increased 
by more than benchmark then …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, just talking, the asset was 
the wrong term, it is net value of the fund. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Net value because it is an asset 
20 
liabilities matter. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  But can I ask this, 
assuming there is a market crash and the value of the fund 
drops by 30% because there is a market crash, obviously 
you will not get an outperformance fee, is that correct?  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 55 of 297 
 
Well, you will not get an outperformance fee because the 
value will go down. 
MR MAKHUBO:   The outperformance would be the fund 
performing at above the bottom mark or the benchmarks 
given by the City.  So there is an opening balance, the 
performance of this quarter, driver plus whatever. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   And then anything over and above that.  
so anything less than that watermark, that benchmark, you 
get nothing. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But after the crash, you are now 
30% lower than you were in the previous quarter, is the 
benchmark for the next quarter that 30% lower figure or is 
there a structured benchmark that says - we will look at 
what would have happened on the assumption that you did 
not lose anything this month. 
MR MAKHUBO:   I suppose later in the evaluating the 
fund, I think there was advice from an auditing firm that 
dealt with exactly that because it was not part of the 
contract to say in future you must look at capital erosion.  
20 
That did not happen, by the way, there was no capital 
erosion, at least till that time, so we must look at that 
crash which will not only deal with the returns but will deal 
with the capital invested, it is a 30% crash in the market 
and how do you then have a lower base but what happens, 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 56 of 297 
 
what you have lost in between, so …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Exactly but that this original 
contract did not provide for that. 
MR MAKHUBO:   No. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So there was a 30% loss one 
quarter and then market readjusted and went back to there 
with a 30 – with a gain so that over the two quarters it was 
net zero, you would still get your outperformance on the 
30% gains …[intervenes] 
MR MAKHUBO:   It did not happen, but that is how the 
10 
structure – that is why later on you said how do you claw – 
what is the claw back between what you have lost and 
where the base was before. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  And these amounts that we 
are talking about are amounts that get paid to the 
consortium, 
what 
this 
agreement 
says, 
within 
the 
consortium  those amounts are split 90% Regiments, 10% 
Molelwane. 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So Molelwane is going to get 
20 
10% of the management fee, 10% of the outperformance 
fee over the life of the consortium’s contract with Jo’burg. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Ja, for five years, that was the life of the 
contract, correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Right.  Now at the time that the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 57 of 297 
 
consortium concluded this contract with Jo’burg you were 
not in politics – sorry, not you were not in politics, you 
were not in government, is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I was an ordinary member of the 
public and an entrepreneur of six years. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, I would not call you – I 
would not suggest you describe yourself as an ordinary 
member of the public because you were – I think you were 
already Treasurer of the region, were you not? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   When did you become Treasurer 
of the region? 
MR MAKHUBO:   2008. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   2008 and this contract was 
awarded 2006. 
MR MAKHUBO:   ’05. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   2005? 
MR MAKHUBO:   It kicked off January 2006. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Kicked off January 2006.  And 
initially it was due to run for five years. 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And terminate and at the end of 
January 2011. 
MR MAKHUBO:   January 2011, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON 
SC:   And you first went into 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 58 of 297 
 
government after the municipal elections was it May 2011? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct, the elections were in May 
2011. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And that chronology has been 
quite important in explaining your response to allegations 
of a conflict of interest  because, as I understand your 
response in your various statements and maybe we can go 
to one, maybe at page 947. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What bundle? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    Of bundle 2, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what is the page number? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   947, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if I can read what you say 
there, it is a paragraph, about three or four paragraphs 
down: 
“There was never a conflict of interest as the term 
of Molelwane’s agreement with Regiments on the 
first Sinking Fund would have lapsed in January 
2011, the year I took public office.  Molelwane 
20 
Consulting did not continue providing services to 
Regiments on the second contract as it did not 
participate in the RFP.” 
We are talking about the second contract there. 
“Further to this I declared all my private interests 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 59 of 297 
 
upon taking public office as required by law.  In 
addition to this I subsequently resigned as a 
member of Molelwane Consulting and director of all 
other companies in November 2011.  This was in 
line with my decision to use my skills as a public 
representative.  I also made a commitment to the 
Mayor of the day and the ANC when I was appointed 
MMC that I will unwind my interests and resign all 
my directorships.  Political office bearers are by law 
precluded 
from 
participating 
in 
procurement 
10 
processes hence I could not have been involved in 
overseeing 
the 
renewal 
of 
the 
Sinking 
Fund 
contract.” 
And then there is an issue lower down in relation to 
Colourfields that we do not need to get to.  
So would it be fair to say – well, let us take a step 
back.  The contract was with Regiments and the City’s 
contract 
with 
Regiments 
and 
Molelwane 
was 
due 
to 
terminate in January 2011.  Did it terminate in January 
2011? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, it did not. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Why did it not? 
MR MAKHUBO:   As far as my recollection goes, the initial 
tender was out in 2010 and everyone responded, the one 
that I say I was not part of, and what I was told is that 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 60 of 297 
 
when I enquired was that there was moratorium placed by 
the then MEC on big contracts being awarded before 
elections, that is what I – therefore then the extension 
happened. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And so the existing contract 
which was essentially being run by Regiments but in terms 
of which Molelwane was getting 10% of the revenue 
contained into 2011. 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And how much longer did that 
10 
contract continue? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, it is common cause that it 
continued till 2015 because of an interdict on the second 
award by a certain company. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay, so Regiments continued 
with the fund management contract with the City all the 
way through to 2015 and through that period the 10% 
continued to be paid to Molelwane. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, there was a contractual obligation 
on the first contract between Regiments Consulting and 
20 
Molelwane Consulting - Regiments Capital and Molelwane 
Consulting so as the month-on-month extensions went – 
are waiting for the conclusion of the legal challenge, it 
continued, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  And from May 2011, as I 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 61 of 297 
 
understand it, you were now a councillor in Jo’burg and 
also the MMC for finance. 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And this contract would have 
fallen under your jurisdiction as MMC for finance or 
political 
oversight 
jurisdiction, 
not 
a 
hands-on 
administrative jurisdiction. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, it was managed by Treasury which 
was one of the units in finance, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And you were politically 
10 
responsible for overseeing that. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, generally I do not watch the 
contract, I did not watch the contracts but yes, would be 
getting reports on performance and all that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So there had been suggestions 
that that presented a conflict of interest but you have 
answered those suggestions in your statement and can I 
put to you how I understand your answer and if I have got 
it wrong please correct me.  It seems to me that you had – 
that there are really two parts to your statement – to your 
20 
explanation as to why there was not a conflict. 
 
The first was that you had resigned from Molelwane 
Consulting, although that resignation for reasons, that we 
do not need to go into at present, was not processed. 
 
The second part you say is that – and in any event, 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 62 of 297 
 
councillors, political officials do not have involvement in 
procurement issues so there would not have been a conflict 
there.  Have I got your explanation correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I will explain the first one, Chairperson.  I 
suppose one of the ways you obviate a conflict is to 
declare your interests and two, if there is any decision that 
affects you at that time you will excuse yourself, that is 
one. 
 
Two, is that we – yes, I would be - code of conduct 
precludes 
anybody 
that 
is 
an 
office 
bearer 
from 
10 
participating in any procurement.  I think the MFMA does 
that.   
 
A (Pty) Ltd is quite easier to deal with because you 
can resign your directorship and keep your shareholders, 
can remain a shareholder.  With a CC it is not that easy 
because when you resign your membership even for – it is 
like a partnership, you forego your member ’s interest, you 
forego your share which is why then you can cease to be a 
very active member of a CC and then I suspect – I do not 
have – that would have been the complication.  So that is 
20 
how I explained and I think what the issue is here for me, 
Chairperson, my responses here are not – you do not even 
have the questions to say what were the questions.  They 
just posted the responses because it would have been 
interesting but yes, this was my response. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 63 of 297 
 
 
Two 
questions 
from 
Amabhungane 
and 
I 
was 
answering a newspaper article, Amabhungane.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, can I just clarify what you 
– I mean, one of your answers was I had resigned but my 
resignation was not processed, was not reflected at CIPC, 
if I understand you correctly, it did not get to CIPC to be 
reflected. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  So I presume that what you 
mean there is that what you intended to do is to divest 
10 
yourself of your interest as a member in Molelwane CC.  
MR MAKHUBO:   Quite correct that at the end of the 
contracts 
which 
basically 
would 
have 
ended 
around 
February or so, 2012, I wanted to divest myself, initial 
intention, but it was never to be. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, you say it was never to 
be?   
MR MAKHUBO:   I did not happen. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did it not happen because you 
did not implement your intention or because you tried to 
20 
implement your intention but somewhere along the line it 
did not get to CIPC? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chairperson, the intention was not 
implemented, so it continued. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no, but did you subjectively 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 64 of 297 
 
think that you had divested yourself of your interest? 
MR MAKHUBO:   If you look at the emails, I knew that it 
was not done.  Of course I did ask the person who was 
dealing with it via email and asked them if it was divested 
and they told me stories and then it did not happen. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes but that – that relates to 
how things are reflected at CIPC, sub…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe, Mr Chaskalson, maybe we 
should go back to precisely what you did and precisely 
what your understanding was of what was supposed to 
10 
happen if you were to resign.  So, as I understand it, you 
signed a letter of resignation, is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I said to a person that – yes, we 
signed a resolution and said look, let us divest. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but was there a letter of resignation 
or a resolution?  Or a resolution of the CC? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And what was your understanding 
of what should happen for the resignation to take effect? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, I had asked a person within 
20 
Molelwane 
who 
subsequently 
appointed 
somebody 
to 
process.  My understanding at that point was I would 
resign but would then start valuing and seeing what stood 
to Molelwane, a company that I had worked for for eleven 
years and built from scratch, how do I get back my sweat 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 65 of 297 
 
capital, how do I get whatever is due to me but – and then 
over time would unwind it but the issue was I could not 
leave and say what is due to me is not there because I was 
building wealth, I was not building – I was not just working. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now – so if you could just tell me step-
by-step what your understanding was of what needed to be 
done and who needed to do it in order for the resignation 
to take effect.   Now if you are talking about an employee 
10 
in a company, when you want to resign you might do a 
letter, sign it, hand it over to your employer and then you 
know that that resignation happens.  So that is what I am 
looking for.  In terms of this resignation, what was your 
understanding of the various steps that needed to be done 
for it to be effective? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chairperson, I was active in four 
companies – well, three companies and a CC.  I followed 
the same process.  I said to this person who was helping 
me please get somebody to resign my directorships in 
20 
Molelwane Holdings, in Acsolve(?), in Present Perfect 
Investments and my membership and then they made us 
sign a resolution.  I expected them to submit the same to 
CIPC but I was very full aware that with a CC you might 
take a bit of time to start unwinding especially if you want 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 66 of 297 
 
to take your member ’s interest out because you have to 
value 
– 
because 
member ’s 
interest, 
it 
is 
not 
like 
directorship, it is linked to your shares in the company so 
you do not just leave and leave your equity and equity in 
the close corporation.  That part I understood but the 
intention was to get rid of the 67% and take the money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would I be correct in saying what you 
are saying is you understood that there needed to be a 
resolution reflecting that you were resigning but that the 
resignation, as far as you were concerned, was not going 
10 
to take effect until you had clarified certain issues such as 
what happens to your financial and capital and whatever, 
whatever, is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay, alright. 
MR MAKHUBO:   If it was a company I would know that I 
am selling this share, it is worth x but I would have 
resigned a director. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   I do not have to be a director to be a 
20 
shareholder. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   But you have to be a member and a 
shareholder at the same time in a close corporation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 67 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   I suppose at that time there was even a 
review there of the Companies Act to deal with that close 
corporation and issue, that is always a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And at that time of that resolution 
of resignation, were you the only member of the CC? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I had 67% shares. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You had 67% shares and there was one 
or more other members? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, there was one person who just held 
an interest there. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright.  Thank you, Mr 
Chaskalson, I hope that has clarified a bit. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thanks, Chair, and maybe if we 
can just clarify that other person, as I understand it, is 
Florence Matlakala Makhubo who is your mother. 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  Now from your 
answers to the Chair I understood that you were wanting to 
divest yourself of your interest which would then complete 
your withdrawal from Molelwane. 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, after evaluation, yes, that is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So what steps did you take to 
divest yourself of your interest?  Who were you going to 
sell your interest to? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Quite honestly we wanted to shut it down 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 68 of 297 
 
and keep it dormant because initially I did not know what is 
going to happen after five years, I wanted to go back into 
business, I never saw myself as a career – what I am doing 
now, not seeing myself as that but the issue was, I was 
central to the business and part of the work that it did 
basically, when the contracts were finished, we thought we 
would divest.  So that was the initial thing, value, what is 
there, what are the outstanding contracts, how much 
present value can we get from them, if at all, and then we 
divest. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But I am not sure I understand 
your answer because you said you had one idea of leaving 
the company dormant and then I presume going back to 
rejoin, if you left politics at a later stage, is that what you 
meant? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Give myself options Chair, I could 
probably go to Corporate, I do not know I just wanted to 
give myself options. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But what were you going to 
leave dormant? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   All I am saying is that when we say we 
diverse, shut it down or leave it dormant or - but 
completely that stops operating. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And your interest in it would be 
what? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 69 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   Would be what is outstanding and the 
value of contracts.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you would either I presume 
find someone who is going to buy that interest and then 
give you value for it, was that an option? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That as an option or whoever you have 
got a contract with you sell that contract, you see that 
contract with somebody else you get value, there would 
have been different options that we look at.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What steps did you take to 
10 
explore any of those options, can you describe that to us?  
MR MAKHUBO:   No I had left the person with it Molelwane 
Holdings to help, I was more focused on dealing with the 
billing problems in the city of Johannesburg.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So was that person Mr Chikani? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you left it in Mr Chikani 
hands as to what was going to become of your interest in 
Molelwane.   
MR MAKHUBO:   What to do with Molelwane and how to 
20 
proceed and what are the steps we going to follow, yes.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And what did Mr Chikani report 
to you in relation to those steps? 
MR MAKHUBO:   As and when some contracts especially 
the Regiments one was continuing we could not find the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 70 of 297 
 
lady that we gave power of attorney to, having an email 
saying this thing is going to take time to happen and there 
is an email proof to that.  So we just looked at and said let 
us wind down whatever we have and if possible but this 
contracts continue just continue them.    
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So can I take you to a document 
at page 946, is that the resolution that was adopted to 
record your resignation from Molelwane? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, that is the resolution that we 
advised that we signed.  
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, and if you go up a page you 
will see that there was due notice of a meeting of 
Molelwane Consulting in advance with that resolution being 
adopted.  
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if you go up a page further 
to 944 you will see a power of attorney.  
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And that one is actually a power 
of attorney given by you and if you go up to page 943 there 
20 
is a similar power of attorney given by your mother.   
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Is that the power of attorney that 
you were referring to earlier? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 71 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And no other powers of attorney 
other than these two? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the person who you were 
speaking to is the person who you asked to act on this 
power of attorney is this Televalie Getrude Ralibekwa? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can we go down to your power 
of attorney the one that you gave on page 944.  So special 
power of attorney for resignation of directors of course 
10 
there are not directors in a close corporation, were you 
aware of that at the time?  
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair I was aware and I asked the 
second one is this what we must sign that is what I got.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay but let us leave that aside 
for a moment it says: 
“Special power of attorney.  I the undersigned 
Moloantoa Geoffrey Makhubo being a director of 
Molelwane 
Consulting 
do 
hereby 
nominate 
constitute and appoint Ms Ralibekwa, her ID, with 
20 
full power of substitution to be my lawful agent in 
my name place instead.  To deliver to the registrar 
of companies the original COR39 and or any other 
documents or form that maybe required for the 
appointment of directors.  To make such amendment 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 72 of 297 
 
additional alteration to the COR and such other 
documents and forms which my said agent may 
deem fit or which may be required by the registrar 
of companies and to initial or sign as maybe 
required ach of such amendments additions or 
alterations.” 
This was the only power of attorney that you gave?     
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So this power of attorney was 
really enabling Ms Ralibekwa to go to the CIPC and effect 
10 
whatever 
changes 
were 
necessary 
to 
reflect 
your 
resignation as a member.   
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It was not giving her any power 
of attorney to dispose of your interest or to do anything in 
that regard?  
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And your explanation as I 
understood it earlier on was that that is what failed to 
happen but she did not act on this power of attorney.  So 
20 
she did not go off to the CIPC and say please remove Mr 
Makhubo as member of the CC that was the problem.    
MR MAKHUBO:   That is what happened yes.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if she had that would have 
happened at the CIPC.    
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 73 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Or that is what you wanted to 
happen at the CIPC.  
MR MAKHUBO:   Correct, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But was she meant to go there, as she 
meant to do that as yet or was she meant to wait until all 
the issues that needed to be sorted out, were sorted out.    
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair I just signed this to say look we 
need to effect this however as I say we needed to value 
and do all those sorts of things and see what we can take 
10 
out in the company.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So what is the answer to the question 
whether she was meant to take this resignation or send 
this resignation, resolution to the intellectual property 
office before those issues were sorted out or she was not 
meant to do that until those other issues are sorted out.      
MR MAKHUBO:   We did not specify on that process Chair 
I did not think it was…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why did you not know, what was your 
contemplation.  If you found out the day after the 
20 
resolution that she had taken the resolution to the CIPC 
office, what would have been your reaction before this 
other issues were sorted out?  
MR MAKHUBO:   I suppose it would be speculative but for 
me the CC and its employees were still people I know as 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 74 of 297 
 
you say so the winding down would not have been – 
because the 100% delivery back track to the other member 
according to the member ’s interest who could still value 
and still do what we wanted to do.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So the CIPC would still continue 
but your 67% interest would have gone away.   
MR MAKHUBO:   The way I understand CC’s is that your 
membership is linked to your percentage shareholder that 
is how I understand it.  
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No that is correct but if your 
membership had been removed at CIPC then suddenly you 
would have lost your interest in Molelwane is that not the 
case.   
MR MAKHUBO:   I suppose we still got it back in terms of 
valuing and closing it, ja but on the CIPC it is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes but as a matter of law when 
that happened you would no longer have a legal interest on 
Molelwane and if your mother at that stage fell out with you 
and took the attitude that she was going to keep all of 
20 
Molelwane for assault you would have no legal recourse.     
MR MAKHUBO:   Correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did you want that to happen? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you wanted to retain your 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 75 of 297 
 
67% interest until you could have found some suitable way 
of disposing it? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I wanted to get value out of what I 
worked for.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes no I am not suggesting that 
you did not work for it.  But you did not want to give up 
that interest you wanted to hang onto it until you got value 
for it.    
MR MAKHUBO:   I wanted to get value for what I worked 
for yes.  
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, so the fact that your 
resignation was not reflected at CIPC maybe because Mrs 
Ralibekwa did not implement her instructions but as a 
matter of underlying reality you did not want to give up 
your 67% interest in Molelwane until such time as you 
received value for it.  
MR MAKHUBO:   In reality I wanted value out of it and this 
power of attorney meant exactly what it meant it did not 
add on it.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But the point is that if you did 
20 
not get value for your 67% you were not intending to give 
up that 67%, is that not right? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chairperson I suppose my statement very 
clear.  I wanted to get value out of Molelwane Consulting 
and this power of attorney needed to have acted in a 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 76 of 297 
 
particular way whether the intention or not that I wanted to 
hold on I do not think that is correct I said I wanted to get 
value out of, I was weighing the semantics I wanted to hold 
on to get this.    
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let me try and see if you would 
agree with my formulation of what you mean.  The one 
thing you were clear about you did not want to lose your – 
to forfeit your 67% interest whatever happened you did not 
want to forfeit that.     
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   I wanted value for it Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you wanted – if it went to somebody 
else you wanted to get the financial equivalent of it you 
wanted to sell it or whatever.  You did not want it to go to 
waste, you did not want it to be acquired by somebody 
without you getting anything for it.     
MR MAKHUBO:   I did not want to give it away for free.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja you did not want to give it away for 
free yes, yes now that is one thing that is quite clear.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and if resigning your membership of 
the CC was going to mean that you give it up for free then 
you did not want that resignation.  You wanted the 
resignation to happen at a time when you would get value 
for your 67% interest.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 77 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair it is correct that divesting it means 
I would need to divest to get value from the company 
because like it happened in the other one if it was that I 
would simply resign my directorship and still hold onto my 
share the certificate up until I can, that is correct but in 
this case because they are intertwined maybe that is when 
you will say you will hold on to your interest because they 
are intertwined.  That is correct or could give somebody 
and say look I will pay you in future something like that but 
you are correct say eleven or twelve years of hardship and 
10 
building and working for me I did not want it to go to 
waste, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay Mr Chaskalson.        
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If that was the case Mr Makhubo 
so long as you had not disposed of that interest, you had 
not found someone to give you value can you not see that 
there was a potential for conflict.  That you had an 
interest, you had an ongoing interest in Molelwane and you 
were as MMC presiding over a contract which provided a 
very steady income stream to Molelwane.    
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Personally I do not preside over a 
contract, secondly at that point I do not see that as a – or 
as a conflict.  It led that I owned Molelwane Consulting and 
I would not do anything to benefit the contract in the city.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  To benefit the contract in the city, 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 78 of 297 
 
I see but we will come to that a little bit later but I want to 
clarify a – I want you to get to the second half of your 
explanation first.  We dealt with your interest as I 
understood the second part of your response to the 
question of conflict is that you said councillors do not have 
say over procurement decisions so there could not be a 
conflict there.  
MR 
MAKHUBO: 
 
 
Councillors 
do 
not 
participate 
in 
specification, they do not participate in bid evaluation they 
do not participate in executive acquisition committee.  The 
10 
only time that a report would come to a Mayoral Committee 
and council is when like the banking tender that goes more 
than three years and a Section 33 of the MFMA would have 
been 
a 
public 
participation 
for 
comments 
National 
Treasury, Provincial Treasury is to be informed of those 
responses to a contract going beyond three years.  That is 
the only time that a report will come to say we have done 
Section 33 and Section 33 has found nothing and we agree 
to that, that is owing.          
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So saving the Section 33 
20 
situation councillors do not have any hands on involvement 
in procurement decisions.  
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I mean there is another section I 
cannot remember whether it was Section 16 or something 
where when you change the material…[intervene] 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 79 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, could it be 43? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I cannot remember the section well let us 
say one chooses the amount or something like that then 
again you go to public, you ask the public and then 
councillors get to be told that the public have been 
consulted and there has been no problem that are those 
participations that I know of.    
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, now while you had this 
intention to resign as soon as you could find someone to 
give you value did you remove yourself from active 
10 
management of the affairs of Molelwane?  
MR MAKHUBO:   I was not on a day to day basis but I 
remained the only signatory.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you remained the only 
signatory in Molelwane’s account? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Would not change, ja but there was 
somebody dealing with the online banking thing.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, so after 2011 no one other 
than you had authority over Molelwane’s accounts as far as 
FNB who ran those accounts was concerned? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, as I say internally there was 
somebody who used to do payments and all that using the 
online system.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, but ultimately you were the 
only one with signing power? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 80 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   Signing yes.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I take you to a document in 
that regard can you go to volume 3 page 64.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that page 364 or? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Bundle 3 of page 64, sorry about 
that.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
MR MAKHUBO:   64 you say? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   64, yes three dash six four.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay.  
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you recognise that 
document at Bundle 3 page 64? It says at the front in 
contacts set up screen.  
MR MAKHUBO:   I see my signature but I cannot remember 
what it is all about.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So this is a document that FNB 
it 
is 
an 
in 
contact 
setup 
screen 
which 
records 
authorisations and customer details from FNB in relation to 
its customers.  In this case Molelwane Consulting and in 
contact is the feature that FNB has where they send you an 
20 
SMS’s in relation to your transactions.  You see your 
signature down there and the date is 20/09/2018, 13 
September 2018.  So as late as 13 September 2018 that is 
a good seven years after you were intending to resign from 
Molelwane you were issuing instructions to FNB in relation 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 81 of 297 
 
to the Molelwane Consulting account.           
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair the account is still as we speak 
under my own profile my personal profile.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is under your personal profile? 
MR MAKHUBO:   It is under my profile, yes my FNB 
logging profile.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you have your personal bank 
account on that profile, you also have Molelwane?  
MR MAKHUBO:   They are all linked.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   They all linked.  
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   At some point were linked when I was a 
signatory of the ANC they are all linked.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, but this particular account 
is Molelwane’s account and I just want to clarify with you 
that as of September 2018 you were still the sole signatory 
on the Molelwane account as far as FNB was concerned.   
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   As we stand today are you are 
you the sole signatory on the Molelwane account? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you play a role in 
relation to Molelwane financial affairs do you administer 
those affairs?  
MR MAKHUBO:   There is very little happening but I watch 
what is happening yes.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 82 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And there may be very little 
happening now but from 2011 until the start of 2016 there 
was a contract with Regiments fund managers in relation to 
management or the sinking fund of the city and I imagine 
quite a lot was happening, would you be keeping an eye on 
that?    
MR MAKHUBO:   To see what is going on, yes that is 
correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You would? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes and they would come and tell me 
10 
what is going on as well.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, can I take you to page 16 of 
volume 3.  At page 16 you see the photocopy the front and 
back of a cash cheque drawn on Molelwane Consulting for 
300 000,00.  So it is a cash cheque for 300 000,00 dated 3 
August 2013 and on the back there is in handwriting with a 
stamp from FNB cheque confirmed with Mr Moloantoa 
Makhubo and then there is a cell phone number and the 
time is 12:23, 3 August 2013.  Can I ask is that cell phone 
number - we do not need to mention it - but is that your 
20 
cell phone number? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is my number, yes.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you recall authorising 
FNB to pay R300 000,00 in cash out against this cheque on 
Molelwane Consulting?  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 83 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   I cannot remember that far back about 
the date of the cheque on the 3 r d of August 2013, I cannot.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Were there a lot of cheques for 
300 
000,00 
cheques 
been 
cashed 
for 
Molelwane 
Consulting?  
MR MAKHUBO:   There were cheques, that is right.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no I am talking about 
R300 000. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair I cannot say at the time even 
50 000 or so answer.  
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But would you accept against 
this photocopy that chances are that FNB phoned you and 
confirmed with you that they could cash this cheque of 
R300 000 drawn on Molelwane Consulting on 3 August 
2013?     
MR MAKHUBO:   Chances are that but I mean I cannot 
verify that they indeed called me.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I ask what Molelwane 
Consulting was doing that needed a cheque for R300 000 
to be cashed? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   I cannot remember exactly what this 
cheque would have been for but as I say in my affidavit 
that would have been various things where we used cash 
or to assist members of the organisation, to assist all other 
people asking for help.     
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 84 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I take you down a page, 
page 17 you will see a cheque on the 24th of October for 
200 000,00 also cash and that one has got your signature 
on it.   
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I would have signed cheques but my 
detail were not right.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes and if we go to the next 
page 18 another one for a 100 000 and this time in March 
2014.  Is that your signature on the cash cheque?  
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I was a sole signatory.  
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Now earlier you said or in your 
affidavit you described the business of Molelwane as being 
in the accounting space.  Is that correct?  
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What is a business in the 
accounting space doing that requires amounts this large to 
be turned into cash?    
MR MAKHUBO:   As I said Chair I would need to think but 
there were various things that we would have done 
depending on the date when volunteers ask for money I 
20 
would help from here we would – but we would assist a 
whole lot of people.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let me take you to how you 
explained this in your affidavit.  If you go to volume 2 page 
423 at paragraph 62.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 85 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   Paragraph? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say paragraph 62? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   62.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, on page 423.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   423.  
MR MAKHUBO:   423.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I think you maybe in the 
incorrect file, Bundle 2 so it should be two dash four to 
three of not three dash four two three but if you are in the 
right.  So you were asked to answer a question; cash 
10 
cheque withdrawals from the FNB, Killarney account of 
Molelwane Consulting aggregating to more than 3.5million 
in the period 2009 to 2017.  Your answer was: 
“I 
have 
not 
quantified 
the 
amounts 
of 
cash 
withdrawals over the said period and my response 
thereto should not be construed as an admission of 
the aforesaid amounts.”   
Fair enough. 
“However any amount if withdrawn was in the 
course of business of Molelwane and would also be 
20 
withdrawals for personal expenses.” 
So let me ask two separate question what business of 
Molelwane would require Molelwane to cash a cheque for 
R300 000?          
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair I must say we would assist as 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 86 of 297 
 
Molelwane Consulting people and there is no – I do not say 
that there is a business transaction that we needed but we 
draw money and that is for the people.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So Molelwane assist people in 
the course of its business?  
MR MAKHUBO:   Well that is what we did.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And so this 300 000 was 
dispersed to individuals on behalf of Molelwane? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well it could be or ja well they come to 
me and say look and then I would assist yes.  
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Personal expenses do you have 
any personal expenses that would ever require you to have 
cash in hundreds and thousands of rands?  
MR MAKHUBO:   That period you are talking about there 
were expense that were especially 2013, 12, 2013 ja.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   13/14 but what sort of personal 
expense were you paying cash for in these amounts?  
MR MAKHUBO:   Furniture, promulgating pool etcetera.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And you were paying cash for 
that? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, I mean my bill was to pay him cash.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay let us – that was a bit of a 
detour in cash but let us back to the conflict.  As I 
understand your version you have continued to play an 
active role in the management of Molelwane’s finances 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 87 of 297 
 
after 2011.  Is that correct?     
MR MAKHUBO:   Well I continued to watch them, ja.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You continued to watch them 
beyond watching what did you do or beyond watching and 
authoring the cashing of cheques from time to time and 
drawing cheques what did you do?   
MR MAKHUBO:   What did I? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What did you do beyond 
watching? 
MR MAKHUBO:   How do you mean? 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well you said you kept an eye 
on the accounts.  
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, you just see now that they would 
come to me to sign cheques.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Chaskalson may have meant 
whether there was any work that you did for the CC apart 
from watching well he might not have meant that but take 
the question is coming from me if he did not mean that.     
MR MAKHUBO:   No I did not work for the CC. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not do any work for the CC? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did you give any directions to 
the CC in relation to the accounts? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 88 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you were still in control of 
the financial affairs of the CC?  
MR MAKHUBO:   Largely yes, you know they come to me 
for certain things but operationally they overcame worse. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And you could see from being in 
control of their accounts that the primary source of revenue 
of the CC continued to be the Regiment Fund Managers 
accounts.  Is that not correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:  We knew that yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Can I take you now to 2015?   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which bundle do you want us to go to Mr 
Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  We will still be in Bundle 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And earlier in your evidence you 
mentioned Section 33 of the MFMA.  And Section 33 of 
MFMA gives council as a very important role in contracts 
which impose financial obligations on a municipality of more 
than three years.  Is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Council has an active role in this. 
MR MAKHUBO:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And I presume the MMC for finance 
has a particularly active role because the MMC for finance 
would have to assess any documents that go before council 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 89 of 297 
 
before they reach council in relation to contracts of this 
nature. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes the department would ask the MMC to 
say we request council to approve a contract for three years 
and then you will say yes let us take it to council but it has 
got no authority to say so. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can I ask you to go to page 492 of 
Bundle 2?  Are you there? 
MR MAKHUBO:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can you confirm that this is an 
10 
invoice that Molelwane issued to Regiments Fund Managers 
on the 30 June 2015 for an amount of R609 177.73 plus VAT 
giving a total of R694 462.61? 
MR MAKHUBO:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And then if you go over the page at 
476 you will see a statement? 
MR MAKHUBO:  4  47? 
CHAIRPERSON:  493? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  476. 
MR MAKHUBO:  476. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  476.  I am sorry I am jumping 
around. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said we go over the page. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes it is over the page in my notes.  
It is not over the page in anybody else’s notes I apologise 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 90 of 297 
 
for that.  476.  There is an end of year statement for 2015 
from Molelwane a Regiments Fund Managers account.  Will 
you confirm that that is correct it is at 31 December 2015 
statement 
issued 
by 
Molelwane 
to 
Regiments 
Fund 
Managers? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Here is it here.  Ja I mean they would have 
sent it here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And that – this is a Molelwane 
statement is – can you confirm that? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes I confirm it is but I … 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Let us look at 30 June 2015.  
There 
we 
see 
that 
out 
performance 
the 
invoice 
of 
R694 462.61 reflected as a debit and at that point Regiments 
Fund Managers balance – in other words what they owned t 
you at Molelwane was R993 370.47, is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Well I see it here Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So Regiments Fund Managers 
owed Molelwane at that point just under a million on 30 June 
2015. 
MR MAKHUBO:  I am saying I am seeing it here yes.  That is 
20 
correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  You seeing it here well you have 
no reason to doubt that that is the – that this statement is 
accurate? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 91 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Let us go to page 614 of this 
bundle?  And 614 it is a City of Johannesburg Mayoral 
Committee Report or a report that served at the Mayoral 
Committee on the 23 July 2015 and this in fact is a report 
under Section 33 or to – to – for the purposes of Section 33 
of the MFMA and the report said: 
“That the approval of the Portfolio Management Agreement 
for the appointment of the Redemption Fund Asset Managers 
a strategic thrust well governed and managed city objective 
purpose of this report is to obtain council approval to enter 
10 
into the five year Portfolio Management Agreement for the 
City’s Redemption Fund now.” 
 
So this is finally the contract that is going to take the 
place of that old 2006 Regiments Fund Managers contract, is 
that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Say again. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  This is the contract that is going to 
take the place of that original contract first awarded to 
Molelwane and Regiments back in 2006? 
MR MAKHUBO:  [00:05:25] the second one here. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And then there is a bit of a 
summary and at 3 and it says: 
“The required notice of advert in terms of 
Section 33(1)A containing the information 
was 
published 
in 
local 
and 
national 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 92 of 297 
 
newspapers. 
Cities 
projected 
financial 
obligations referred to in Section 33(1)B 1 
and 2 for the five year contract was stated in 
the financial implications. Terms of 33(1)C 
City needs to determine whether it will 
secure significant capital investment.” 
 
On and on it goes and there are legal implications 
and financial implications and if we come to the resolution at 
page 625 we see that the Mayoral Committee made a 
resolution that the contract and Item 17 attached hereto is 
10 
Annexure C to manage the City’s Redemption Fund between 
the City of Joburg and Regiments Fund Managers is 
approved.  And that the City Manager be authorised to sign 
the contract referred to in Annexure C on behalf of the City.  
Is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes that is correct to approve any period 
beyond three years. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:  That goes to council from there ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes do you recall who chaired this 
20 
meeting of the Mayoral Committee? 
MR MAKHUBO:  I saw in the minutes that I chaired the first 
part and then the former Mayor Parks Tau checked the latter 
part. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes and – and where did this item 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 93 of 297 
 
fall in? 
MR MAKHUBO:  When I read these minutes because I 
cannot recall the Councillor Tau was chairing the meeting at 
that time.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes did you participate in the 
meeting at that time? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Sorry? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Did you participate in the meeting at that 
time? 
MR MAKHUBO:  I would think I was there but I cannot recall 
10 
what the – whether the item was approved or not. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:  I cannot recall but I was chairing the 
meeting that time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So you were not chairing but you 
were part of the Mayoral Committee? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can we then go forward to the 
council meeting of the 30 July.  So that recommendation 
from 
this 
Mayoral 
Committee 
meeting 
in 
which 
you 
20 
participate goes to council on 30 July.  Were you present at 
council at 30 July 2015? 
MR MAKHUBO:  I tried to check the – what page is that? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry it is at page 610.   
MR MAKHUBO:  I cannot tell Chair if I would not have – we 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 94 of 297 
 
do not have the – I can go check if we do not have the 
attendance register. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Okay.  Well we will get the 
attendance register.  Can we just go to the resolution?  That 
the resolution at page 611 is that the contract hereto is 
Annexure C to manage the City’s Redemption Fund between 
City of Joburg and Regiments Fund Managers is approved.  
And the City Manager is authorised to sign the contract.  Do 
you remember that resolution? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Well I see it here yes. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  So Regiments was having 
had the original contract from 2006 was then given the 
second contract in 2015, is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes through the process of the EOC and all 
that yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry through the process of? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Of the EOC. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  What – the EOC. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Executive Opposition’s Committee. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Executive yes but because this 
20 
was a Section 33 contract it was also a contract that went to 
council and Mayoral Committee? 
MR MAKHUBO:  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes so if Mayoral Committee said 
no it would not – well if Mayoral Committee and council said 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 95 of 297 
 
no it would not have gone through. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And do you recall whether any of 
the bidders other than Regiments Fund Managers were – 
made it through to round 2 of this adjudication? 
MR MAKHUBO:  I would not know Chair.  I saw for the first 
time in this bundle the EOC report. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I see.   
MR MAKHUBO:  For the first time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Well it would not be the first time 
10 
because you were at the Mayoral Committee meeting that 
considered the report. 
MR MAKHUBO:  The EOC report does not serve at Mayoral 
Committee. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It does not serve at Mayoral 
Committee. 
MR MAKHUBO:  No. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It serves at council. 
MR MAKHUBO:  No, no even the EOC reports does not 
serve at council.  They bring a report we will [00:09:49] 
20 
recommendations. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  So Mayoral Committee – so 
Mayoral Committee and – and council do not even get to see 
the EAC report. 
MR MAKHUBO:  No. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 96 of 297 
 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
They 
exercise 
their 
own 
independent discretion. 
MR MAKHUBO:  In the time I have been a Mayoral 
Committee member no. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I see but Mayoral Committee and 
council must exercise their own independent discretion in 
relation to these decisions.  It is not just rubber stamping the 
EOC. 
MR MAKHUBO:  The report you see is the report that gives a 
recommendation. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes but the – my question is does 
Mayoral Committee and council just rubber stamp that 
recommendation or do they exercise an independent invest – 
an independent discretion? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Except when there is a obligation to the 
financial obligation on the sitting post beyond three years 
which is what we concern ourselves with. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes so in this case Mayoral 
Committee and council had to look at the matter with an 
independent discretion is that not correct? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:  The discretion of whether three years or 
five years? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No a discretion as to whether they 
are going to authorise the contract to Regiments? 
MR MAKHUBO:  The discretion whether it is three years or 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 97 of 297 
 
five years that is what [00:11:01]. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No, no  
MR MAKHUBO:  We do not see Regiments or we – we do not 
do that.  At least I do not do that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Well what you could say is we are 
not going to give this to Regiments we – we have 
investigated 
this 
contract 
we 
are 
not 
satisfied 
that 
Regiments should do it.  Go out to tender again. 
MR MAKHUBO:  But that you can say go to tender again but 
generally when they come and say you have done the whole 
10 
process it has got probity, people looked at it as being – so 
you believe what they say they have done because the 
Accounting Officer is accountable at the end of the day. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes but – well we can have a legal 
debate inside the commission later.  I am telling that at legal 
level the Mayoral Committee and the council have to 
exercise an independent discretion in these cases. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Chairperson I am sure discretion is – yes 
we can say take this thing back to tender I suppose you 
ultimately have to say yes it is five years or not but why you 
20 
go to Section 33 is because you are imposing a financial 
obligation on the city more than three years.  If it was less 
than three years it will not even reach Mayoral Committee.  
If it was less than years do not reach Mayoral Committee nor 
council.  So you only get involved on that period extension 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 98 of 297 
 
anything that is beyond three years. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Now with respect – with respect Mr 
Makhubo the legal position is because binding the City to a 
commitment 
of 
more 
than 
three 
years 
is 
sufficiently 
important to require the attention of the council.  The council 
must look at the obligation that the City is going to carry for 
three years and more and must decide whether the City 
should carry that obligation.  It is not an issue of deciding 
well we will only give three years.  The issue is are we going 
to undertake this obligation to Regiments Fund Managers on 
10 
this contract? 
MR MAKHUBO:  So your contention Chair is that the 
obligation is not the financial obligation over three years it is 
a financial obligation and the person that it is going to.  Is 
that what we [talking over one another]. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is – there is an obligation that 
the City will carry for a period of five years on this 
recommendation. 
 
Is 
the 
City 
prepared 
to 
carry 
this 
obligation on that contract?  Why the – the Section requires 
the whole contract to be put before the council. 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:  The conditions of the contract yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No in fact the exact contract that is 
going to be signed with Regiments is what the Section 
requires. 
MR MAKHUBO:  That is correct. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 99 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So the council has to scrutinize 
that contract and say do we want to bind the council on that 
contract? 
MR MAKHUBO:  That is correct.  That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And part of that question is do we 
want to bind on these terms to Regiments Cap – to 
Regiments Fund Managers for five years? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Well I would not choose one over the other.  
I am saying that it says looked at the conditions, the 
financial obligations, the whole contract is there.  Yes we will 
10 
[?] Regiments but I do not think we can turn it back at least 
in my experience never have been that we do not want this 
bank we want this bank, we do not want this developer we 
want this developer. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Well you cannot say we do not 
want Regiments we want Colour Fields because the contract 
and the – has to be advertised to the public and the only 
contract that has been advertised to the public is the 
Regiments contract.  But you can say we looked at this and 
we do not want – we do not want Regiments – we do not 
20 
want to be in this relationship with Regiments for five years.  
And in fact your obligation is to examine whether you want to 
incur this obligation on behalf of the City to that counter 
party.  
MR MAKHUBO:  Ja I never looked at it like that.  I have 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 100 of 297 
 
never looked at it like that that I can like the conditions and 
the money and the financial obligations and then would say 
just because I do not like this person at that point we do not.  
I mean it has happened, banking, many of that Section 33’s 
we looked at. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Well let me – let me give you an 
example.  You are aware – well I will get to my example – let 
me get to my example a little later let me not do it now.  I – 
you participate in the process that awards this contract to 
Regiments Fund Managers. 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes I was in a – assumed that I was in the 
council meeting and a Mayoral Committee that time that 
approved that – the obligation of five years and the 
conditions of the contract going to Regiments must – must 
be approved. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Let us then go to the 
situation in your private affairs not your council affairs.  Can 
you turn to page 774?  Remember that council – the Mayoral 
Committee was 23 July, the council was 30 July.  Page 774 
is an extract from Regiments bank statement.  And what we 
20 
see is that on the 28 August less than a month after the 
council approves Regiments pays Molelwane R799 197.00.  
Do you recall that payment? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Well I see it here I cannot say I recall. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Well maybe let us go back to 492 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 101 of 297 
 
which is that end of year. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Statement. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Statement.   
MR MAKHUBO:  4? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And you see on 28 August 
MR MAKHUBO:  4 what?  Is it 492 and it is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja 492 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  492.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Chaskalson when you say 249. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Oh sorry Vol – sorry Volume – 
10 
Bundle 2, 492. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is better that way. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Bundle 2, 492. 
MR MAKHUBO:  My 492 is a – is that invoice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  492 is … 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Is a statement not an invoice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Statement.  Bundle 2? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  492 if you turn around the other 
page- the other side? 
MR MAKHUBO:  493. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you look at the – on the spine of the 
bundle is it written Flow of Funds Bundle 02?  If you just 
look – I just want to make sure you are… 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes that is.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 102 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:  02 I am on FOF 02, 492. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay then you are – you must be on the 
right page.  I – does it not look like your page Mr 
Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just show it towards me because Mr 
Chaskalson is looking at the computer. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No, no I can – but I will see the 
same page there.  It looks a little bit shorter.  Well let me 
describe to you what I see on 492.  It is a statement that we 
10 
looked at a short while ago when I pointed out to you that at 
30 June Regiments owed Molelwane R993 370.00.  Do you 
recall that? 
MR MAKHUBO:  That statement – that is correct ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Well the same statement – it 
is the same document says that after this payment the 
amounts outstanding by Regiments had now dropped to only 
R101 000.00.  R101 925. 976 so this payment came in on the 
28 August according to the statement and – and as of the 28 
August what had once been a balance of just under R1 
20 
million was now just over a R100 000.00.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Chaskalson I am not sure. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Am I looking at – have I got the 
wrong document? 
CHAIRPERSON:  There are some things you are saying 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 103 of 297 
 
which do not appear on page 492.  Are you looking at 492 
too? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I am looking at my 492 it may be 
476.  If we – can we try 476?  Is the statement on 476? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got 476. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So this is the end of year 
statement of 2012 and can we – let us just rewind a little bit.  
We looked at 30 June 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of 2012 or 2015 Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  2015 Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  30 June 2015.  The outstanding 
balance that Regiments owed Molelwane was R993 370.47.  
There are then some movements on the account but the 
biggest is a payment of R799 197.00 on 28 August less than 
a month after the resolution to reappoint Regiments leaving 
a balance of R101 925.00.  So in the period over which the 
Mayoral 
Committee 
considered 
the 
Regiments 
renewal 
contract and awarded – and the council awarded it the 
outstanding – well – a month before this the outstanding 
20 
balance was R993 370.00 that Regiments owed Molelwane 
and a month later the outstanding balance was R101 925.00.  
Do you not see the potential for an appearance of a conflict 
of interest there? 
MR MAKHUBO:  The way I see it here I mean you are 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 104 of 297 
 
winding down an existing contract and transferring to the 
second one – monies outstanding again finalised.  I really do 
not. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  You had sent – you had sent an 
invoice at the end of June. 
MR MAKHUBO:  The – this part I was not involved in but 
what I can say is that it makes sense to me that the first 
quarter payment that comes at the end of June must be 
billed. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes but would it not make sense 
10 
for that payment to be paid in July? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Chair I would not – I would not – as I say I 
would have assumed that is the first quarter – I do not know 
the details of what – what the issue is but when it gets paid 
July or June I would not answer for that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Right.  Well let us go on on the 
chronology.  We have – we have seen a payment from 
Regiments to Molelwane of R799 197.00 on the 28 August.  
Can I take you to Bundle 3 page 849?   
MR MAKHUBO:  I am there. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if we go – just hang on a 
minute.  If we go to the 29 August 2015 the day after 
Regiments pays Molelwane.  Can you go up to 29 August 
2015? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 105 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  This is a table of payments that go 
from Molelwane into your personal account.  And we see on 
29 August 2015 the day after Regiments pay Molelwane half 
a million rands is transferred from Molelwane into your 
personal account.  Do you have a comment on that? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Without having the details big amounts 
would go to the call account for her interests in the same 
profile so that is – that is that.  What – there is no other 
comment. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry big amounts go to the call 
10 
account on the same profile.  So you are treating the 
accounts of Molelwane as essentially interchangeable with 
your own personal accounts? 
MR MAKHUBO:  No.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  You moving R500 000.00 from an 
account in the name of Molelwane into an account in your 
personal name. 
MR MAKHUBO:  Yes that is what happened but I was not 
treating them the same no. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry you are not treating them as 
20 
the same? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Ja. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
But 
you 
have 
just 
taken 
R500 000.00 that belongs to Molelwane and you put it in an 
account that belongs to you. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 106 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:  I would have thought it went it into the call 
account then you asked me to comment Chair around this.  
As I say I am seeing this I do not have underlying detail I am 
assuming it is gone to a call account. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry whose call account?  Is it 
your 
call 
account 
– 
your 
personal 
call 
account 
or 
Molelwane’s? 
MR MAKHUBO:  It is in my name. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is in your name? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Ja. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  So R500 000.00 has gone out 
of Molelwane’s account into your – an account in your name 
the day after Regiments has paid Molelwane R799 000.00 
which in turn is less than a month after you participated in a 
decision to give Regiments a Fund Management contract for 
the City for another five years.  Is that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:  I think the context it not correct.  Regiments 
owed Molelwane Consulting.  Regiments – Regiments Capital 
owed Molelwane Consulting the money that was duly 
invoiced and paid.  So I suppose what you are saying is that 
20 
what happens between Molelwane and myself – I do not 
know how it links to the council decision.  They have got no 
relationship.  Not at all. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  You say they have got no 
relationship.  Looking from the outside I want to put it to you 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 107 of 297 
 
that there is an appearance that they may very well have a 
relationship at least in appearance.  But they may very well 
have a relationship. 
MR MAKHUBO:  It is a very wrong appearance and it is 
incorrect. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So you say it is incorrect. 
MR MAKHUBO:  I maintain it is incorrect. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Okay.  I am – Chair I see that we 
have reached one o’clock.  There are some more questions 
that I want to – to pursue along this line but… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Would it be a convenient time to 
take the lunch adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us talk about that.  We have the other 
witness coming later on but you – you know how you want to 
manage the time.  Do you propose that we take the 
adjournment – the lunch adjournment now and you continue 
with Mr Makhubo at two or did you want to continue a little 
bit or for a certain time and we – or what do you have in 
mind? 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Chair if we could continue for 
another half hour now I might be able to complete this 
section with Mr Makhubo and then we can come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  At a later stage. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 108 of 297 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well in terms of the other witness 
maybe it is not going to impact much because I – from what I 
understood from you yesterday we should be able to finish 
with him as well. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes we certainly will be able to 
finish. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay maybe let us take the lunch break, 
come back at two you continue with Mr Makhubo and then 
maybe we finish with him at half past two or thereabout – 
quarter to three and then when we are done with him then 
10 
we will – I will hear the other witness. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that fine? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I wonder if we might not notify – 
we will try to notify [?] Ramosebudi and his attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  To – to come later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright.  Alright we are going to 
adjourn for lunch we will come back at two.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Shortly before 
the break Mr Makhubo, we were looking at a payment of 
R 799 000,00 that went into Molelwane’s – the day before, a 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 109 of 297 
 
payment of – from Regiments, the day before, a payment of 
R 500,000,00 went out of Molelwane into your personal 
account. 
 
And your answer to me was that you would have moved 
it into the call account to get more interest.  That you treated 
the call account in your personal name as a place where you 
could house Molelwane funds for getting better interest.   
 
Is that a fair answer – a fair summary of your answer? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair, generally, that would happen.  I was 
saying that you need more interest.  But specifically on this 
10 
one, I would have to check on which account it went to 
specifically. 
 
However, I can indulge yourself Chair that, even before 
we closed, the chair tried – the council tried to misread the 
statement that seven, ninety-nine came as Regiments was 
owing Molelwane hundred thousand.   
 
The statement does not say that, the way I read it.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is not what I said at all.  I 
said after the R 799 000 came, what was left owing was 
hundred thousand. 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes.  So I want to categorically state that 
all the monies that flew from Regiments Capital to Molelwane 
Consulting were in relation to contract that was signed in 
2006. 
 
No other contract that we were part of.  We were not 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 110 of 297 
 
part to contract number 2.  And that, giving that same 
contract Chair, would have been through the processes that 
we described earlier. 
 
And the award is not made by council.  The award is 
made by the EAC subject to Section 33, that if – if the 
Commission can hear it on the record what Section 33 
requires of council to do.   
 
I think it will be quite important that no monetary benefit 
- and I had not opportunity to influence because the EAC and 
Probit(?) and all that.  Then those documents are all there.   
10 
 
The Commission would have wanted them.  I mean, in 
the same way – EAC report here says they worked through 
property. 
 
So I thought it is quite important that we clarify that.  
But everything else was in relation to contract – contract 
number 1 and we had no opportunity to influence contract 
number 2. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But if...  Well, you did have an 
opportunity to stop contract number 2.   
MR MAKHUBO:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
20 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...your mandate(?) is on the 
Mayoral Committee and on the council.   
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair, I say, if you can read Section 33, 
what council and council has to do.  And then maybe then, I 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 111 of 297 
 
would say I had no opportunity to say:   
 
Do not award to Regiments because Regiments – awards 
of contracts are the privy of the city(?) manager, who is the 
accounting officer.   
 
And they are done subject to the Specification(?) 
Committee, 
the 
Evaluation 
Committee, 
the 
Executive 
Adjudication Committee, Probity and of course, the award by 
The City Manager.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I do not think we need to debate 
the terms of Section 33 with you.  You have given us your 
10 
view on Section 33.  What Section 33 actually requires is a 
legal issue which we can address later.  But what I 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do we have it at hand? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I do have it at hand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Would you like me to read it into 
the record? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, maybe you could just read it, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It says the following Chair: 
20 
“The municipality may enter into a contract which 
would 
impose 
financial 
obligations 
on 
the 
municipality beyond the financial year but if a 
contract will impose financial obligations on the 
municipality beyond the three years covered in the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 112 of 297 
 
annual budget for that financial year, it may do so 
only if: 
A: 
1. The municipal manager has at least 60 days 
before the meeting of a municipal council at 
which 
the 
contract 
is 
to 
be 
approved 
in 
accordance with Section 21(a) of the Municipal 
Systems Act, made public the draft contract. 
2. 
And then information statement summarising 
the 
municipality’s 
obligation 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
10 
proposed contract. 
3. 
Invited 
the 
local 
community 
and 
other 
interested person to submit to the municipality 
comments or representations in respect of this 
proposed contract. 
4, 
As solicited the views and recommendations 
of AA, the National Treasury and the relevant 
Provincial Treasury. 
5. 
The National Department responsible for local 
government. 
20 
6. 
The 
contract 
involves 
where 
CC 
is 
not 
applicable.” 
 
B is crucial.   
“1. 
The municipality is taken into account the 
municipality’s 
projected 
financial 
obligations 
in 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 113 of 297 
 
terms of the proposed contract for each of the 
financial year covered by the contract. 
2. 
The impact of those financial obligations and 
municipal fees, municipal tariffs and revenues. 
3. 
Any comments or representations on the 
proposed 
contract 
received 
from 
the 
local 
community and other interested persons. 
4. 
Any written views and recommendations on 
the proposed contract by the National Treasury, 
relevant 
Provincial 
Treasury 
and 
National 
10 
Department responsible for local government and 
any national department referred to in paragraph 
AA.” 
 
And then C is – there is the provision that invest the 
power in the council.  C says: 
“The municipal council has adopted a resolution in 
which: 
1. 
It determines that the municipality will secure 
a significant capital investment or will derive a 
significant financial economical financial benefit 
20 
from the contract. 
2. 
It approves the entire contract exactly as it is 
to be executed. 
3. 
It authorises the municipal manager to sign 
the contract on behalf of the municipality.” 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 114 of 297 
 
 
So the power to conclude or not to conclude these 
contracts is quite clearly controlled by the council of the 
municipality. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Thank you.  Well, in fairness to 
Mr Makhubo.  Maybe you could put that last proposition and 
hear what he has to say.  What do you say Mr Makhubo to 
the ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   No, no, no ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...position that ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   No, no, no.  I was responding to 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on.  Let me finish first.  
What do you say to Mr Chaskalson’s proposition that when 
he reads Section 33, it seems that the final decision, 
whether the – such a contract should be concluded or not, 
seems to lay with the council? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes, we say council approves. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   But exactly why we have to do Section 33, 
Section 33(1).  Yes, I agree that the council approves. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   But what I was contending. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MAKHUBO:   There was an earlier discussion that we 
have the power to say no to Regiments or to whoever it is 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 115 of 297 
 
awarded or to the bank or the financier.  So we do not 
award. 
 
By the time the contract comes to council, the award is 
already made.  What we are bringing is a council – is a 
contract.  That is how I understand it.  That is how I 
understood it.  That is how it has been operating. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Chaskalson I will leave it to you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thanks, Chair.  I mean, as a 
matter of law, Mr Makhubo’s understanding is incorrect.  I 
can put that very firmly but I do not want to debate law with 
10 
Mr Makhubo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Makhubo, earlier I took you to 
a 
schedule 
which 
showed 
that 
in 
this 
period 
from 
November 2011 when you were attempting to resign from 
Molelwane, through to January 2020, amounts of R 7 million 
or just a little over R 7 million were paid from Molelwane into 
your personal account.  And you will recall, you were not 
able to dispute that.   
MR MAKHUBO:   When you said no verify.  Sorry, no 
20 
verifying.  I said that I had not verified but it was not in 
dispute.  So... 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You will come back in due course 
to deal with the EOH side of the evidence.  In between now 
and then, if you have any dispute over that amount, you will 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 116 of 297 
 
have the opportunity to raise it. 
 
But will you accept that over the same period, the 
primary source of revenue into the Molelwane account was 
the Regiments contract? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I will have to check that.  Maybe it was a 
larger one.  If you say primary means that.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   [Indistinct]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Was there any other source of 
10 
revenue into Molelwane bigger than Regiments? 
MR MAKHUBO:   None that I can recall.  I was, as I say, I 
did not check the docs. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, we actually went and looked 
at the numbers and we saw that in this period the income 
from Molelwane to Regiments page 985, aggregated...  Let 
me just get the exact figure.   
 
Well, that figure of R 35 million goes back to 2006.  Let 
me see if we have ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Where are you looking now 
20 
Mr Chaskalson?  985? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   985, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of Bundle 2? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Of Bundle 2, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 117 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We do not have a figure for the 
period after 2011, but I can say with considerable confidence 
that it is more than R 7 million and I can also put to you that 
there was no remotely comparable source of revenue into 
Molelwane, apart from Regiments. 
 
If you want to dispute that once you have looked at your 
bank statements in more detail, you will have the opportunity 
to do that when you come back. 
 
I want to take you now to an interview you gave to 
Power FM shortly before you became Executive Major.  And 
10 
can we turn to page 941 of the bundle? 
MR MAKHUBO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Do you recall giving an interview 
to 
Power 
FM 
shortly 
before 
you 
– 
I 
think 
it 
is 
3 December 2019. 
MR MAKHUBO:   I have given many interviews.  I might 
have.  I stopped at Jozi FM, Tata FM.  I gave many 
interviews.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   This was shortly before you were 
appointed Executive Mayor.  Can I take you to line 12 on 
20 
page 941? 
MR MAKHUBO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The presenter says:   
“I am sorry to push you.  It is just that we are out of 
time.  So I am just trying to put, you know, just 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 118 of 297 
 
encapsulate, basically, what is that you are saying 
that is not true?  That I resigned in 2019.  I actually 
resigned on such and such a date.” 
 
Your answer is: 
“Ja.  I resigned.  The final resignation was around 
2013/2014.” 
 
Was that correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I cannot remember if I said that but if you 
have seen the transcripts.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   It is not correct.  That is not correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So it is not correct?  So what you 
told Power FM shortly before you were made Executive 
Mayor is not correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair, I am reading this.  I am not even 
sure that I have said this to Power FM. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  Well, if you want to hear the 
transcript, we can give it to your attorneys.  You can come 
back.  Assume for present purposes, this is an accurate 
transcript.   
20 
 
If it is an accurate transcript, is what you said there, 
correct or incorrect? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, I mean, it is quite clear that the dates 
are not correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The dates are not correct? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 119 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   No. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Why would you have told Power 
FM it is not correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  It is important to make it clear 
in terms of what is correct and what is not correct when you 
mean what is written here is not what you said.  Or when you 
say you accept that what is written here is what you said.  
But what you said then was then correct.   
 
So I just want to make sure that we are all on the same 
page when you say it is not correct, which one is it? 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   Thank you, Chair.  I say that if it is indeed 
what I said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   What is written here is indeed what I said, 
it is not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright. 
MR MAKHUBO:   I must have been mistaken here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You must have been mistaken? 
MR MAKHUBO:   [No audible reply]  
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can we go a little bit lower down 
onto page...  Well, let us continue.  The presenter then says: 
“Alright.  So the time you were already MMC at the 
time you resigned?” 
 
You say: 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 120 of 297 
 
“Yes, yes.” 
 
The presenter says: 
“Which means you continued to derive benefit from a 
company doing business with The City?” 
 
Your answer over the page on 942 was: 
“I did not derive benefit.  In fact, if any fees came – 
because the fees came, they went into staff and all 
that.  I did not derive any benefits from that time. 
I, Geoff Makhubo, did not.” 
 
If that is what you said, would that have been true or 
10 
false? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, no.  I will have to be – that will not be 
true.  But what is true here is that I did not get undue 
benefit. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, what is true here? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Is that I did not get undue benefit from this 
contract. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay that is not what you said. 
MR MAKHUBO:   I am just saying, if that is what I said.  But 
that is what I meant.  Effecting...  Then I do not know the 
20 
thing that...  This is the ...[indistinct] of broadcast.  I wonder 
what the issues are.  But I mean undue benefit here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You meant undue benefit? 
MR MAKHUBO:   If this is what I said. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   “I did not derive any benefit from 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 121 of 297 
 
that time.  I, Geoff Makhubo, did not.”  How would that be 
reconcilable with the notion that you did get a benefit but it 
is not it is not an undue benefit? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair, I have no idea but what I am saying, 
I meant here, undue benefit.  I mean, I was not sure what 
this interview has got to do with this.  But undue benefit it 
meant in the interview with the radio. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From what you are saying, it seems to me 
that your approach is that if you received benefits, there was 
nothing wrong with that as long as it was not undue benefit.  
10 
Is that right? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is...  You know, if – as I say Chair – if 
that is the temperature at that time, especially from the case 
– the issues that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The evidence leader is raising... 
MR MAKHUBO:   H’m? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The evidence leader is...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   The evidence leader.  Yes.  No, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja. 
MR MAKHUBO:   The evidence leader started with – I mean, 
20 
he started with Ama Bongani and my response to Ama 
Bongani.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MAKHUBO:   And everything – the threat has always 
been what was said in the newspaper and the applications 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 122 of 297 
 
made by Ama Bongani, which is...  So that is really what the 
response was here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  But you see, in the transcript, as I 
read it.  I do not know if there is something that I have not 
picked up.  There is no reference to undue benefit.  There is 
reference to benefit.  But what you have, in your response, 
emphasised is, that you meant to say, you did not receive 
any undue benefit.   
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I am saying.  That seems to suggest 
10 
to me that you do not think there would have been any 
problem with receiving a benefit as long as it was not an 
undue benefit.   
 
So that is why I am seeking to try and establish whether 
that is the distinction that you want to make or you do not 
wish to make any distinction.  You are just saying, you meant 
you did not receive any undue benefit.   
 
Of course, the next question will be:  Did you receive 
benefit that you regarded as due? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is the distinction I wanted to make. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that is the distinction you wanted to 
make? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the importance of the distinction?  
What is the importance of the distinction? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 123 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, it is very clear that we had a running 
contract and there were benefits.  That is why I am saying, 
they were not undue.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.   
MR MAKHUBO:   They are benefits(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I then go back to your first 
statement to Ama Bongani, at page 974? 
MR MAKHUBO:   H’m. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if you go to the foot, the 
10 
second last paragraph – the third last paragraph. 
“There was never a conflict of interest as the term of 
the Molelwane Agreement with Regiments on the 
first 
Sinking 
Fund 
would 
have 
lapsed 
in 
January 2011, a year I took Public Office. 
Molelwane Consulting did not continue providing 
services to Regiments on the second contract as it 
did not participate in the RFP. 
Further to this, I declared all my private business 
interest upon taking Public Office as required by 
20 
law. 
In addition to this, I subsequently resigned as a 
member of Molelwane Consulting and director of all 
other companies in November 2011. 
This was in line with my decision to use my skills as 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 124 of 297 
 
a public representative. 
I also made a commitment to the Mayor of the 
...[indistinct] ANC when I was appointed MMC that I 
unwind(?) 
my 
interest 
and 
resign 
all 
my 
directorships.” 
 
This was a statement you gave in 2018.  I want to put it 
to you that it is materially misleading.   
MR MAKHUBO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   In 2018, you were still controlling 
the financial affairs of Molelwane Consulting.  Is that not 
10 
correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I thought we have canvassed that I agreed 
that 
the 
resignation 
did 
not 
happen. 
 And 
we 
have 
canvassed, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKHUBO:   So it is not misleading.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, there is a difference 
between a technical deficiency and a resignation not being 
registered 
at 
CIPC. 
 And 
a 
material 
non-resignation.  
Because what you were doing in 2018, was continuing to run 
20 
the financial affairs of Molelwane.  Is that not correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I did say at the beginning of the 
engagement that whatever was due that I have worked for, in 
my view, the equity would have been withdrawn.  So I had 
not mislead anyone. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 125 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let us read that sentence again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  You will remember to face this 
side so that I can hear you. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Sorry.  Sorry, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja, ja.  Yes, okay.  Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But nobody reading this statement 
that you gave to a response to an allegation of conflict of 
interest, would know that you had retained your equity in 
Molelwane Consulting.  It is – the of this statement is exactly 
the opposite of that.   
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   Hence I said when you started that it is a 
pity that you did not look at the questions, one, two.  I was 
answering in the best way that my advisors gave me.  And 
three was that at that time you(?) did not even know what 
the allegations come from in the floor(?).  So this and what I 
was referring to earlier on, I ...[indistinct]  So I do not agree 
with you. 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let us take this at the same page 
947, the second paragraph from the end.  You say: 
20 
In addition to this, I subsequently resigned as a 
member of Molelwane Consulting and director of all 
other companies in November 2011. 
This was in line with my decision to use my skills as 
a public representative.” 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 126 of 297 
 
 
Blah-blah-blah.  By 2018, you would have known that the 
resignation 
had 
not 
happened 
although 
there 
was 
a 
resolution, is it not? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Correct, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Which is why in the beginning, I qualified. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   I think the evidence leader dealt with this 
matter right at the beginning of the... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   And I qualified it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   That point, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but what I am saying is.  I can 
understand a situation where you had taken the steps that 
you believed were necessary in order to effect a resignation, 
like signing the resolution or signing the letter of resignation 
and asking somebody to send the letter off. 
 
And for some time after that, you do not know that that 
person did not actually sent the letter off.  So you think you 
20 
had resigned.   
 
But by 2018, I take it that you knew that the resignation 
had not happened.  You had signed but it had not happened.  
So the question would arise, how you would say in 2018 you 
did resign in circumstances where one expects that you know 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 127 of 297 
 
that the resignation resolution was not acted upon. 
 
You understand where my concern is? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes.  Chair is asking about my knowledge 
at the time and I was responding to Ama Bongani. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja in 2018. 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is basically what DCJ is asking me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   And Chair, I must say.  What I – when I 
want to engage when the questions came in and I gave to 
the team.  What I do not deny is that the financial affairs 
10 
was, I was still in the ownership ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   But when I asked the team about where is 
the process and how is the process.  And they told me – 
when we checked, that is not done.   
 
In fact, when the journalist asked me, I saw it when it 
was done.  But this I said:  Look, it was an attempt that 
happened and that is what I sent to Ama Bongani.   
 
And the context of that Chair was such that I did not 
believe in the innocence of these questions from Ama 
20 
Bongani. 
 
I thought they were loaded with lots of politics especially 
that I – I was made aware, even before the questions came, 
about a process in The City where they were sitting together 
with my opponents. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 128 of 297 
 
 
So at that time, when these things came Chair, the 
context of that, for me, it was valid but I wanted to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But sitting there, you would accept, would 
you not, that in 2018, it would not – it was not correct to say 
you had resigned? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, I have qualified it the way that it is 
qualified now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, to say, you had made an attempt. 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the resignation resolution had not 
been acted upon. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, Mr Makhubo.  Well, I put it to 
you that that is a materially misleading statement.  But let us 
look at the next paragraph.  There you say: 
“Politically office bearers are by law precluded from 
participating in procurement processes.  Hence, I 
20 
could not have been involved in overseeing the 
renewal of the Sinking Fund contract.” 
 
As a matter of fact, you were involved in the renewal of 
the Sinking Fund Contract.  Is that not correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is completely incorrect. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 129 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You say it is incorrect? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did you not sit on the Mayoral 
Committee that recommended to the council that it adopt the 
contract in terms of Section 33? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Again, I differ with you how you interpret 
Section 33.  The award was already made.  There was BAC, 
there was BEC, there was EAC.  There was Probity.  There 
was everything else.  I do not agree with you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, what did you understand your 
10 
function to 
be 
on the 
Mayoral Committee?  
Just to 
rubberstamp a decision that had been taken at BAC and BEC 
level? 
MR MAKHUBO:   To check whether the financial obligations 
to The City are not ...[indistinct] and that is it.  And to 
convey to council. 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Well, 
even 
if 
you 
had 
misunderstood your obligations in that sense.  I submit to 
you, that you were overseeing the renewal to that extent.   
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   And I am saying that I do not agree with 
you.  I was not overseeing and I do not think I misunderstood 
my role, as we have done it all the time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The fact that you acted unlawfully 
several times in the past, does not make it lawful for when 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 130 of 297 
 
you do it again Mr Makhubo.  What is lawful and what is not, 
is a matter of law and not a matter of your past practise.  But 
we can move on. 
 
Do you not accept that in your role as MMC, that you 
had a responsibility at a political level to have oversight of 
this Sinking Fund Contract? 
MR MAKHUBO:   There are various contracts in The City 
that have got officials overseeing them.  I did not think 
specifically this one out of many was my responsibility to 
oversee it.  The Treasury of The City had to oversee this. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if it came to your attention 
that Regiments had been guilty of any impropriety, would you 
not as a – the MMC under whose jurisdiction that contract 
resides, had the responsibility to order investigations and 
the appropriate action? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I would have probably asked City Manager 
to do something, to say we hear this news.  Please look at it 
and do something about it.  It is the City Manager’s 
responsibility to do.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  Can I put you two possible 
20 
cases of impropriety which might have triggered a political 
response? 
MR MAKHUBO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Are you aware of the R 290 million 
Denel bond that Regiments took out on behalf of The City? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 131 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   I only became aware of it when it was 
raised in council by the former Mayor after there was 
potential default.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  So there was a potential 
default by Denel in repaying this – was it R 290 million or 
R 270 million?  Do you recall? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I do not.  I think it was the figure.  I mean, 
I just know that he made a lot of noise in the media and he 
came to council about it but I do not know all the details. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Were you aware that Regiments 
10 
were acting on both sides of transaction for The City 
borrowing the money and for Denel lending the money to The 
City?   
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I was not. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Facing the debt with The City. 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I was unaware of the investment 
details of what the Sinking Fund was investing in.  Which 
paper(?) they are buying.  I thought the dealers(?) would do 
that. 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  Were you aware that 
Regiments took one percent commission from Denel for 
borrowing in the name of The City, the money that they 
placed with The City? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I was unaware of that. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 132 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If you had been made aware of 
that, what would you have done? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I think that is speculative.  I do not know 
what I would have done. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no.  I am asking a question.  
If you had been made aware of that, what would your 
political view have been? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I would have applied my mind(?) that time 
but if it happened now, of course, we would have been to the 
Treasury and The City Manger to investigate and take up a 
10 
big action. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  But of course, you were 
continuing to derive the benefit in your personal capacity 
from the contract which Regiments had abused at the 
expense of The City.  Would that not have been a conflict of 
interest? 
MR MAKHUBO:   But I did not know that saying that I 
abused the...  Chair, I was unaware.  I think the evidence 
leader is asking me something I was unaware of.  And he 
says:  Please suppose, you would have done that.  And then 
20 
...[indistinct] back.  No, I was not aware of that.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, what I am putting to you is 
that your position was a manifest conflict of interest.  The 
fact that you did not know about certain facts, does not 
detract from the fact that there was a manifest conflict of 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 133 of 297 
 
interest between you deriving a benefit from this contract at 
the same time as you were supposed to be overseeing it in 
your capacity as MMC.   
MR MAKHUBO:   Again, I deny that.  I do not agree with you.  
I mean, what about the manifest conflict of interest?  I mean, 
what we would have done to – and of course if there was 
wrongdoing would have acted.  I mean it does not mean 
that – you are presupposing that I would have looked away 
from the wrongdoing because of x, y and z and I say I 
disagree with that. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    I see.  In due course we will 
bring other evidence of other wrongdoing on behalf of – 
well, let me put a scenario to you which in due course we 
will substantiate with evidence.  Were you aware of the 
evidence that was led yesterday in relation to ACSA? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I did not watch. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We heard yesterday about 
contracts at ACSA where Regiments were representing 
ACSA were borrowing money from Nedbank and were 
taking a 10 basis point payment from Nedbank which ACSA 
20 
in turn was repaying to Nedbank.  So Regiments were 
being paid a fee by Nedbank which Nedbank would recover 
from ACSA while Regiments were ostensibly representing 
ACSA’s interests in raising money for ACSA.  Would you 
have regarded that as a conflict of interest if you were at 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 134 of 297 
 
ACSA? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Again, I need to hear the – I need to see 
the details regarding …[intervenes] 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Well, 
let 
me 
ask 
you 
…[intervenes] 
MR MAKHUBO:   I cannot really answer on behalf of 
Regiments and I am not involved on that, ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay, were you aware that 
Nedbank was doing the same thing in Johannesburg? 
MR MAKHUBO:    No. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    You were not. 
MR MAKHUBO:   No.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you were not aware that 
Nedbank was borrowing money for the City – sorry, that 
Regiments were borrowing from Nedbank for the City and 
being paid a fee which they took from Nedbank but which 
Nedbank recovered from the City? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, I suppose that origination business 
I would not be part of and I was unaware.  I mean, if 
Treasury did not bring that to our attention I would not be 
20 
aware. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Right.  Do you not see the 
potential conflict in this situation when the primary source 
of revenue of your company is derived from a company that 
is managing one of the biggest funds at the disposal of the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 135 of 297 
 
City? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Which debt origination you mean?  Sorry, 
I do not understand. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry? 
MR MAKHUBO:    You see, the debt origination thing or the 
ACSA thing, what …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    Just generally, the structural 
relationship.  Your company derives its revenue from 
Regiments’ contract with the City.  Your role as MMC for 
finance is in the name of the City to oversee that contract 
10 
in the interests of the City. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair, if I have to oversee every contract 
with the seven departments of finance I would spend my 
day overseeing contracts.  I do not think that was my role 
in the first place. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Is there a bigger contract at the 
City? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Pardon? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Is there a bigger financial 
contract at the City? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   How do you mean, sorry, I do not 
understand? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Does the City – does the City 
have any other fund the size of the Sinking Fund? 
MR MAKHUBO:    Not that I am aware of. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 136 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    So this is the biggest fund that 
you are aware of that the City has. 
MR MAKHUBO:   The Sinking Fund is the fund of the City, 
yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   But there are counterparties, there are 
sweeping of bank accounts every night, there is a lot that 
is happening in Treasury.  If I have to oversee the back 
office, the middle office and the front office, I mean, I 
would spend my life in Treasury only not even in Revenue 
10 
or in Rates and Taxes and all that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Ja, I am not asking you to do the 
nuts and bolts but I am suggesting to you that a contract of 
this importance to the City requires political oversight by 
someone who does not have an interest in that contract. 
MR MAKHUBO:   And I am saying if there is any political 
principal who tries to oversee contracts at that primary 
level is actually interfering in the [indistinct] 03.46. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We may have to leave this point 
here but let us move to something else.  Can I take you to 
20 
a document at page 659 of bundle 2? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it 639 or 649? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   659, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   659, okay.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And there you will see an 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 137 of 297 
 
internal Regiments’ email from Eric Wood to Niven Pillay 
saying: 
“Geoff Makhubo briefing.docex” 
And below that page, if you go to 660 you will see the 
document that was attached to that email.  We will get to 
the contents of the document in a minute but I would first 
ask you to go up to page 918 where the document appears 
again.  Sorry, before we go to 918, just note the time there.  
The time on the email at page 659 is 12.36.  If we then go 
up to 918 we see a slightly later email.  Sorry, do you know 
10 
who Niven Pillay is, the recipient of the last email.  Do you 
know who Niven Pillay is? 
MR MAKHUBO:    Yes, I do. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    Can you tell the Chair? 
MR MAKHUBO:   He is a director at Regiments Capital. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And was he primarily responsible 
for the fund management of the Sinking Fund on behalf of 
Regiments Capital? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, there was a team and I think he 
was overseeing it. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  Let us go to 918.  That is 
an email …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry, did you say 918? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   918, Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 138 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is from Eric Wood to Mr Litha 
Nyhonyha 19 November 2010.  The heading is: 
“CoJ Cheat Sheet” 
And the attachment is Geoff Makhubo briefing document 
and the email says: 
“Hi Litha, as discussed...” 
Sorry, Litha is Mr Litha Nyhonyha, I assume.  Well, it says 
so in the address. 
“...as discussed I have attached the one pager that 
we gave to Geoff.” 
10 
Maybe we can go up to see what this one pager that was 
given to Geoff was, 917.  It says: 
“Loan to CoJ from DBSA, stored because Parks 
made some negative comment re the pricing.  In 
fact pricing is 45 basis points better than DCM 
pricing, 1 billion of 20 year funding provides a 
better asset liability match for CoJ and the DCM 
alternative.” 
:(d) 
Direction  needs to be provided to Treasury 
to proceed with this line. 
20 
2. 
Interest 
rate 
hitch. 
 
Seeks 
to 
convert 
existing floating rate exposure to fixed at 
optimum all time low yield curve. 
(b) 
Will protect CoJ from interest rate increases 
in the imminent business cycle upturns. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 139 of 297 
 
(c) 
Treasury has approved the transaction in 
principle, 
needs 
mandate 
from 
Mayoral 
Committee. 
3. 
Fund management fee, third quarter 2010.  
Amount of 27 million VAT inclusive due to 
Regiments Fund Managers Molelwane and 
JP Morgan has been withheld by Treasury on 
JPC instructions.  JPC alleges that this is in 
accordance 
with 
the 
surety 
agreement 
provided 
by 
Regiments 
Capital 
for 
the 
10 
obligations of Cedar Park Properties, Kgoro 
Consortium.  In terms of the agreements 
between JPC/CoJ and the Kgoro Consortium 
there are no funds due until transfer, which 
has not taken place yet.  If transfer had 
taken place JPC would have first had to 
summon the Kgoro Consortium and fully 
discuss before surety becomes executable.  
Further, these funds are due by CoJ to 
totally different parties to the debtor or 
20 
surety, therefore the withholding of these 
fees is unlawful and needs to be released 
forthwith.  
4. 
Sinking 
Fund 
tender 
needs 
to 
be 
adjudicated, an appointment needs to be 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 140 of 297 
 
made.  You see around splitting the mandate 
between two managers needs to be killed, 
cannot be done due to counterparty risk 
limits and lack of risk consolidation capacity 
within CoJ Treasury. 
5. 
JPC 
property 
fund 
tender 
needs 
to 
be 
adjudicated.  An appointment needs to be 
made.” 
You will see that Mr Wood writing to Mr Nyhonyha on the 
19 November 2010 said: 
10 
“As discussed I attach the one pager that we gave 
to Geoff” 
And the document is headed: 
“Geoff Makhubo Briefing.” 
Do you recall receiving this one pager in 2010? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I do not recall, I answered the same 
to amaBhungane that I cannot recall receiving this.  In fact 
then they sent me the sheet but actually first time I see 
some of these issues here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   First time you saw some of this? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:    Some of these issues that are raised 
here, first time that I saw them. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    So amaBhungane had sent this 
sheet to you. 
MR MAKHUBO:   They did. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 141 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  Did you not find it strange 
that emails were flying around inside Regiments saying 
that they had given it to you whereas you had no 
recollection of it? 
MR MAKHUBO:  Well, I found it strange in 2018 when I 
received this that what is this because I do not even know 
what a cheat sheet is.    
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:   In business I do not even know what a 
cheat sheet is.    
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You  do not know what a cheat 
sheet is. Did you Mr Litha Nyhonyha and say what is this,  
I am seeing a document that is embarrassing me which 
apparently was circulating in Regiments? 
MR MAKHUBO:    Well, I did say look, I did not receive 
this document, did you send it?  And said look, I will find 
out.  That is it.  We left it there, 2010. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    You did not follow it up? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You did not follow it up? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I did not. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  You were not interested 
to know whether Regiments had sent it or had not sent it? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I knew – I had said look, they have 
not sent it, I have not seen it, I have not seen some of the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 142 of 297 
 
issues that are here.  Some of the issues I know about, 
especially the 27 million and all that, in 2010 I knew about. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKHUBO:    But the rest of the things, what would 
they have to do with me, Kgoro, JPC. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    Well, it is a good question, what 
did they have to do with you. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But people in Regiments clearly 
thought that it had something to do with you. 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   I cannot speak for them, Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  Can we go back to your 
contract with Regiments?  Do you remember that clause 
2.2 
which 
gave 
you 
responsibility 
for 
relationship 
management at the City?  Do you think that is what 
Regiments may have had in mind there, page 714? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I would not know, I remember the 
contract and that.  I do not know what they meant but this 
was not for me, what they should have meant.  Some of 
these things have nothing to do with me. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   2.2.7: 
“Maintaining on an ongoing basis all strategic 
relationships with CoJ before, during and after 
completion of the fund management mandate for the 
mutual benefit of the parties.” 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 143 of 297 
 
What sort of strategic relationships were you going to 
maintain? 
MR MAKHUBO:    Chair, we have canvassed earlier, in my 
mind I told you that I needed to know City, the strategic 
level, where it is going, what the funding plan is, how to 
grow the fund, how to invest because that was my primary 
interest at that time, nothing else. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    I see.  And you never followed 
this up with Litha Nyhonyha when he did  not come back to 
you? 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, at that time – remember, when the 
amaBhungane thing came I had to ask him what is going on 
and he was telling me he was receiving the same questions 
as well, he is [indistinct – dropping voice] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, I did not hear that last 
answer? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I am saying that I did speak with them, 
when the amaBhungane things came and said what is going 
on here, eight years later, the contract is finished, why, 
what are they following up and then of course he told me 
20 
that 
they 
are 
receiving 
the 
similar 
questions 
from 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] person and all that, 
that is why I said look let me answer to the best, I will 
answer to the best of my ability and leave it at that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes but when I read the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 144 of 297 
 
amaBhungane article, the one key piece of evidence that is 
very damning of both you and Mr Nyhonyha is the cheat 
sheet, did you not think that you needed to get to the 
bottom of this cheat sheet? 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I responded, I have a response and I 
do not see it in the bundle.  I responded and [indistinct] 
12.35 and I thought my response was adequate. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What your response suggests is 
– let me get the response.  It is at page 952.  It says at the 
last sentence in the second last paragraph: 
10 
“I have no recollection of the so-called cheat sheet 
and the issues raised have nothing to do with me, 
the Molelwane, nor our agreement with Regiments 
Capital.” 
Why did you not say …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Chaskalson, you said 
952? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   952, Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is bundle 2? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Bundle 2, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say last sentence in the last 
paragraph? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Second last paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see: 
“This was in line with my decision to utilise my 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 145 of 297 
 
skills as a public representative.  I also made a 
commitment to the Mayor.” 
That is not what – is that the paragraph? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   952, I have, am I on the wrong 
page again? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, page 952, the last paragraph 
…[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no, the sentence before the 
last paragraph, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, the sentence before the last 
10 
paragraph.  Oh, the second paragraph from the end of the 
page. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The last sentence. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   the last sentence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   “I have no recollection of the so-called  
cheat sheet and the issues raised have nothing to 
do with neither Molelwane nor our agreement with 
Regiments Capital.” 
Okay, now I see it, ja. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  So you said you 
cannot recall the so-called cheat.  That was your answer.  
You cannot recall and these issues have nothing to do with  
Molelwane and Regiments. 
MR MAKHUBO:    That is what I responded and after the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 146 of 297 
 
article of amaBhungane I personally penned an article that 
was published in the Daily Maverick and I was referring to 
that.  When I say it is not part of the bundle, this is what I 
responded to the questions from Susan Comrie. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  But what your answer is, 
is I have no recollection of the so-called cheat sheet, it is 
not I never received a cheat sheet like this.  Why did you 
not deny receiving the cheat sheet? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I mean, if you cannot recall something 
you say I have never – I mean, what is… It is a recollection 
10 
but these issues has got nothing to do with me, in fact 
…[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, but …[intervenes] 
MR MAKHUBO:   I do not think I have because what you do 
again, you go to your emails and you check but the MC 
email server is down, so I do not know. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Would it not have struck you as 
very, very critical if - would it not have struck you as a 
particularly important fact that you would remember for a 
long time if you got this sort of document from a business 
20 
partner essentially inviting you to interfere in council 
processes which were none of your business?  
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair, as I say, these things have nothing 
to do with me, neither with our agreement with Regiments 
and I do not recall receiving it but, I mean, it did not strike 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 147 of 297 
 
me at that time and for me it was immaterial.  When I saw 
this I knew that I would never – I would not have seen this, 
I do not recall it at all.  I would have recalled it if ever the 
issues of Kgoro, JPC, I would have recalled if I was 
required to do something, I do not remember anything like 
that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You do not remember anything 
like that? 
MR MAKHUBO:    I cannot remember anything, no. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
 
Would 
you 
not 
have 
10 
remembered if you received this cheat sheet?  Is it not 
something 
that 
would 
definitely 
have 
stuck 
in 
your 
memory? 
MR MAKHUBO:   What sticks in my memory, what does 
not, 20 years later – I mean, 10 years later, with all due 
respect, Chairperson, there are lot of things that are 
happening in my life every day, I would not remember a 
specific paper or a detail that happened in 2010.  I mean, I 
do not know what is the expectation of me to remember.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Makhubo, let me put it this 
20 
way.  If the business partner sent a letter to you inviting 
you improperly to influence council affairs is that not 
something that would be so shocking that you would 
remember? 
MR MAKHUBO:   For me that has never happened.  I do 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 148 of 297 
 
not recall anything like that and I would not say when you 
say it is shocking but, I mean, this thing did not happen so 
it is not in my mind, I do not recall it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see. 
MR MAKHUBO:   I do not want -  presuppositions for me 
are a problem because I - you know, you are taking me to a 
fact and then you move to presupposition and I think it is a 
bit unfair on ourselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Makhubo Mr Chaskalson in 
part is trying to establish what would shock you, you know, 
10 
different people get shocked by different things.  What 
might shock me might not shock you, what might shock you 
might not shock me.  So because maybe if a business 
partner sent you a letter or email saying certain things, 
those things might shock you and you would never forget 
that once upon a time he or she sent you such a thing, 
such an email.  So he is saying if they sent you something 
that says interfere in the affairs of the City or use your 
position improperly would that not be the kind of thing that 
would shock you and therefore you would remember it 
20 
easily because it would be something that you would have 
found so unacceptable for them to do, to expect you to do.  
MR MAKHUBO:   Chair, I do not know what the word 
shock, I am trying to think as you speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 149 of 297 
 
MR MAKHUBO:   In the line of what we do, especially 
when in public office, every day or every week you receive 
an email of this proposal or the other, you transfer them to 
the relevant people to follow process, you would receive 
one lobby or other of wanting or the other, you transfer it 
to the right people to process.  People will ask you to do 
certain things and you say no, no, I cannot, I want to do a 
thing – you know, at the beginning of Covid a good friend 
of mine that I grew up with Robville with sent me a 
Whatsapp and says I have 13 tubs(?) of sanitizer.  My 
10 
answer to him was that look, I do not even know who is 
buying and how they are buying it.  This is a guy I grew up 
with in Soweto.  Ordinarily we received these things, he 
says but you are Mayor, you have influence, said no, you 
cannot do it.  But what do you is like you – and then this 
Whatsapp, you move forward, you just transfer and do all 
sorts of things.  So when you say what would shock me in 
business, in politics, there are couple of things in politics 
when you get betrayed by your trust comrade.  That shocks 
me, I will never forget that.  When you expect a certain 
20 
behaviour from a comrade and they do the opposite, which 
is 
fundamental, 
not 
they 
voted 
against 
you 
in 
the 
conference, that will not shock me, but there is something 
very fundamental.  So there have been very fundamental 
things.  In business in 2010 some things you receive you 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 150 of 297 
 
just ignore and you move forward, especially if you cannot 
do but this one, I do not remember seeing at all, so how 
would I felt with this thing because when I saw it from 
amaBhungane I just thought it is one of those things and I 
ignored it.  I must be quite honest, for me that did not – I 
just answered the way I answered and I just moved on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But this is not just some friend 
of yours, this is the counterparty in the biggest contract 
that your company has.  Would that not raise a concern 
10 
from you if it happened? 
MR MAKHUBO:    It did not happen with due respect, 
evidence leader, and which is why I would have asked what 
is this thing, what are you discussing?  If you want to give 
it to me, why would you have given it to me, what do you 
expect me to do with it?  And surely if I can do nothing 
about something, why should I occupy my brain space with 
things I cannot change?  I believe in the Serenity Prayer, 
accept things I cannot change. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    So you now say very clearly 
20 
that this was not sent to you? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Well, I am saying that I have no 
recollection but I do not think it was sent to me. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  Did you not raise an 
issue with Litha Nyhonyha?  Was it not sufficiently 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 151 of 297 
 
damaging that you wanted to get an answer from Litha 
Nyhonyha on? 
ADV MPHAGO SC:   Chair, maybe I should object and say 
that I think Mr Makhubo has answered and this boils down 
cross-examination of some sort.  I know that there has to 
be a probe but I think that there is a repetition of the same 
question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I am happy to move on, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can we then go to page 952? 
MR MAKHUBO:   950…? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   952, that is the amaBhungane 
article itself.  No, it is not –I am sorry, no, 968, where they 
discussed the cheat sheet.  And if you go five paragraphs 
from the bottom, the report reads: 
“Yet over the next…” 
Oh sorry, well let us start under:  No influence. 
“By law there is meant to be a Chinese Wall 
between 
political 
office 
bearers 
and 
the 
20 
procurement departments and municipalities they 
control. Even Tau, the then MMC for finance, could 
not 
legally 
interfere 
with 
the 
City’s 
tender 
processes 
yet 
over 
the 
next 
year 
Regiments 
received almost everything on its wish list.  In 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 152 of 297 
 
January 2011 the City agreed to release 18.4 
million of Regiments’ fees.” 
Do you know if that is correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I would not have known at that time but I 
read it in the bundle of the City Manager there.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    Yes. 
“In March Regiments facilitated a smaller 250 
million loan for the City and received 1.25 million as 
a raising fee.” 
Do you know if that is correct? 
10 
MR MAKHUBO:   No, I cannot remember that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see. 
“And in December Regiments was one of  
two 
bidders 
awarded 
Johannesburg 
property 
company tenders.” 
Do you know if that is correct? 
MR MAKHUBO:   Again, I have no – I had no idea of it up 
until I saw it in the papers that you sent my attorney. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.   
“The only hiccup was the tender for new Sinking 
20 
Fund contract.  Under the Regiments the fund had 
performed well but a review conducted by KPMG in 
2010 criticised Regiments’ fees for being excessive 
when the bids for the new tender to replace 
Regiments’ 
first 
contract 
were 
adjudicated.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 153 of 297 
 
Regiments Fund Managers was not a preferred 
bidder and had in fact been disqualified.  Isaac 
Mogashoa 
the 
City 
Group 
here 
at 
legal 
and 
contracts told us.  But just as the goose laying the 
golden eggs appeared to be running out of luck, Tau 
discovered a fundamental flaw with the tender 
process. 
 
The 
MMC 
finance’s 
views 
that 
the 
evaluation around the process must include social 
investments to uplift the communities around the 
City, Khomotso Letslatsi, the head of Treasury told 
10 
colleagues in an April 2011 memo.” 
Are you aware of that memo? 
MR MAKHUBO:   I am unaware of that memo, Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.   
“The award of new Sinking Fund contract was 
already months overdue but according to Letsatsi’s 
memo Tau halted the tender on grounds it did not 
include a programme to address transformation in 
the City’s procurement practices.” 
Are you aware of that? 
20 
MR MAKHUBO:    No, I am not aware of that, Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    Earlier you said to me it was 
stopped because there was a moratorium on the award of 
tender before the 2011 elections.  
MR MAKHUBO:   That is what I was told, yes.  I am not 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 154 of 297 
 
aware of this part. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So in 2011 that tender was 
supposed to be awarded but it was not and is it not correct 
that Regiments then stayed on under your MMC portfolio 
month-to-month for more than another four more years until 
the council on the back of a recommendation of the 
Mayoral 
Committee, 
that 
you 
participated 
in, 
gave 
Regiments a new five year contract in 2015.  Is that not 
what happened? 
MR MAKHUBO:   What happened was that it was on a 
10 
month-to-month because of a particular reason and the 
reason being that there was a court challenge from 
Colourfields and the Colourfields withdrew its court action.  
When the City Manager brought the report to the Mayoral 
Committee to approve a financial bidding on the City build, 
yes.    
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So a tender that should have 
come to an end in 2011 eventually only came to an end 
four years later and it came to an end with an award to the 
same party for another five years and that party was in 
20 
business with your company on the contract that had run 
for nine years. 
MR MAKHUBO:   That is correct, sir, we canvassed that 
earlier and the reasons and it was on a month-to-month 
because of particular reason that the City was defending 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 155 of 297 
 
but the evaluation of the new party – in fact the tender was 
advertised in 2012 and the advert said for five years and 
the evaluation happened just before the award, there was 
an interdict or at least a court challenge.  That is how – 
that is what we were told and then it was awarded when 
that was settled. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Mr Makhubo.  Chair, 
there are further questions that I would like to ask about 
donations to the ANC by Regiments solicited by Mr 
Makhubo but I am anxious at this point that we may run out 
10 
of time for Mr Ramosebodi and Mr Makhubo is going to be 
coming back any way to deal with the EOH question, so 
with 
your 
leave 
I 
would 
ask 
that 
we 
move 
to 
Mr 
Ramosebodi here and my understanding to Mr Makhubo 
and his legal representatives is the only remaining issue 
unrelated to EOH that I will be canvassing is the questions 
of donations to the ANC solicited from Regiments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, no, that is fine, that is fine.  Alright, 
then we are going to release you Mr Makhubo for today as 
you hear, arrangements will be made for you to come back 
20 
in due course.  But thank you very much for coming and 
thank you to your legal team, you are now excused.  You 
are excused, thank you. 
MR MAKHUBO:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What earlier should not happen again.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 156 of 297 
 
No, they will talk to you about whether you can take those 
bundles or not, Mr Makhubo, but I think generally they do 
not go but I am not hundred percent sure, somebody must 
know. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I am told they do not go but my 
offer to Mr Makhubo and his legal team is we can 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] electronically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja.  Maybe Ms …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no, I think you are entitled. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson, I guess I should 
10 
probably adjourn for five minutes for you to get settled 
with... 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...bring in another witness.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Ramosebudi, and 
good afternoon to your counsel. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Good afternoon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, your counsel continues to represent 
20 
you, as was the case yesterday.  Mr Chaskalson are you 
ready?   Mr Ramosebudi the oath you took yesterday will 
continue to apply today.  Is that fine? 
PHETOLO RAMOSEBUDI   [s.u.o.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 157 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Mr 
Ramosebudi today we are going to be talking about some 
of the arrangements to finance the purchases of the 
Chinese locomotives that were part of the 1064 deal, and I 
want to take you through some stages of that – of the 
relevant transactions and is it correct that the – that an 
arrangement was made with China Development Bank to 
borrow 1.5billion dollars and to get a facility for another 
billion dollars to finance Transnet’s purchase of the 
locomotives from CNR and CSR.  Can you answer that 
10 
question? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Thank you Chairperson.  Yes indeed 
there was a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Speak up a bit. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   There was a discussion you know with 
the China Development Bank and between Transnet and 
China Development Bank to finance the part of the 1064 
locomotive deal. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Ramosebudi I’ve been asked 
if you can just move the microphone a bit closer so that 
20 
your voice is picked up better.  And indeed for the 
purposes of negotiating that loan I understand that you 
went to China, is that correct? 
MR 
RAMOSEBUDI: 
 
 Yes 
Chairperson 
there 
was 
a 
delegation that went to China for the negotiations of the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 158 of 297 
 
funding 
of 
the 
1064 
locomotives, 
part 
of 
the 
1064 
locomotives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were part of that delegation. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I was part of the delegation.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Who else was in the delegation? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   If my memory you know serve me well 
it was myself, from Transnet, I know Singh from Transnet, 
Eric Wood from Regiments, Tedross Scheeper-Selassie 
from Regiments and another gentleman from  J P Morgan, 
his name just escape me. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I’m afraid his name escapes me 
too, I understand he was the one who took a photograph of 
the team and then sent it to you all?  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I don’t know who took the photograph. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I just for the purposes of 
the record I think the fourth name that you mentioned was 
Tedross Scheeper-Selassie from Regiments. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That’s correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And trip to China was successful 
and in the end a loan was concluded, a loan agreement 
20 
was concluded is that not correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And it provided for a facility of 
1.5billion dollars with access to another facility of one 
billion should that be required. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 159 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What then happened as I 
understand is that Transnet decided that it didn’t want 
exposure in dollars and so instead of taking the extra one 
billion facility from China Development Bank it decided to 
try to raise a Rand debt of R12billion through what became 
to be known the Club Loan, is that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Do you recall the banks that 
participated in the Club loan? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I can recall a few names, I think 
Nedbank was part of it, Future Growth was part of it, the 
Bank of China I think was part of it, I think Old Mutual also 
was part of it, I just  can’t recall. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry I didn’t get the last one. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Old Mutual. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Old Mutual, it was a rand loan 
and so there was a lot of local financial institutes that were 
involved or there were some local institutions involved. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes that’s a Rand denominated loan 
20 
les. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And I think alongside the Club 
loan there was possibly a loan from was it the Export 
Development Bank of Canada or – is that correct, does that 
ring a bell? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 160 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, that was not part of this 
transaction. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    I see, what was the Export 
Development Bank of Canada transaction about?   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It was funding other part of the 1064 
locomotives. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, I imagine it would have 
been 
funding 
Bombardier 
because 
Bombardier 
are 
a 
Canadian company, do you know that?  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja, they were funding part of the 
10 
Bombardier transaction. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The Club loan, the 12billion Club 
loan was taken out with a floating interest rate, is that not 
correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes it was taken with a floating 
interest rate.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then at a certain point 
Transnet decided that it wanted to swap the floating rate 
exposure with interest swaps, is that correct?   
MR 
RAMOSEBUDI: 
 
 
Yes 
Transnet 
concluded 
in 
20 
...[indistinct] Club loan. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    And I think Transnet concluded 
four interest – four tranches of interest swaps which 
swapped the floating exposure under the Club loan and 
under the loan to the Export Development Bank of Canada 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 161 of 297 
 
and its counter parties on the first tranches it swaps were 
Nedbank and on the last two tranches it swaps the 
Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund?  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja, there’s the counterparties for the 
swaps that we transacted was Nedbank and this Transnet 
Second Defined Benefit Fund. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So can I take you through that 
process.   On the China Development Bank loan, we will 
get there in due course, but is it correct that a fee was 
paid to Regiments of R189million inclusive of VAT, I think 
10 
it’s a R166million plus VAT. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You said true? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And on the Club loan a fee was 
paid to Trillian of R82million plus VAT which came to 
around R93million. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And on the interest swaps a fee 
was paid or a decision was taken by Transnet to pay a fee 
20 
which would have been around R229million to Regiments, 
is that true? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That one – how much did Regiments 
earn on the fees in Rand terms I don’t know.    
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It was a 20 basis points on the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 162 of 297 
 
swaps. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That’s true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But in the end the full amount of 
that fee it turns out was paid to Trillian and ...[indistinct] 
are you aware of that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That I am not aware. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let us go through the logic of 
these transactions.  The China Development Bank loan was 
dollar denominated. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The Club loan was taken out 
because Transnet didn’t want that much dollar exposure it 
wanted. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can we go back a step all of 
these loans were to finance locomotive purchases.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   They were part of the funding plan or 
the funding requirement for the year and as part of that the 
1064 was also part of the funding plan so we used to 
finance that. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No but these weren’t specifically 
linked to the locomotive procurement, it wasn’t – it is not 
like you could use this money for something else. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The China Development Bank and the 
CDC loan yes were specifically linked for the locomotives. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 163 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So I am – but I am talking now 
about China Development Bank – well China Development 
Bank and CDC were specifically linked to locomotives. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Are you aware of the business 
case that was put to the Board in April 2013 for the 
locomotive procurement, April 2013?   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I am aware that the document exist 
but I did not go through it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Are you aware that – and were 
10 
you aware that the price in that business plan for the whole 
transaction was fixed by the McKinsey Consortium at 
R38billion? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   As I said Chairperson I did not go 
through the documents so I just heard the numbers 
everywhere spoken about.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But is the number that you hear 
spoken about R38billion.  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That is true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Are you aware that that 
20 
R38billion included provision for rand hedges. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson I am not aware that it 
included for its component in rate. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Are you aware that the 
locomotive procurement, that one of the terms of the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 164 of 297 
 
locomotive procurement was that the locomotive price was 
going to be fixed in rands, not dollars or any other 
international currency? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   As I heard that the locomotives 
contract was Rand based yes I am aware of it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So the purchase price was 
rands. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And whatever happened to the 
Rand against the dollar Transnet would pay Rands. 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And a fixed number in rands, it 
wasn’t like Rands, and if dollar goes strong against rand 
you have to pay more Rands. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That is what I have learnt and then I 
commended Transnet for doing that as a Treasurer. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Are you then aware of a decision 
finally taken by the BADC in I think it was March or 
February, I think it was February 2014, February or March 
2014, to approve the procurement at a price which was 
20 
then R52billion? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I just heard it Chairperson but I did 
not get any official information about that, I just heard it 
about that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    And are you aware that one of 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 165 of 297 
 
the reasons given for the increase from 38billion in the 
April 2013 business case to the 52billion in March, 
February/March 2014 was that there was a need to provide 
– because the purchasers were going to be bound to a 
Rand purchase price their price they took the hedging risk 
and the price had to include provision for the purchases 
hedging cost. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson I am not clear what the 
question is. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   There was an increase in the 
10 
amount from the business case amount of R38billion to the 
ultimate amount which started at 52 but then because of 
some Transnet engineering cost became 54 one of the 
reasons given for that increase was that the price to be 
paid by the purchases would be Rand based so the 
purchasers need to factor into their purchase price their 
cost of hedging because they were the ones who were 
going to take the Rand exposure.  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That’s true I got to learn that 
immediately I joined that there is a fixed price that has 
20 
been agreed and is a determinence of a number of 
components and those some of those components is the 
hedges but I got to learn it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So if we take a step back 
Transnet had provided – had essentially provided for a 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 166 of 297 
 
hedge in the 38billion business case, it was going to pay 
Rands and it had factored into that 38billion what the 
increase to the purchase price would be because it wanted 
to pay Rands not dollars.  Do you accept that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson without knowing the 
details of the business case the absolute figure in terms of 
the correctness of the figure that was included in the 
business case and what was in the final price that I did not 
examine. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well let’s then look at the 
10 
52billion and 54billion in 2014, that definitely had quite a 
large number built in for the cost of hedging so that 
Transnet could pay in rands, not in dollars, will you accept 
that?   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, the price difference was there, 
so Transnet had paid what was the final price concluded.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So Transnet according to the 
reasoning of the Board that adopted that 54billion or 
adopted a 52billion purchase price justified the price 
because it was necessary to pay that amount to be able to 
20 
have a purchase price in rands which meant that the risk – 
the rand – the forex risk with the locomotive providers, not 
with Transnet. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson for indulgence I don’t 
understand the questions.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 167 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry I am not very good at 
asking questions about complex financial transactions, 
because it is not my strength but in that 54billion that was 
adopted or sorry – I keep on saying 54, initially BADC was 
52, but in that 52 there was an increase, part of the 
increase from 38 to 52 was justified on the basis if this is 
the number we have to pay to make sure that our purchase 
price can be in rands not in dollars.  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson just need a bit of 
correction, I think earlier on I said I don’t know much about 
10 
the numbers that have been spoken about, because I didn’t 
go into the detail of the business case but what I heard Mr 
Chaskalson speaking about is two numbers 54 and 52 and 
38 which is one of those is the base number.   I just want 
to understand which of the two, 52 or 54 we are talking 
about? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   In truth the heading was 
irrelevant to the difference between 52 and 54, it was 
relevant to the difference between 38 and either 52 and 54.  
The ultimate price was 54, what the BADC approved was 
20 
52, 
the 
other 
two 
are 
related 
to 
I 
think 
Transnet 
Engineering costs which were completely unlinked to 
finance.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson I think I wanted to help 
the Commission because at some point in 2018 I was 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 168 of 297 
 
requested to look at those numbers, so I wanted to help Mr 
Chaskalson on those numbers, is it 52 or 54, because the 
one 
number 
that 
I 
was 
requested 
at 
some 
point 
...[indistinct] 
into 
when 
the 
Board 
of 
Transnet 
was 
appointed in 2018 around May in June they requested a 
presentation about the 1064.  While I was not part of the 
development of the business case and any other numbers 
that are around the 1064 the then CEO at the time says 
can you help us to unpack these numbers so one of the 
numbers that I remember very well is the 38billion plus 
10 
...[indistinct] 
numbers 
and 
49billion 
plus 
[indistinct] 
numbers so those are the two numbers that I can candidly 
help you Chairperson to try to unpack some of the numbers 
around that, but 52, 54 is not clear to me which of those 
numbers that is why I can – I might be cagey in responding 
to those ones, but here I want to assist the Commission. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you Mr Ramosebudi, I 
don’t want to get into the precise number whether it was 
49, 50 or 52 it is not relevant for present purposes.  What 
is relevant though is that the purchase price agreed by the 
20 
Board in 2014 included a component which had provided 
for putting the forex risk on the purchasers, in other words 
it was the purchasers’ rand hedge cost. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   You are correct there Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So in that purchase price 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 169 of 297 
 
Transnet had essentially paid to have a purchase price that 
they could rely on being in Rands. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   You are correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So the effect of taking out the 
China Development Bank loan, which was denominated in 
dollars was to undo what Transnet had paid for by 
requiring a purchase price in Rands, is that not correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well let me put this question to 
you, if you wanted to pay for a rand hedge to the 
10 
equivalent of 2.5billion dollars in 2005 how much would 
that have cost you approximately? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Well 2.5 I remember at the time 
Chairperson without you know absolute figure for 2.5billion 
dollar at the time we are looking at about I remember 
something in the region of about R30billion, when we were 
discussing the 2.5billion dollar with China Development 
Bank, it just out of the numbers that we bandied around 
was about R30billion you know, around there, because the 
Rand was between R11/R12 somewhere there. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No I am talking about a Rand 
hedge, not an exchange rate, I am talking about a Rand 
hedge.   You want – you have an exposure of 2.5billion 
dollars, you want to pay that in Rands, what would it have 
cost you in terms of hedging to be able to hitch that over 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 170 of 297 
 
the life of the Transnet, of the locomotive loan. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson it is not a – I hear Mr 
Chaskalson what he is talking about, he does not want a 
translation number, he wants the cost currency hedge 
number which is not a simple – I cannot do a simple 
calculation, it needs a model that needs to be built with 
cash flows and then I can then explain how much that will 
be in total, but from a translation point of view at the time 
that 2.5billion dollar was around R30billion that is the 
simple answer I can give now but what he is looking for is 
10 
– it needs a model to be built and I can show the cash 
flows and all that because it is a 15 year old, we need 
interest for the – the Chinese interest rate or the Dollar 
interest rate at the time, Rand interest rate, work out what 
the cash flows are and then what would be the total in 
Rand terms. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But would you accept that if 
Transnet had this 2.5billion dollar exposure and it wanted 
to convert that into a fixed rand exposure at current rand 
rates it would have cost billions of rands not millions.  The 
20 
cost of that hedge would run into billions of rands. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson I guess if you have got to 
exchange rands, I mean dollar to rands of course there is a 
cost to it and the cost to it depends on the differential of 
the interest rate between the dollar and the rand so that is 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 171 of 297 
 
why I am saying I cannot at this point quantify that, but all 
I can say is of course it cost money, even if you travel you 
want to change the rands at the airport to dollars, it will 
cost you money. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But on 2.5billion dollars over 
how long was the term of that ...[intervenes]   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That was a 15 year loan. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Over 15 years and you want a 
fixed rand exposure, are we talking hundreds of millions of 
dollars – sorry hundreds of millions of rands, billions of 
10 
rands? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson when we discuss the 
funding and in terms of the funding plan you know which is 
well documented in the PFMA document, or Treasury 
regulation it will tell you that any funding that you need to 
– it needs to comply with the regulation and funding – 
funding sources are vast, you can fund in rand, dollar, 
Chinese in any other country currency as long as it meets 
your requirements, so the first determinant is to what 
extent would that bundling or funding or growing is 
20 
comparable 
to 
your 
own 
funding, 
that 
is 
when 
you 
determine whether is it costly or not costly and then can 
you ...[indistinct] with the cost or not costly, so if you look 
at the funding from China Development Bank Chairperson 
that was a 2.5billion dollar we only drew 1.5billion dollar 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 172 of 297 
 
but the cost of that when we changed it into rand was 
ranging between ...[indistinct] plus 330 basis points to 360 
basis points at a 15 year loan.   Maybe the question is how 
comparable to that to a rand if you funded that in your 
domestic market, maybe that question you can ask me.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well we do know that Transnet 
decided that it didn’t want the dollar risk, which is why it 
took the one billion Club loan to negate some of that dollar 
risk, is that not correct? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   One of the key principles as a 
10 
treasurer is to diversify your sources of funding.  The other 
principle is to make sure that you blend your cost of 
funding.  Blending your cost of funding is to make sure that 
what you borrow outside the country and what you borrow 
in the domestic market the overall cost of funding is within 
your benchmark, and then that is exactly what we did.  We 
had the 2.5billion dollar facility with China Development 
Bank, and then what we did we then said we cannot borrow 
the whole lot at 257 basis points ...[indistinct], instead let 
us see what we can get in the local market so that we can 
20 
blend that, that is exactly what we did. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let me put to you what my 
concern is.  Transnet had a Rand exposure for which it had 
paid billions of rands in the original business case, and in 
the 
contract 
that 
it 
concluded 
with 
the 
locomotive 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 173 of 297 
 
manufacturers, you will accept that? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Yes I do. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It then took the Rand exposure 
and converted 2.5billion of that into a dollar exposure with 
China Development Bank, you accept that? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Which was swapped back into Rand 
Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes at a cost each time.  
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Maybe the question is how relative to 
the bench mark in your domestic market could you have 
10 
done 2.5billion Dollar.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:    That may be a question but why 
would you when you have a Rand exposure borrow, get a 
2.5billion facility and then a few months later swap one 
billion of that 2.5billion facility back into a rand – into a 
rand exposure, why would you go from rand 2.5billion 
dollars back to 1.5billion dollars and the equivalent of one 
billion dollars in Rand in a space of a few months.  What 
logic was there? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Chairperson that is not how it works.  
20 
We had 2.5billion dollar facility with China Development 
Bank, out of the 2.5billion dollar facility with China 
Development Bank we decided that we will only draw 
1.5billion dollar, we will leave the one billion dollar as a 
standby facility.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 174 of 297 
 
 
However that one billion dollar we will replace it in 
the domestic market with a rand equivalent, so that dollar 
was not swapped back into dollar and back into rand.  The 
only one which was swapped from dollar is 1.5billion dollar 
which we have drawn and we swap it back into Rand.  Why 
did we do that Chairperson?  We did that because South 
African regulations, Reserve Bank Regulations does not 
allowed State Owned Entities even companies in South 
Africa to trade in hard currency so you need to swap back 
into Rand.  And why did we do that?   We needed to make 
10 
sure that we afford an opportunity to pay our own 
obligations in terms of the ...[indistinct – dropping voice] 
that we contracted with CNR and CSR. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But what you contracted for and 
what you paid was a price in rands? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Precisely true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So if you had not first taken out 
the dollar exposure and then converted the dollar exposure 
back into the rand exposure you could have borrowed in 
rands at the beginning to pay for the locomotives? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Chairperson I have been in this market 
for more than 25 years.  South African markets is not deep 
and liquid to an extent that it can provide in one particular 
period of time an institution R30 billion at a go.  So this 
market is not that liquid.  To that extent for South African 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 175 of 297 
 
institutions to diversify their sources of funding they need to 
explore other sources of funding.  Multiple institutions – we 
have seen government in the last three couple of months 
they went to IMF and the World Bank and the National – and 
the New Development Bank.  It is to diversify the sources of 
funding.  That is exactly what we were trying to do as 
Transnet at that point. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Why then pay billions of rands in 
your purchase to be able to pay in rands not dollars if you 
are going to have to go and borrow dollars to pay anyway? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I do not understand Chair – the question 
Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That you say 49 – 49 billion.  Let 
us use your 49 billion number.  That included a component 
which was the purchase – which was the manufacturer’s 
hedge cost included billions of rands in that price which were 
what the manufacturers demanded to be willing to sell 
locomotives in rand not dollars. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is true and it has to be that way.  It 
has to be that way Chairperson.  Why because Transnet at 
20 
the time they wanted to fix their obligation.  Should they not 
fix their obligation and leave their prices in dollars they not 
have appointed – afforded to pay – they were still paying 
even at our next – next generation be paying for that.  
Instead what they did is to fix the rand amount of the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 176 of 297 
 
contract so that they can pay it in rand without the 
fluctuations and currency.  One particular example that I – 
maybe just to share it is we hear mostly of institutions that 
have borrowed – they went to buy arms deal in dollars and 
that number today is [00:02:29] because they did not fix in 
rand. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I agree with you completely it 
made a lot of sense to – for Transnet to require a rand 
purchase price even it meant that the purchases hedge cost 
would put billions of rands onto the purchase price. But 
10 
having done that it negated that benefit by going out and 
borrowing in dollars which exposed it to the dollar – the rand 
dollar fluctuation. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I do not see it that way Chairperson. 
Because the manufacturer prices in rand fixed Transnet goes 
and borrow in dollars and fix it in rand and then there is a 
match currency payment.  I do not see the negative of the 
transaction that has been done with that one. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
It 
has 
to 
repay 
China 
Development Bank in dollars is that not correct? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Because of the cross currencies 
transactions that was done with the bank Transnet pays the 
bank rand and the bank pays China Development Bank 
dollars.  So there is no exposure to Transnet on that 
particular transaction. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 177 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Transnet had to pay for a cross 
currency swap to be able to pay back – to pay rands to get 
dollars. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  It is a normal transaction in the market 
and they are there.  The cost associated with it they are very 
easily transparent you can look at.  I do think it is 
astronomical figures that have been paid for for the cross 
currency.  The hedge that was done at 337 basis points not 
even a single institution could have afforded to finance that 
transaction at that level at the point in time. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Alright Mr Ramosebudi let me tell 
you where I want to go on this.  Can I take you to page 729?   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  700? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  729.  In fact start at 727.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So you will see that on the 14 April 
2015 middle of the page to Wandross Gebresellassi that was 
the man who went with you to China is that – or one of them 
went with you to China emailed Eric Wood another member 
of the China delegation saying: 
20 
“Hi Eric, please find attached the draw down 
schedule 
under 
1.5 
billion 
China 
Development Bank loan Column G in the 
attached Excel spread sheet provides the 
drawn down schedule.  Please note that an 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 178 of 297 
 
exchange rate of R12 to the dollar is used to 
determine the draw down schedule.  Regards 
Ted.” 
 
And if you go to the next page 728 you will see the 
draw down schedule that Mr Gebresellassi had produced.  
Do you see that/ 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I can see it Mr Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then let us go back up to 727 and 
you will see that on the same day at 3:20 in the afternoon 
Eric Wood forwarded message with the draw down schedule 
10 
to Salim Essa.  Did Salim Essa have any business dealing 
with this? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am not aware of that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Let us go down to 729 now.  And 
halfway through the page we see Salim Essa’s response to 
Eric Wood.  Do you see the email from Salim Essa 15 April 
2015 10:39 am to Eric Wood? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I see that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is cc’d to someone Walemse  or 
Walemse@gmail.com do you know whose address that is? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I do not know that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry you say you do not know? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I do not know that Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  If I put it to you that it is Mr Ashok 
Narayan – Ashok Narayan do you know Ashok Narayan is? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 179 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No I do not know them. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second Mr Chaskalson I think 
I have lost you.  I thought you were at a certain page and 
discovered that I did not have the right page – just tell me 
again. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  729. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh 729 okay I have got it now. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And we are on the second half of 
the page of 729 Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is an email from Salim Essa to 
Eric Wood copied to Walemse@gmail.com and in due course 
we will bring evidence to show that this is Ashok Narayan.  It 
is has got the same subject as the previous email and the 
body of the email says: 
“Sir please add a column for what our fees 
will be at each draw down please.” 
 
Was Salim Essa due any fees in relation to the China 
Development Bank? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am not aware of that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Let us go to the top of the page 
still on the 15 April 2015 Eric Wood replies to Salim Essa 
and Ashok Narayan and he says: 
“Will do but please understand this is only 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 180 of 297 
 
our first shot at a proposed draw down 
schedule.  This still has to be agreed by both 
Transnet and CDB before it becomes the 
final agreed cash flows.  Regards Eric 
Wood.” 
 
Can we then go down to page 731 towards the foot of 
the page – there is another email string. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  700? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  731. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am here Chair – Chairperson. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And do you see an email from 
Louis Skutter to Wandross Gebresellassi and Eric Wood 17 
April 2015 09:41 am. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I see that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Do you know who Louis Skutter is? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Ja he used to work for Regiments. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  And it is copied to someone 
called Grant Joseph do you know who he is? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No I do not know Grant Joseph. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Any Mr Skutter says: 
20 
“Hi Eric, please see the fee table below. I 
have used two methods for reconciliation 
purposes.  Delta of each draw down as a 
loan times 15 basis points and 15 basis 
points on the outstanding nominal of each 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 181 of 297 
 
draw down as a loan.  The latter is slightly 
lower but more accurate.” 
 
And then do you see a table underneath on page 
732? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I see that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And do you want to explain to the 
Chair what this table – what this table does? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  This table shows the cash flows draw 
down per month from the 1 May 2015 down to the 2 May 
2017 in dollar terms and what the rand equivalent of that is 
10 
going to be.  So that is what the draw down are on the first 
three columns. And then the next columns shows the – the 
basis points that they have been paid on a PV basis for the 
loan which was – here I see two numbers.  One is 166 
million the other one I see 175 million.  And then the last two 
columns also show the 15 basis points on the outstanding 
numbers or the outstanding notional numbers to be drawn. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And the PV and the FV are present 
value and future value. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Ja. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But let us look at Delta times 15 
basis points PV.  Do you see that total at the bottom 
166 019 505? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I see that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Does that figure ring a bell to you? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 182 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Ja I see it is equivalent to you know 
without comparing the exact numbers it looks like the fee 
that was owed by Regiments on this – on the loan. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Were you aware at this stage 
that Regiments was going to earn a fee of R166 million on 
the loan?  I am talking about 17 April 2015. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  17 April 2015 no I was not aware. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  You were not.  Can we go back up 
to 731 – the top of 731?  It is Salim Essa he has seen the 
table and later in the day he writes to Eric Wood. 
10 
“Hi Eric this is for one stream what about the 
other two.  The $1 billion CPI and the hedge 
on the $1.5 billion.  Thanks S.” 
 
Can you tell the Chair what he is saying there?  What 
– do you understand what he is referring to there? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  So here he is talking about the two 
transactions that are outstanding.  There is $1 billion CPI 
and the hedge on the $1.5 billion. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And how do those fit in?  Do you 
know how they fit in? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Come again. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Do you know how they fit in?  Do 
you know what the $1 billion CPI was and what the hedge on 
the $1.5 billion was? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I will not know which one was this one. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 183 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So you do not know what he is 
referring to? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No I do not know. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But – well let us go down.  Well 
before we go down.  Would it – let me put to you what I read 
there.  Salim Essa has seen the table produced by Louis 
Skutter with its draw schedule and the fee for Regiments PV 
on Delta time 15 basis points at R166 million and then he 
says but this is just one of three transactions we are going to 
do what about the other two.  The $1 billion CPI and the 
10 
hedge on the $1.5 billion.  Is that a fair – is that how you 
read  it too? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is how I read it Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So he is saying where are my 
other two fees is that not what he is saying? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is what I see here yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  And were you aware that 
Salim Essa was going to get any fees in relation to this 
transaction? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No I am not aware of that. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So let us go to page 735 and it 
starts with an Essa email but that response – there is a line 
that says: 
“On 18 April 2015 at 9:31 Eric Wood wrote.  
Will get the team to draft the draw down 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 184 of 297 
 
schedule for the ZAR syndicated loan and 
send through.” 
 
That – what is the ZAR syndicated loan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Probably he is talking about the – the 
anticipated club loan that was the $1 billion that we were 
talking about here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Mr Wood knew that there was 
a club loan coming and the club loan would attract a fee 
would it not? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is what it is yes. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  And Salim Essa’s response 
at 932 on the 18 April. 
“Cool if they can split all three streams 
please.” 
 
So he wants to see each of the three transactions 
with a fee in respect of each stream is that not correct?  Is 
that not how you read it? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is how I read it yes Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can I take you then to page 595?  
And that is the spread sheet that we discussed yesterday in 
20 
relation to the fees that went into Regiments and out to 
various shell entities controlled by Salim Essa.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Page 595 you see the very top line 
on that list it says: 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 185 of 297 
 
“2 
June 
15 
TRXF 
00000 
1 
China 
Development Bank.” 
 
You see that line? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I see that line. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  The amount inclusive of VAT 
R189 200 – R189 240 000.00. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I see that Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And then if you go across you will 
see an entry under Albertime R147 607 607 200.  Do you 
know who Albertime are? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No we still started talking about it 
yesterday I do not know who Albertime is. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Well Albertime is run by 
someone called Mr Kuvan Moodley and he would usually 
take a small cut relative to the cut taken by Mr Essa’s 
company.  So if we look for instance down the table it says: 
“For sure or Hustaf or Magool” 
 
You 
will 
see 
that 
the 
corresponding 
entry 
on 
Albertime is usually 10% of the entry for the cut of the – by 
the shell company nominated by Mr Essa. But in this 
20 
particular case Albertime took the primary cut and the 
secondary cut and if you look at that number 147 607 000 
inclusive of VAT you will see that it comes to 75% plus 3% - 
78% of what Transnet paid Regiments.  And in due course 
evidence will be shown how 122 million plus VAT of this 147 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 186 of 297 
 
million was laundered onto Sahara Computers.  Were you 
aware that – of the fee that Transnet was going to pay 
Regiments for the China Development Bank 122million would 
go to Sahara Computers? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No I was not aware of that Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Let us look at what was happening 
above ground in relation to these transactions as opposed to 
in the emails between Mr Essa and Mr Wood.  Can we go 
now to page 300?  And in fact if we can go – yes page 300 is 
correct.   
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am at page 300. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And there you will see an email 
from Mr Wood addressed on the 22 April and I just want to 
remind you again of the dates of the email correspondence 
that we have previously been going through that was 15 to 
18 April.  But now we have gone forward to 22 April and Mr 
Wood write to Anoj Singh, yourself and he copies Mr 
Gebresellassi at Regiments and he says: 
“Hi Anoj and Phetolo I have attached the JP 
doc with discussed updates.  Regards Eric.” 
20 
 
Do you recall getting this email from Mr Wood? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I cannot recall but I – I see it came to 
me so it means I did receive it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  If you go a page down you will see 
what the memo is that he attached.  It is dated 21 April 2015 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 187 of 297 
 
and what it is is essentially a fairly detailed if possibly 
spurious motivation for paying Regiments a success fee in 
relation to the China Development Bank of 15 basis points 
which will correspond to 166.3 million.  You will see that at 
page 303. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Do you… 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I see it here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes do you.  Do you remember 
that?  I mean do you remember receiving a motivation for 
10 
Regiments to pay – to be paid 166.3 million in relation to the 
China Development Bank? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I guess it came to me I might have 
received it but I do not remember of – this one. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I see.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Chaskalson.  Yes we 
may proceed. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair.  If we then – well 
-  go to page 339 there is a document which bears your 
signature and maybe if I can take you to the signature it is at 
20 
page 347 it is not just your signature.  It has your signature, 
Gary 
Peter’s 
signature, 
Anoj 
Singh’s 
signature 
and 
Siyabonga Gama’s signature and what it is is a motivation to 
do two things.   
 
The one is to pay Regiments this 166 million and the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 188 of 297 
 
other is to appoint JP Morgan on confinement to do various 
transactions in relation to the China Development Bank loan. 
 
Let 
us 
start 
at 
1.1. 
 
Approve 
the 
confined 
appointment of JP Morgan to hedge the financial risks, 
interest rate credit and currency risk emanating from the US 
Dollar 1.5 billion China Development Bank load back into 
ZAR. 
 
So Transnet now wants a rand exposure not a dollar 
exposure although originally it had only a rand exposure and 
it is going to pay JP Morgan to orchestrate that. 
10 
 
1.2  Approve the confined appointment of JP Morgan 
to lead and underwrite the equivalent syndicated ZAR loan of 
$1.5 billion.  That would become the club loan is that not 
correct?  Mr Ramosebudi.  That was what eventually became 
the club loan. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Approve the contract extension 
from 99.5 million to 265.5 million for the appointment of 
Regiments Capital for transaction advisory services and 
support to Transnet on the 1064 locomotive transaction. 
20 
 
So that difference from 99.5 for the advice that had 
been 
giving 
Transnet 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
locomotives 
procurement to 265 was going to be the 166 million that 
would be paid to Regiments and laundered out via Albertime 
to Sahara Computers in respect of the China Development 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 189 of 297 
 
Bank loan.  Is that where – is that the difference the 166 
million there?  Is that – that explains the difference between 
99.5 and … 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes it increases 166 million yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Can I ask you – let us go to 
1.1 and 1.2.  Did JP Morgan ultimately complete the task in 
relation to hedging the financial risk interest rate credit and 
currency risk in relation to the China Development Bank 
loan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes they did Chair. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So they did these cross-currencies 
swaps? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  They did Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Did they lead and underwrite the 
equivalent syndicated ZAR loan of 1.5 billion? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No they did not. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I see.  Let us maybe see why that 
happened.  Why they did not.  Can I take you to page 384. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Page? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  384.    
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am on page 384. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  384.  There you will see an email 
from yourself at Transnet to yourself and copied to Eric 
Wood and it says: 
“Letter to JP Morgan” 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 190 of 297 
 
 
And it is a draft letter because obviously it is not 
being sent to JP Morgan it is being sent to yourself and Eric 
Wood and it says: 
“Dear 
Mark, 
re 
coordination 
of 
ZAR 
syndication loan and the bridging facility.  
Further to your previous engagements and 
the 
request 
to 
coordinate 
the 
ZAR 
syndication 
loan 
with 
Regiments 
Capital 
Transnet has realised that it made a wrong 
assumption that the lead coordinator will 
10 
provide 
the 
underwriting 
facility 
on 
the 
balance of the US 1 dollar – 1 billion.  Now 
the expectation is not in line with JP Morgan 
position Transnet has decided it will pursue 
the current offer received from the bank of 
China and any other availability facility and 
balance will be drawn from the US 1 dollar 
billion 
standby 
facility 
therefore 
the 
coordination of the ZAR loan will not be 
required. 
 
Transnet 
therefore 
regret 
to 
20 
terminate the coordination arrangement of 
the ZAR syndication loan with JP Morgan.” 
 
Do you recall writing this email or writing this draft 
email because it was not yet sent to JP Morgan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I was writing on behalf of the Group 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 191 of 297 
 
CFO yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And the Group CFO was Anoj 
Singh? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can you explain to the Chair what 
was being said here? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  In the simplest terms Chairperson the 
previous memo was saying we approve the – on 1.2 on page 
339 it says: 
“We approve the confinement of JP Morgan 
10 
for 
the 
lead 
and 
underwriting 
of 
the 
equivalent syndicated ZAR loan of 1.5 billion 
dollar.” 
 
But this letter was terminating that confinement. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But why was it terminating the 
confinement? 
MR 
RAMOSEBUDI: 
 
It 
is 
because 
there 
was 
a 
misunderstanding with JP Morgan when we were to advance 
the discussion with the underwriting of the- of the 1 billion 
dollars you know syndicated loan.  In rand terms JP Morgan 
20 
was not in capacity to do that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry I did not hear that.  JP 
Morgan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Was not in – did not have the capacity 
to do – underwrite that 1.5 billion dollar. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 192 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So JP Morgan could not underwrite 
a 1.5 billion facility. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  1 billion dollar actually yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  1.5 billion dollar facility in rands.  
What is interesting there is what you say in this draft.   
“Transnet has decided it will pursue the 
current offer received from the Bank of China 
and any other availability facility and balance 
will be drawn from the US 1 billion dollar 
standby facility.  Therefore the coordination 
10 
of the ZAR loan will not be required.” 
 
So you are saying there we are not going to do – use 
any rands as an equivalent for that 1 billion standby facility 
and we do not need anyone to coordinate it we will go with 
our 1 billion dollar facility.  Is that not what you are saying? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No that is not what it says here.  What it 
says here is that we will pursue the current offer that we 
have received from China Development Bank – sorry China 
Bank – Bank of China not China Development Bank.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Bank of China. 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  So China Development Bank are two 
institutions.  So we will pursue that and any other that is 
available you know.  So what we then did was that the 
persons or the companies that was appointed with JP 
Morgan 
at 
the 
time 
we 
will 
pursue 
other 
alternative 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 193 of 297 
 
opportunities since JP Morgan was not willing to underwrite 
that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes but it is – but in that second 
paragraph – or second paragraph you are not talking about 
underwriting you talking about coordinating.  You say: 
“Therefore the coordination of the ZAR loan 
will not be required.” 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  From JP Morgan yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  From JP Morgan.  Was somebody 
else going to do that coordination? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes who was that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  In this case it was Regiments. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And if this draft is being written by 
you to Regiments to settle or was it written on the instruction 
of Anoj Singh? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The termination of the coordination, 
yes. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
The 
termination 
of 
the 
20 
coordination agreement or arrangement with JP Morgan was 
Anoj Singh’s decision, you say? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Is that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It was Transnet’s decision because 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 194 of 297 
 
Dicken(?) Owen(?) was no longer offering the... 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Who at Transnet took that 
decision? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It is Transnet at the time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, I am asking which individuals 
at Transnet was the one who took that decision? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Anoj Sing. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Anoj Sing, yes.  And this letter, 
this draft.  Did you just frame it was it framed in consultation 
with Anoj Sing? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I wrote it and checked with him. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then, if we go down to 386, we 
see another email which you write from Transnet from your 
Transnet address formally to Eric, saying: 
“Hi Eric.  Do you mind reviewing this as per Anoj’s 
requisition.” 
 
And underneath, on page 387, there is letter that is 
going 
to 
be 
send 
to 
JP 
Morgan, 
terminating 
their 
appointment.   
 
And it is essentially the same.  In fact, I am not sure if 
20 
there are material or there is no material differences but it 
corresponds to your draft that you sent to Eric Wood a little 
while earlier.  Is that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The previous day.  I am sorry.  It 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 195 of 297 
 
is 8 June and 9 June.  And was the appointment of JP 
Morgan then terminated? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, it was terminated. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Do you recall when it was 
terminated? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I cannot recall but it should be 
immediately after, you know, after they received the letter. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Shortly thereafter.  It was shortly 
after 8 June.  8 June or thereabouts.  Would that be a fair 
assumption? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Mr Ramosebudi.  I just want 
to get the date.  So it would be shortly after 8 June? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, I said shortly after they 
received the letter being terminated.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can we go to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry.  Just to confirm.  So the letter 
carrying that page 385, is it drafted by you Mr Ramosebudi 
or Mr Singh...[intervenes]  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...who then does the letter at 387? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can we go to three...  Sorry, to 
444? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 196 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And that is an email from Eric 
Wood to yourself, copied to what was Gabro(?) Selasi(?) and 
Nswana(?) Mwango(?).  Who is Nswana Mwango? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It is one of the employees of 
Regiments. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Employee 
of 
Regiments.  
Thursday, 27 August 2015  A memo in respect of Regiments’ 
role on 1064 Locomotive Club Loan Funding.  And the body 
of the email says: 
10 
“Hi Phetolo.  As discussed, I have attached the 
requested 1064 Club Loan memo.  Please let me 
know your thoughts.  Regard Eric.” 
 
And then what follows is a memorandum that is being 
drafted in the name, in your name, to go to Gary Peter.  And 
the subject is...  Sorry, that is at 445.  Advisory support...   
 
Sorry, let me take a step back.  Do you recall receiving 
this email with a draft memorandum from Erich Wood on or 
around 27 August 2015? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I guess so.  I cannot just remember.  It 
20 
has been some time.  But I might have received it.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You have got no reason to believe 
you did not receive it? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I said I might have received it.  I 
cannot remember.  It is a long time ago. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 197 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, but I mean, is there anything 
in here that makes you think that you did not receive it? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I am not saying I did not receive it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  So there is this draft in your 
name to Gary Peter.  And was it the practise of Regiments to 
write drafts in your name to go to other Transnet executives? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja, it is a tradition in Transnet that you, 
you know, as a head of a function, all memos will come from 
my name as a compiler.  And then, where you have worked 
with other teams, they also have to come in and they will be 
10 
there, 
supporting 
or 
recommending 
and 
then 
we 
will 
recommending upwards.  That is how – it is a tradition, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And is this a memorandum, 
essentially, a motivation for Regiments to be paid a fee of 
R 75 3 million for raising the Club loan?  Is that what it is?  
You will see that at the bottom line at page 448. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja, it looks like it is some motivation, 
yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  And you will see, if you go 
back up to page 447, there is a table suggesting that 
20 
Regiments has saved Transnet R 763 million in this exercise.  
You will recall or just remember that number 763 million. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I then down a page...  Sorry, 
down to page 453.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 198 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And there you will see an email 
from yourself to Eric Wood on the same date, 27 August.  
And it says: 
“Hi Eric.  If a question arises, what is your 
comparable pricing on the current debt that Transnet 
raised?  Would it not be better to compare this with 
the current China development loan than what would 
JP Morgan achieve?” 
 
What are you saying there? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja, here I am saying, I think it is better 
to compare apples with apples than comparing apples with 
oranges.  So if you look at the initial proposal that was 
submitted by JP Morgan, it was a ten year bond which is 
bullet and the pricing was about – minus or plus 316 above 
basis points.   
 
So if you look at the ten year bullet bond price at that 
level and a 15-year with a five year grace period in 
amortizing, these two are not the same 
 
This other one is amortizing.  So it means it is paying 
20 
down to the maturity.  The other one is not paying down to 
the maturity.  You only pay at the end of the period.   
 
So the prices are not – they are not comparing apple 
with apple.  So what I said is.  Take the current existing bond 
loan with China Development Bank which is 15-year, five 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 199 of 297 
 
year grace period and compare with that, so that at least we 
compare apples with apples. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So can I then take you down to 
page 465 because it seems that Regiments took heed of your 
suggestion.  There you will see an email from Nswana(?) 
Mwango(?) dated 2 September 2015 addressed to yourself 
and it has got a revised fee.   
 
And you will see much of the narrative is still the same 
but if you got to page 469, there is a new table.  The table 
that you wanted.   
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oka you can go 469. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   469? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   [No audible reply]  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, I see this. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And there you will see that the 
saving that you said was the better measure, is not 
R 763 million which is in the table below, it is R 502 million.  
I want to say the alleged... 
 
You will see that when you – they did the comparison 
20 
which you said they should do.  They came up with a number 
of R 502 million and not R 763 million.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Is that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I see that.  Then it must. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 200 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But you recall receiving this 
memorandum? 
[Speakers are not clear.]   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   ...say something, yes, but - I have seen 
this memo.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And the date of the memo, it 
comes under cover of an email of 2 September, if we go back 
to 465.  2 September.  And all of these savings that we are 
talking about are savings that the good people at Regiments 
have made for Transnet.  Can we go down to 11 September 
10 
and 486? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   486? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  Oh, sorry.  Before we get 
there.  Can we go to 472? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If we start at the middle of the 
page, we see that same email from Nswana Mwango that 
was sent to you on 2 September 2015 with the revised fee 
memo that that email with the revised fee memo has been 
forwarded 
by 
Eric 
Wood 
to 
Asher(?) 
Kenarian(?) 
20 
miwallance@gmail.com(?) is Asher Kenarian. 
 
Do you know who Asher Kenarian is? 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I do not know. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   He was a former advisor to the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 201 of 297 
 
Premier of the Free State, who later went on to do big things 
in the Gupta Enterprise.  If we go down to page 486.  This is 
after Asher Kenarian has received the revised memo.   
 
We now see a document that you sent to someone called 
– an email that you sent to someone called Betsy van 
Heerden on 11 September 2015.  And you say underneath it:  
Prepare for sign off.  
 
And it says: 
“Request to appoint Trillian (04).” 
 
And what it is, it is a memorandum is in Siyabonga’s 
10 
name this time at page 487.  And it now says: 
“Request to appoint Trillian as lead manager in 
R 18 billion in club loan.” 
 
Who were Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Come again? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Who were Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Trillian were the Supply Development of 
Regiments ...[indistinct]  
[Speaker is not clear.]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Have you met anyone from 
20 
Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, I did. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Who? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Daniel Roy. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Daniel Roy? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 202 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And did you meet anybody else 
from Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did you meet anyone other than 
Mr Roy from Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Daniel Roy. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So Mr Roy was the only person 
from Trillian that you have met? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   When was this work on the club 
loan done? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The work on the club loan was done on 
the – the time I joined in March of 2015 as part of that 
delegation to go to China later.  I am not sue if it was March 
or April.   
 
One of the things we went for was to negotiate with 
China Development Bank for the split of the 2.5 billion Dollar 
so that the part of the 2.5 billion is used for syndicated 
Zalo(?) which is the ultimate club loan.   
20 
 
So through that period, Regiments were working on the 
Zalo immediately when the termination with JP Morgan.  So 
there was this full speed-on on the work of the club loan to 
syndicate with the local institution. 
 
And some of the those is per as the foreign institution at 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 203 of 297 
 
Bank of China but we were talking to Bank of China here in 
the country until there was part where Trillian came in before 
we finalised the transaction, were part of the transaction and 
until we paid out the club loan to Trillian.  That is when the 
transaction was done.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So when was the first time you 
met Mr Roy? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I cannot remember very well but around 
July/August.  Somewhere there. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   July/August.  And when was the 
10 
first time you heard of Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I think it was the similar time because 
he called me and he said:  Let us meet and discuss what you 
are telling me.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let us meet and discuss...? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Because he was telling me that he was 
part of the transaction.  I said:  Come in so that we discuss 
this and so that we are on the same page. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I take you back to pages...  
Well, let us go back to page 444.  That is the email from Eric 
20 
Wood, 27 August 2015 with a detailed memo suggesting that 
Regiments should be paid this fee of R 76.3 million.   
 
And then on page 453 – and there is no mention of 
Trillian in that memo.  At page 453 you respond to Eric Wood 
and you say: 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 204 of 297 
 
“If a question arise what your comparable pricing on 
the current debt at Transnet raised, would it not be 
better to compare this with you current CBD line 
than what would JP Morgan achieve?” 
 
You do not mention Trillian on 27 August.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And there is no mention of Trillian 
in the memo.  At that stage, the fee is going to Regiments. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   When did you first decide the fee 
10 
should go to Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   When did you decide that you 
were going to make a motivation? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I did not decide. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Oh, that you were going to make a 
motivation that the fee should go to Trillian. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I did not make a – I did not decide to 
make a payment to Trillian.  I think during that time, there 
was 
a 
discussion 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
requirements 
that 
20 
Regiments 
needs 
to 
meet 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
supplier 
development.   
 
As part of the appointment of Regiments, they also had 
to meet the supply developments.  I think they were 
discussing around that time, which they did not include me at 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 205 of 297 
 
the time.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But who would they have 
included? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   They would have included, at the time, 
the CFO which was Anoj Singh and Dereck Peter who was in 
the procurement, the procurement officer at the time and 
Eric. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So Regiments had to find itself a 
supply development partner? 
MR 
RAMOSEBUDI: 
 
 
It 
was 
a 
requirement 
for 
the 
10 
appointment of Regiments, yes.  Of the supply development.  
So there was some push-back from Transnet in paying 
Regiments for what they were required to bring in the supply 
development. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  And presumably, the supply 
development partner would have to be a B-BBEE partner. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That is what it is. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  Did you ever get a B-BBEE 
certificate from Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The documents were supplied to us, 
20 
which were forwarded to Procurement.  So I do not know that 
details of the B-BBEE certificate is. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Right.  Did you know who owned 
Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 206 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did you know who owned Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I do not.  Trillian, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  All you knew was Daniel 
Roy. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Who came to me, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And how did he come to you? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I do not know how he came to me but 
he came into my office, whether he drove or... 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   [laughs] 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I do not know but he came to my office 
10 
at the time to have a discussion with me. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Ja, I am not talking about his 
mode of transport.  I mean, did he get an introduction to 
you?  Did somebody say ...[intervenes]  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   ...expect a meeting from Mr Roy? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No.  I just got a call from him. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You got a call from him.  And what 
did he say to you? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, I cannot remember.  I 
20 
think it was 2015, somewhere there, whether – how he 
introduced himself.  But he ultimately came in, introduced 
himself and then we had a chat.  I brought in one of my 
colleagues.  He met him and then he left. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And did he suggest that he should 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 207 of 297 
 
be the person or his company, Trillian, should be the one 
getting paid for the club loan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I think among the discussion, the 
position was beyond my salary scale.  That could have been 
discussed that that is where, you know, Trillian should be 
paid 
instead 
of 
Regiments 
because 
they 
are 
supply 
development.  They should have met.  That is required 
requirement.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And but when Mr Roy announced 
for the first time or arrived at the first time and you are like...  
10 
How did he describe himself?  What did he say he being 
doing? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, I will be lying if I can tell 
you.  But he gave me his company’s profile.  He tells me that 
asset(?) management, they want this deal.  But the details, I 
cannot tell you exactly what it was all about.  Yes, he 
introduced his company, what they do and their role in the 
transaction 
but 
further 
than 
that, 
I 
would 
be 
lying 
Chairperson.  I really want to assist this Commission.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you recall what he said 
20 
about the role that his company played in the transaction? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What did he say they had done in 
relation to the transaction? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It was about a syndication of the money 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 208 of 297 
 
that needs to be raised. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   A syndication of the money that 
needs to be raised? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And did he describe, you know, 
what work had been done by Regiments, what work had been 
done by Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I did not get to that level. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Who told you that Trillian are the 
ones to be paid? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Gary Peter told me. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did Gary Peter tell you? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So let us then move on.  Oh, 
before we move on.  Let us look at that memo that you 
wanted signed off on 11 September 2015.  So at 486. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   486 was the covering email and 
the memo starts at 487.  And I want to put to you that what 
this memo does, he simply takes the previous memo and 
20 
wherever Regiments is mentioned ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Chaskalson.  Did you say 
087? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   487. 
CHAIRPERSON:   487? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 209 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   487 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The – for the most part, what this 
memo does, is it cuts and pastes Trillian for Regiments from 
the previous memos.  So that is – let us look at it.   
 
Under the heading Trillian, paragraph 2: 
“Transnet had signed the mandate for US Dollars 
2.5 billion, 15-year loan from China Development 
Bank to finance 232 and 359 Locomotives from 
China North Railways and China South Railways 
10 
respectively. 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
 
Paragraph 3: 
“The 
board 
approves 
the 
transaction 
during 
August 2014.” 
 
Paragraph 4: 
“Transnet decided to split the transaction into two 
tranches of the US Dollars 1.5 billion tranche and 
standby facility of US Dollars, one billion tranche. 
When Morgan was appointed to lead the ZAR Club 
20 
as a substitute of US Dollar one billion standby 
facility the costs with the transaction lower.  How 
they failed to secure the 15-year at the appropriate 
pricing. 
Trillian approach with reversing inquiry for club loan 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 210 of 297 
 
deal 
at 
a 
price 
and 
tender 
which 
was 
more 
comparable to the CDB loan.” 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
 
Did Trillian approach with that inquiry or did Regiments 
approach? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   To the best of your knowledge? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairman, ...[indistinct] with the club 
syndicated loan. 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry?  Trillian approached the 
club loan, not the syndicated loan.  But who made the first 
approach on the club loan, was it Regiments or Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The club loan was Trillian but the 
syndicated loan was Regiments. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC:   The 
syndicated 
loan 
was 
Regiments, you say? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And Trillian, the magic that Trillian 
brought was the club loan.   
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What was the difference between 
the club loan and the syndicated loan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The difference between the two is the 
participation, the quantum amounts.  So in a syndicate, you 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 211 of 297 
 
have – Chairperson, in a syndicate you will have equal 
participants with equal amounts in the syndication.  But in a 
club loan, you know, I can come with a rand, the other one 
will come with a ten rand.  The other one comes with a 
billion rand.  You simply club them together. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  Can I ask you to go back to 
the 2 September version of this memo?  Go to page 466. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And here you are talking about 
still paying – well, let us go to the end.  This is still a 
10 
motivation for Regiments to be paid for organising the club 
loan.  And right through this it is all about club loan.  And 
Regiments are going to be paid.   
 
There is no mention of Trillian whatsoever.  Why would 
that be the case if the club loan was Trillian’s idea? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, at this stage, I cannot 
explain 
the 
arrangements 
between 
the 
Trillian 
and 
Regiments, you know, after Transnet told them about the 
supply development.  How they, from there, they moved, I do 
not know. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  So – but a short while ago, 
you mentioned to me that Trillian was the one who came up 
with the idea of the club loan and ...[intervenes]  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No.  Yes, you are right.  But you are 
simply referring Chairperson here on that it is for Regiments.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 212 of 297 
 
But I am saying the original arrangement that I had 
...[indistinct]  
[Speaker is not clear.]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The commercial ...[intervenes]  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Between(?) Regiments. 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, but whose idea was the club 
loan?  Was it Regiments or Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, as I said, the club loan, it 
was Trillian’s idea. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then why would you pay 
Regiments for something that was Trillian’s idea? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I think there was a time where, as I – if 
– you might recall Chairperson, that there was a discussion 
between Gary and Anoj Singh and Regiments guy(?), in 
particular Eric about payments.  And then Transnet the 
requirement of supply development which Regiments, at the 
time, were not bringing them forth.   
 
So probably from that point of view, things started 
changing.  As I said, it was beyond my...  I was not part of 
20 
that. 
[Speaker is not clear.]   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Were you aware at the time that 
Eric Wood had fallen out with his partners at Regiments and 
was in the process of leaving Regiments to start Trillian? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 213 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I was not aware. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  Can we then continue on 
this Trillian memo that is large cut and paste of Regiments in 
a previous memo.  Let us look at the cut and paste.  Can you 
go to page 491? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you see at 491, the first 
paragraph on the page 36:  Whoever was preparing this 
document, forgot to change one of the Regiments to Trillian. 
 
So 36 says: 
10 
“Regiments value-add to Transnet in relation to the 
1060 four locomotives, ZAR club loan funding can 
be summarised in the following table.” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja.  Chairperson, but when I look at 
this, it is still a draft document.  As the Chairperson says, it 
is a document that comes from Regiments.  And when you 
look at it, it is still a draft document.  It does not have even 
– there is a lot of spelling errors and a whole lot of things 
here. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, it is a draft.  But the point 
that I wanted to make is that it was really a cut and paste 
draft.  So where the previous document said Regiments, this 
one now says Trillian.    
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That is precisely what I said.  I mean, I 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 214 of 297 
 
do not – I cannot even vouch for this.  It is a draft document. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I want to look at the table under 
paragraph 39.  And here we are talking about what success 
fees are going to be paid to Trillian in valuable contribution 
that they have made and it says: 
“Success fee in percent ZAR 12 billion 10%, 
success fee in rands, net present value 50.2 
million.” 
And where 50.2 million comes from is if you go up to 
paragraph 36 it is the comparison that you said was the 
10 
appropriate comparison.  The comparison not comparing 
apples and oranges but comparing apples and apples of 
comparing the alleged saving on the club loan with the 
comparable pricing of the China development bank loan 
which is allegedly R512 million and 10% of that is 50.2 
million, is that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   That is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So even assuming that these 
figures about savings are correct on the logic, on your 
logic of what an appropriate comparator would be and an 
20 
appropriate success fee, the fee would have been 50.2 
million. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   That is what has been calculated to 
50.2 million, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  And the date of that 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 215 of 297 
 
document is 11 September.  Can we then go to page 499?  
And there you will see an email that you sent to Eric Wood 
on 14 September 2015.  That is three days later and it has 
got an attachment, Smhpinnicaldms.co.za  ASP vehicles, 
customer orders print and if we go down to page 500 we 
see a vehicle order for a Land Rover.  Do you recall 
sending this email? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I cannot recall on this particular one 
but I recall having a discussion with the guys at Regiments 
for purchasing of a car. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, having a discussion? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   With Regiments about purchasing a 
car. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   About purchasing a car.  If one 
looks at this order on page 500, it is a vehicle order for 
you, Mr Phetolo Ramosebodi. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Yes, that is precisely true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And I understand in the end you 
did not purchase this vehicle, is that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Because it was expensive, yes. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I could not afford it here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Why were you sending it to Eric 
Wood? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Because one of his partners, Mr Litha 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 216 of 297 
 
Nyhonyha is a part-owner of Waterford Range Rover in 
Fourways 
so 
I 
thought 
maybe, 
you 
know, 
there 
is 
something that he can do for me. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Hang 
on 
a 
minute, 
Mr 
Ramosebodi, 
you 
were 
in 
the 
process 
of 
making 
recommendations to pay at this stage a fee of 50.2 million 
to an entity linked to Mr Wood and you are hoping that he 
or his partner can get you a good deal on a Land Rover.  
Do you think that is appropriate? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Because there was no untoward(?) to 
10 
anything. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, there was no? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   The transaction that we were doing 
with them, according to me was fair and above the board. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, which transaction. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   The cap loan – no, the CDB loan CDB 
loan. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Fair and above board? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I am saying it was fair and above 
board. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, but do you not think that 
there is some impropriety about …[intervenes] 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You do not?   
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No, I was going to pay the car 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 217 of 297 
 
through …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one sec, let him finish the 
proposition he wants to put to you, Mr Ramosebodi. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Do you not think there is some 
impropriety about being in a position where a decision is 
about to be made to pay somewhere between R50 and R90 
million to certain people or their company and at the same 
time asking people associated with that company to 
organise you a deal on a Land Rover? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Sorry, Chairperson, to speak over… 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, that is fine. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Ja.  No, I do not – no, because one, I 
think if - on this particular day I remember very well, 
somewhere around this particular day, could be the 7 t h of 
the 10 September, I had an accident, so I had no car to 
travel to work and so I was looking for a car to replace the 
car that had an accident. 
 
And the second thing is I did not see it that way 
20 
because firstly, I am not an authority, you know, to – I had 
no authority to approve funding, I mean to approve 
funding, first of all, and to approve any payment of that 
size of the transaction. 
 
The third thing is that according to me, their 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 218 of 297 
 
appointment is aboveboard, so there is nothing to hide.  
You know, I have the right to source funding for my car 
anyway I want to. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Ramosebodi, I have to put it 
to you that it is improper but you can comment on that, I do 
not propose taking it further. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Chairperson, it could have been 
improper should they have paid it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What the …[intervenes] 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I would understand. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Were you not wanting them to 
organise you a good deal on the car? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No, I could have got it somewhere 
else but I thought it would be easier for them to give me a 
discount on a car as compared to other dealers because 
they might have other opportunities that they are getting 
from [indistinct] 06.30. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes but the discount would have 
been a benefit to you would it not? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Which I would disclose. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So I know you would have 
disclosed it but I am putting it to you that the mere that it 
would not have been hidden if it was not going to be 
hidden does not remove the impropriety.  
MR 
RAMOSEBODI: 
 
 
Chairperson, 
we 
are 
talking 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 219 of 297 
 
something that did not happen. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes but it did not happen not 
because of your decision because of their decision. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No, it is because of my decision, I 
could not afford, the price was too much. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, they did not give you the 
discount you wanted, is that not right?  They did not give 
you a good enough discount. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Chairperson …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what Mr Chaskalson is saying is this 
10 
was a case where you were in a position to be part of 
those who would make a recommendation on a transaction 
involving them and if now you wanted them to give you a 
discount on a personal thing, they could have been 
influenced by the fact that they also wanted to get the 
recommendation and you were going to be part of those 
who would recommend, so it could have been seen as well, 
you know, if you give me a good discount may I will also 
make a recommendation.  If you do not give me the 
discount, well, I do not know what I will do.  Mr 
20 
Chaskalson, did I put it the way or…? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You did, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Chairperson, I was part of the deal 
chain in the recommendation of the transaction but despite 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 220 of 297 
 
that, they did not give me, so it means there is no 
association with that.  The transactions were two unrelated 
transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Chaskalson says you tried to get 
a discount and they resisted, they did not give you the 
discount.  If they had given you the discount then you 
would have taken the deal.  So the effect of this 
proposition is you tried.  The fact that it did not happen 
does not mean that the attempt was not improper.  That is 
not how you saw it? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No, that is not how I am seeing it, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Ramosebodi, can we then go 
down to 503?  It is an email to you on 16 September from 
Edward Thomas at Transnet copied to Gary Peter.  It is in 
response to that draft memo that you circulated.  Do you 
recall receiving this email from Edward Thomas? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before that, Mr Chaskalson, 
please do not forget your question.  You have said that – I 
20 
am going back to the question that Mr Chaskalson was 
dealing with the issue of the car, the deal, the discount.  
You may have seen it in a certain way.  At the moment how 
do you see it?  Do you see it the same way as you saw it 
then or do you get a different perspective now? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 221 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Now I am – Chairperson, I am seeing 
it with the eye of the Commission, I am not seeing it… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   At the time I did not see because 
according to me everything was aboveboard.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:  You know, it is a free market society 
and you are willing to do business with who as long as it is 
aboveboard.  That is how I saw it at the time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine, I was just interested 
in seeing that because – and you – obviously, you must not 
say you see it if you do not see it, but I just was just 
interested in seeing whether maybe now that the issues are 
being raised you might begin to see differently than you 
saw it at that time. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you gave and answer but… 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   If I think …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you still see it the same way feel free 
20 
to say so. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:    No …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if you say look… 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No, no, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …maybe there is a different perspective 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 222 of 297 
 
then it is up to you to indicate. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   If at the time I am in the current 
situation I would not have done it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would not have done it. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I would not have done it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Okay, thank you.  Mr 
Chaskalson? 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Thank 
you, 
Chair. 
 
Mr 
Ramosebodi, can you go to page 503? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I am at that page. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And it is an email from Edward 
Thomas to you, 16 September 2015 copied to Gary Peter.  
Do you recall receiving this email?  Mr Thomas sort of cuts 
and paste with some very big print so it may have stuck out 
in your memory. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I cannot recall the emails but I see 
the message.  It might have arrived - you know, through 
yourself, Chairperson, why I am saying I cannot recall 
some of these things, you may find that it was opened by 
my secretary then she gave me a paper and says please 
20 
attend to this.  So at the time I am not, I did not receive an 
email, so I received a copy of an email, so I am attending 
the message at that point in time.  So I am aware of what 
Eddie Thomas wrote, yes, I am aware of it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And – well, let us see what – let 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 223 of 297 
 
us take the Chair through what he wrote and he is 
responding to that draft memorandum: 
“Hi, here are couple of questions that need to be 
answered based on the previous submission and the 
new submission.” 
Previous 
submission 
was 
that 
JP 
Morgan 
Regiments 
submission that we discussed a while back. 
“The financial were as follows…” 
And he is quoting from the previous. 
“Given the invaluable contribution Regiments...” 
10 
And unfortunately, the cut and paste has gone off the page 
but I think the point is that he is making the point that the 
invaluable contribution is from Regiments and JP Morgan.  
He says: 
“The ADC approved the following: 
It is recommended that the ADC approve the 
confined appointment of JP Morgan to hedge that 
interest rate credit and currency risk, approve the 
confined appointment of JP Morgan.” 
Etcetera. 
20 
“Approve the contract extension appointment of 
Regiments…” 
That was from 99.5 to 166 million more.  And then: 
“Delegate authority to the Acting…” 
I suspect it would have been the CFO. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 224 of 297 
 
“…to give effect to the confinement.” 
You recall that recommendation to the BADC which was 
adopted and which we have seen previously, remember the 
one that related to Regiments and JP Morgan. 
“From our discussion the first point is still in place 
and JP Morgan is still providing the service and the 
fees as described above will still be valid.” 
So that would be the cross-currency swaps. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Yes.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The second point: 
10 
“Where JP Morgan had to lead and underwrite the 
syndicated loan is where JP Morgan failed to 
deliver.  The document is silent on the fees for this 
and it assumed that it would be included in the 
market-related costs of the funding.  If the fees for 
the lead and underwriting is not included in the 
market-related costs of the funding and there is a 
specific fee, is the one we want to pay Trillian, and 
that will also have to be disclosed to the ADC as an 
omission from the first submission.” 
20 
Because when JP Morgan was going to do the job they 
would just put an extra 10 basis points or whatever onto 
the spread and there would not be a specific fee for this 
exercise, that is what he says. 
“Does Trillian have the capacity and capability to 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 225 of 297 
 
underwrite the loan?” 
Can I stop you there?  Did Trillian have the capacity and 
capability to underwrite the loan? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No, not underwrite the loan. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, it could not underwrite. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Not underwrite, no. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And JP Morgan was going to be 
paid for underwriting, not just arranging. 
“Is Trillian going to provide the exact same services 
that JP Morgan was going to provide and why is 
10 
there is this potentially different than that of JP 
Morgan?” 
Or was Trillian going to provide the same services as JP 
Morgan or not? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Too different. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Obvious because it was going to 
do no underwriting. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So Transnet would have – well, 
no security of an underwriter in this arrangement. 
20 
“The 
Regiments 
fee 
was 
for 
the 
successful 
conclusion of the funding transaction.  I would 
interpret that being the hedging an loan based on 
how I am seeing Trillian being paid.  Is that not 
duplicate as to what was paid Regiments?” 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 226 of 297 
 
He is saying when you motivate at Regiments, he said part 
of what they are doing is hedging as well as raising and is 
not what you are paying Trillian now already included in 
what you had paid Regiments.  Is that not what he was 
saying? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I may be wrong, but is that not 
what  he was saying? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   It is not what I am saying.  No, it was 
– it is not a duplication. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay, so – now I know you are 
saying it is not a duplication. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But he was saying it was a 
duplication.   
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No, he was asking me questions 
whether [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Okay.   
“The footer in the document must reference the 
correct value of the loan.  If different, I will track 
20 
changes in the memos, the areas where you will 
have to provide further information.” 
And then at the end he says: 
“Seeing that we are only changing the existing 
supply for the loan on a previously approved 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 227 of 297 
 
confinement, I do not think that we have to restate 
the grounds for confinement and can thus delete the 
whole section on the grounds for confinement and 
confidentiality in the PPM.  Gary, please comment.” 
What is he saying in that last paragraph? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   He is talking procurement language 
here which I do not understand. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Is he not – well, let me see how 
I understand – let me put to you how I understand it and 
maybe that will elucidate things.  He is saying when we 
10 
motivated for Regiments to get their fee previously, we 
said we wanted a – sorry, where in that Regiments and JP 
Morgan on that original memorandum we said this needed 
to be a confinement appointment.  Although we are now 
getting rid of both Regiments and JP Morgan, we do not 
need to ask for the confinement of Trillian this time 
because we have already asked for confinement last time 
so we can choose who the confinement beneficiary is.  I 
think that is what he is saying.  Does that make sense to 
you? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Yes, I think so, it makes sense. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you go down to page 514? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, Mr Chaskalson, we are at five 
past five, we can still continue from my side but I want us 
to have the same idea in terms of how long we will be.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 228 of 297 
 
Yesterday we had been told that we should – the witness, 
the evening witness should be about two hours, we ended 
up, I think, with much more than that, we finished at 10 
p.m.  What is your estimate of how much more?  I think we 
might need to take a break now but I think at six or quarter 
past we might have to adjourn, from my side. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, I will certainly attempt to 
finish by six. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By six, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Or within an hour after our 
10 
resumption. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. Oh, okay, alright.  So maybe let us 
take a short break now, maybe ten minutes, and then we 
can resume and then continue. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that alright?  Okay, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, let’s proceed. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Page 514, your response to 
Eddie Thomas’s email and we may need to go back to that 
email on page 503 to understand your answers, so the first 
point was – that Eddie Thomas made, sorry – is these CPI 
swaps are still in place and J P Morgan still providing the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 229 of 297 
 
service and fees are prescribed above will still be valid, 
and your answer was yes that is correct.  Do you see that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just switch on your mic. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Sorry Chairperson, yes, I see it, yes 
indeed the first point is correct. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Then the second point was that 
the J P Morgan fees would not be disclosed but would be 
included within the cost of funding and Eddie Thomas had 
said the document is signed for the fees for this and it is 
assumed that it would be included in the market – oh sorry 
10 
– second point where J P Morgan had to lead and 
underwrite the syndicated loans where J P Morgan failed to 
deliver the document is signed on the fees for this and it is 
assumed it would be included in the market related cost of 
funding, and your response to that was the fees were not 
disclosed, this is why we are now disclosing the fees for 
Trillian, is that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, that closed is supposed to be 
20 
disclosed. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I think it was supposed to be 
disclosed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh ja, on the second bullet point. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes Chair, that is what Mr 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 230 of 297 
 
Ramosebudi concluded. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It was supposed to say disclosed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   Yes continue. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And then on the third bullet point 
you said if he fees for the lead and underwriting is not 
included in the market related costs of the funding there’s 
a specific fee, is the one we want to pay to Trillian then 
that will also have to be disclosed to the ADC as an 
admission from the first submission and I think your second 
bullet point covers the answer to that, would that be 
10 
correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Correct sir. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And your third bullet point – 
sorry his third question was, does Trillian have the 
capacity and capability to underwrite the loan, and your 
answer was, Trillian has the capacity and capability, was 
that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It was not entirely correct because 
...[indistinct – dropping voice] to underwrite …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, first do you confirm that, that’s the 
20 
answer you gave and that…[intervenes]. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That’s the answer I gave ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can talk about whether what you 
said is correct. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja that’s the answer I gave but I don’t 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 231 of 297 
 
think I captured the essence of the questions from him for 
…[indistinct – dropping voice].  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well can we agree that Trillian 
certainly 
didn’t 
have 
the 
capacity 
or 
capability 
to 
underwrite the loan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Underwrite the load, they didn’t have 
the capacity. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, and we know at that stage 
Trillian was little more than an idea in the head of Eric 
Wood.  Can we – so what did you think Trillian did have the 
10 
capacity and capability to do? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   They had the capacity to arrange for 
funding of that nature with us at management yes, not 
underwriting. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, who had that capacity? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Big banks they can have the capacity, 
but they were not willing to offer the capacity at the time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, big banks, certainly can do 
that but Trillian, who at Trillian had – who would have the 
capacity to engage…[intervenes]. 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI: You need a bank with a balance sheet 
to underwrite.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, and Trillian certainly didn’t 
have a balance sheet of a bank to underwrite. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 232 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But what capacity and capability 
did Trillian have? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   They had a Trillian to arrange for the 
Club loan type of transaction with various asset managers. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And as far as you were 
concerned the only person, you’d met at Trillian was Daniel 
Roy. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I met Daniel Roy. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And did he have the capacity, 
single headedly to arrange…[intervenes]. 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   When I look at the profile, they gave 
me, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, but who’d done the 
arrangement on this loan, who had actually done the 
arrangement on this loan as far as you were concerned? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The people that I worked with in the 
legislature was Eric Wood with Moselo and Ntswana. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, and they were all, at that 
stage part of Regiments, is that so? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Had you seen anybody from 
Trillian actually arranging this loan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   At the beginning when we dealing with 
this they were not there. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, they weren’t there, and the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 233 of 297 
 
arrangements were made by people, then at Regiments. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That’s precisely true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, so when you said Trillian 
has capacity and capability, why did you say that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That’s when I – after I’ve met Daniel 
Roy and he provided me with his file. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And you thought, one man, Mr 
Roy, could arrange a R12billion loan for Transnet? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I did not ask him, what the number of 
people that he worked with…[indistinct - dropping voice] 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But you do accept now, that your 
answer to the question, does Trillian have the capacity and 
capability to underwrite the loan was incorrect, they didn’t 
have the capacity? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That was not the information he gave 
me. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That was not the information he gave 
me. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, no the capacity and 
20 
capability to underwrite the loan, you never believed that 
they could underwrite the loan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I said to myself, Chairperson, I said 
this was not the intention of how to respond to this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one sec, I thought earlier on, 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 234 of 297 
 
you did say, that Trillian didn’t have the capacity and 
capability. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   To underwrite. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To underwrite. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did not have the capacity to 
underwrite. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Thomas’ next question is, is 
Trillian going to provide the exact same service that JP 
Morgan was going to provide and why is theirs potentially 
different from JP Morgan, and your answer to that was, 
Trillian will provide the same services, you see that on 
page 514, was Trillian going to provide the same services? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I’ve already stated in the above 
that, actually they don’t have the capacity, so they were 
not going to provide the same service. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, it’s two answers in a row 
that are both incorrect and both create the same incorrect 
impression, is that not correct – would you accept that, 
that both of those answers, Trillian has capacity and 
capability and Trillian will provide the same services were 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 235 of 297 
 
both wrong? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   At the time when I looked at this, I 
was not aware that it is like this but now I can see that I 
shouldn’t have written it that way. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, you should have said, no 
Trillian does not have the capacity and capability and no, 
Trillian will not be providing the same service? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I should have indicated that 
Trillian is going to give a different service than what JP 
Morgan was going to give. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, and it didn’t have the 
capacity and capability to provide the services that JP 
Morgan was going to provide? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The underwriting capacity. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, now on a loan of R12billion 
underwriting, I’d imagine, is quite important? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It is – it was quite important but at 
the time they were not willing to offer that balance sheet. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, they were not willing? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   To offer the balance sheet. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   JP Morgan was not willing to 
offer the balance sheet? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So, JP Morgan were not prepared 
to do the underwriting?  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 236 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Precisely. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Was 
that 
because 
they 
considered it too risky? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I think 
it 
was 
because 
of 
the 
concentration because they were doing the cross-currency 
swap on the CD below. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see, but Trillian, who were not 
going to underwrite at all were willing to come in and 
arrange, apparently? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  They didn’t have the requested 
10 
balance sheet to underwrite that much.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, they didn’t have – they 
didn’t have balance sheet to underwrite that much, yes, 
that is correct. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Because the precursor to the 
transaction to the Trillian transaction was Regiments which 
has 
already 
done 
a 
lot 
of 
work, 
so 
there 
was 
no 
requirement for the underwriting. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, was there any underwriting 
provided on this club loan? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No there was no underwriting 
provided. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let’s look at the next question 
from Mr Thomas and he said,  
“The 
Regiments 
fee 
was 
for 
the 
successful 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 237 of 297 
 
conclusion of the funding transaction, as I interpret 
that being the hedging and loan based on how I am 
seeing Trillian being paid, is that not duplicate to 
what was paid to Regiments”?   
So, he’s saying, are you not paying Trillian for 
something that you have already paid Regiments?  Your 
answer is, no duplication with Regiments and why is that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Because Regiments did the CDB loan 
and the advisory on the cost currency transaction, so this 
was a club loan for the R12billion. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see, and the last question we 
needn’t concern ourselves with because it just deals with 
amounts.  Can I take you to 517…[intervenes]? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Chaskalson, before you 
move away from page 514, Mr Ramosebudi, those two 
answers 
that 
you 
gave, 
that 
are 
not 
correct, 
as 
I 
understand the position this is not a case where, at that 
time, when you gave those answers you thought that 
Trillian did have capacity and capability and that Trillian 
would provide the same services but since then you have 
20 
discovered that they didn’t have, am I correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, you’re quite correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so how did it come about that you 
gave answers that were not in line with your knowledge of 
Trillian’s capability and the services that they would 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 238 of 297 
 
provide? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, Chairperson, it was not a 
question of trying to give a different answer because the 
issue was that Trillian was going to do this syndication of 
the club loan it was not about the underwriting because in 
the appointment of JP Morgan it was not exclusively 
saying, it’s an underwriting it was raising a billion dollar 
equivalent in rand and underwriting and syndication. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let’s take those answers, one at 
the time. The third bullet point, page 514 to the question 
10 
whether Trillian had the capacity and capability you said, 
Trillian has capacity and capability, based on what – on 
your previous answer to me, it seems to me that you 
should not have said that because that’s not what you 
believed to be the position, is that correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   the capacity I was mentioning here 
was not necessarily from a balance sheet point of view 
because I knew from day one, at the time that Trillian 
doesn’t have the sufficient balance sheet, the capacity was 
that they have the competencies and skill required for the 
20 
type of transaction that we want to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, that I know it was correct 
because a whole lot of work was already done, you know, 
as I said, prior to the changeover of Regiments and Trillian 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 239 of 297 
 
through the SD requirements, that work, already was done, 
so that capacity from a competency point of view, that was 
already achieved. So, that’s why I was casually saying it’s 
okay it’s the same service it’s the same capacity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, now, let’s take it – was it true, was 
it correct to respond to the question by saying, Trillian had 
capacity and capability, was its correct bearing in mind 
what the question was? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   To leave it at that level it’s not 
correct…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s not correct? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I should have expanded. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright and as you said, you 
are 
not 
just 
saying, 
it’s 
not 
correct 
because 
you, 
subsequently discovered that they did not have capacity 
but at that time you thought they had.  You knew at that 
time that they did not have capacity? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   From a balance sheet point of view, 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, which is what was required, isn’t it? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so my question is, how did it come 
about that you gave an answer that was not in accordance 
with your knowledge of their capacity and capability? 
MR 
RAMOSEBUDI: 
 
 
I’m 
saying, 
through 
myself 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 240 of 297 
 
Chairperson, that I should have expanded to say, they 
don’t have the sufficient – they don’t have the balance 
sheet for underwriting but they have capacity and the 
competencies to do the work, that is what I should have 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How did it come about that you didn’t 
add that qualification to make sure that it accorded with 
your knowledge, how did that come about that you did not 
add that qualification? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I think it was just a casual mishap 
10 
that I left it and not that it was intentional. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then on the next one, Trillian will 
provide the same services, how did that come about that 
you said Trillian would provide the same services in 
circumstances where, as I understand your evidence, you 
knew at the time that Trillian would not provide the same 
services? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I just – I applied the same – I can say 
I applied the same argument, you know, from the above. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm, okay, Mr Chaskalson? 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you Chair.  Can we go to 
page 517 and that’s an extract from the minutes of the 
Board acquisitions and disposals Committee on 1 October 
which resolved the following: 
“The appointment of Trillian to replace JP Morgan 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 241 of 297 
 
as lead manager of the US Dollar 1billion ZAR 
equivalent club loan which was previously confined 
to JP Morgan.  The termination of JP Morgan on the 
ZAR syndication loan and delegation to the Group 
Chief 
Executive 
to 
approve 
and 
sign 
all 
the 
documentation relating to this confinement”. 
 
So, the Board acquisition and disposals Committee, 
on 1 October, gave the appointment to Trillian.  Let’s look 
at the minutes, the narrative of those minutes it starts at 
page 518.  First, we see who was present there, Mr Stan 
10 
Shane was the Chairperson, Ms Elsie Mabaso was a 
member, Mr ZA Nagdi [?] another member and Mr Seleke 
who was a member.  Mr Seleke, I understand at one stage, 
became DG of Public Enterprises, are you aware of that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I’m aware. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Nagdi, do you know of him? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I can’t recall. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, I think some interesting 
evidence about Mr Nagdi in the forthcoming weeks, Mr 
Mabaso or Ms Mabaso? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I remember her. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And what about Mr SD Shane? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I remember him. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Who was he? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I remember him. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 242 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did he disclose any relationship 
with Trillian that you recall were you aware that he had any 
relationship with Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I don’t know that, when I came to the 
meeting it was already …[intervenes]. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see…[intervenes]. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [Indistinct – dropping voice]. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Was that in your encounters with 
Mr Shane, did he ever disclose that he had a relationship 
with Trillian? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Unfortunately, I never interacted with 
Board members. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see, he never mentioned, for 
instance, that he had a Trillian email address? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I never interacted with Board 
members Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see and if we see partial 
attendance under paragraph 1.3 down at the bottom, three 
from the bottom, Mr Piri Ramosebudi, Group Treasurer.  
So, you were at the meeting, at least in part? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:     I came in to present that 
submission. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
Well 
let’s 
look 
at 
that 
submission, let’s go to 526 and page 526, paragraph 5.8, 
“Change in lead manager for ZAR club loan, Mr 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 243 of 297 
 
Ramosebudi 
joined 
the 
meeting 
at 
17h15.  
Management 
took 
the 
Committee 
through 
the 
submission as contained in the meeting pack”, 
 
When they say management, would that be you?  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   “The submission was taken as  
read, the purpose of this submission was to request 
the Committee to approve the following.  The 
appointment of Trillian in place of JP Morgan as 
lead manager of the USD 1billion rand equivalent 
10 
club loan which was previously confined to JP 
Morgan. The termination of JP Morgan on the ZAR 
syndication loan, delegation of authority to the GCE 
to 
approve 
all 
documentation 
relating 
to 
this 
confinement. 
 
Management 
indicated 
that 
the 
company had signed the mandate letter and term 
sheet for the USD 2.5billion 15-year amortising loan 
from China Development Bank to finance 232 and 
359 locomotives from China North Railways and 
China South Railways, respectively. The Committee 
20 
noted 
that 
the 
company 
decided 
to 
split 
the 
transaction into two tranches, namely the USD 
1.5billion tranche and the standby facility of USD 
1billion tranche.  JP Morgan was appointed through 
a confinement approved by the Committee to lead 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 244 of 297 
 
the ZAR club loan as a substitute for the USD 
1billion standby facility to lower the overall cost of 
the transaction and to avoid forex exposure and the 
need for cross-currency swops. The Committee 
notes that Trillian is a black owned company”, 
 
Can I just stop there, you presented this, have you 
seen any evidence that Trillian was a black owned 
company? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson I can’t recall me 
presenting in that fashion. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, you can’t recall you 
presenting that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja because there’s a submission that 
was submitted so that’s what I was taking them through, so 
I can’t recall this is what was written there. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You’re not sure that, that was 
written on the submission? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I cannot recall that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You can’t recall? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can you recall whether you would have 
20 
said it even if it wasn’t in the submission or not, or that 
you may have said it even thought it might not have been 
in the written submission? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, Chairperson, I present things that 
I’ve written down or things that I’ve gone through in the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 245 of 297 
 
submission, so I can’t – unless we have that submission 
here that will tell you this is what is…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course you may have had no 
reference in the written submission to Trillian being a black 
owned company but if somebody in the meeting asked the 
question, you may have – you might have given information 
that was not in the written submission, I would imagine, if 
you had knowledge of what they were asking, I take it? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I know I present things that I have 
knowledge of and I – because I might have read it through 
10 
the document, that’s what I would have done but where I’m 
sitting now, I can’t recollect that this is what I said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and you don’t know whether you 
knew at that time, you knew Trillian to be a black owned 
company, you don’t remember how your knowledge was as 
to whether it was a black owned company? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The fact that Eddie Thomas, who I 
interacted with in the previous email was responsible for 
procurement, he could have verified that information if it 
was in the submission itself. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you don’t know whether – what you 
knew and what you didn’t know at the time? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   You know, when we draft submissions, 
Chairperson, there’s a whole lot of other people that help, 
you know, contribute and if you look at it from this draft, I 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 246 of 297 
 
can see it’s myself, himself, Eddie Thomas and Gary Peter 
and …[indistinct – dropping voice] who signed off.  So, 
Eddie Thomas would have contributed from a procurement 
perspective in – for the information that he presented 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So, we should speak to Mr 
Thomas about the BEE credentials of Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja, that’s it, he can comfortably speak 
on the procurement issues and BEE issues. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you.  There are some 
things that you can speak on though, let’s get to those.   
“Trillian is the black owned company and supply and 
development partner of Regiments Capital, the 
funding 
advisor 
on 
the 
1064 
locomotives 
transaction. 
 
Trillian 
was 
found 
capable 
of 
delivering on the required club loan deal at more 
comparable price than the JP Morgan proposal 
resulting in a saving of approximately 820million 
with 10% fees being payable to Trillian for the 
20 
transaction 82million”. 
 
So, let me ask you two questions, you’ll recall that 
Trillian’s appointment – sorry Regiments appointment on 
the 1064 locomotives transaction was something that the 
BADC had already considered and had put a budget on. It 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 247 of 297 
 
used to be 90 – remember we looked at it earlier I think it 
was 95 then it jumped up by another 166 on the China 
Development Bank loan which facilitated after – with that 
about 147million going to Albertine and then on to Sahara 
but that mandate had a number on it, it was – they’d been 
increased to 265million that is what Transnet had allocated 
for that advisory function.  On what basis, was it now 
possible to find another 82million for that mandate? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, and I think I’ve already 
indicated 
in 
the 
previous 
question 
that, 
I 
cannot 
10 
competently discuss or respond on procurement members 
or procurement processes at this point in time because I’m 
not fully conversant with them.  Should there be – or had 
an opportunity to procure something it was always referred 
to the procurement and then they will deal with the 
procurement issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I understand Mr Chaskalson’s 
question not to be a procurement question, if I can put it 
that way, I understand it to be a financial one in the sense 
that he is saying, how – what would have been the basis to 
20 
find another R82million, Mr Chaskalson you must tell me if 
I misunderstood you? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It’s not a procurement issue to 
say, can you do this, can you not do this, just say what 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 248 of 297 
 
would have been the basis for finding the R82million in 
addition – another R82million at that time? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, Mr Chaskalson is talking 
about an extension of contract with Regiments to 200 
numbers, a 35 number and this is a payment to Trillian 
which is not linked to that extension contract. So, I just 
don’t understand why he is leaning to the two transactions. 
MR CHASKALSON SC:   As I understand, the way Transnet 
budgets in relation to its procurement, is in relation to any 
given 
procurement 
there 
is 
a 
budget 
given 
to 
the 
10 
procurement as a whole which will include the primary 
contractor and the supplier development partner and that 
budget, I was told, or we saw previously, had initially been 
99 
then 
it 
jumped 
to 
265, 
I 
think 
it 
was, 
have 
I 
misunderstood how Transnet budgets? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I don’t know because I was not part of 
the 
budgeting 
process 
around 
contractors, 
main 
contractors, and sub-contractors, that I have no clue.  
That’s why, in this transaction Eddie Thomas was brought 
in to deal with those specific issues. 
20 
MR 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Maybe 
we’ll 
have 
some 
conversations with Mr Thomas but there is something about 
which you very much did know about.  Look at that last 
phrase, 
“Trillian was found capable of delivering on the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 249 of 297 
 
required loan deal at a more comparable price than 
the JP Morgan proposal resulting in a saving of 
approximately 
820million 
with 
10% 
fees 
being 
payable to Trillian for the transaction 82million”, 
 
Now where on earth does that figure, 120million 
come from, you presented this? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, I presented this Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Do you remember what your last 
memo in relation to savings and apples and oranges was? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I remember the draft, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So let me take you back there 11 
September.  It is at page 491.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am at 491. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Do you see that table – do you 
remember that table? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I remember the table. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And there are two tables on the top 
half of the page.  The one says Savings achieved by 
securing club loan at 68 basis points cheaper than the 
equivalent dollar funding from CDB.  It says Savings in ZAR 
20 
478 million which then becomes 502 million I am – how does 
478 becomes 502? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Chairperson you know it is difficult to 
discuss a draft because if you look at this this was my first 
draft that I sent to Gary’s office and from Gary’s office there 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 250 of 297 
 
is a lot of people who have contributed into this draft.  So as 
is in front of me I see a draft so I cannot comparably say this 
draft is what has gone to the ADC for approval. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I am sure it did not go to the ADC 
for approval.  But if you remember the genesis of this draft 
Regiments gave you a draft that compared this new club loan 
with the JP Morgan deal and found a saving of about 763 
million and you said that is apples and oranges.  Rather 
compare this new deal with the China Development Bank 
deal.  Do you remember that? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I remember that yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So you wanted apples compared 
with apples? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I remember that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And when the apples came back 
compared with apples from Regiments the saving was 502 
million? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes I remember that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And then when we go to apples 
against oranges we see 763 million.  But nowhere do we see 
20 
820 million. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  It was – that as a draft.  That was a 
draft which was still to be worked and the final draft is not 
what I see here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes I know the final draft is not 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 251 of 297 
 
what you see here but we know that you motivated a saving 
of 820 million.  Do you have any recollection of how you 
motivated that 820 million? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  There was a final draft which was 
worked out and that final draft I think the people who 
contributed to it you know they worked out you know the 
numbers properly. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And who were those people then? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I know I worked with my team in the 
Treasury and then another person that I worked with here for 
10 
the Development of this document is – is Eddie and then 
there was Helen Walsh who worked on this document 
actually.  Helen Walsh worked on the final document and 
then there was a lady also in finance who worked on these 
documents called – I forget but her surname is Chukudu. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry Chukudu? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Ja.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And as you stand now you just do 
not know how this figure of 820 million arose? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  And the final document which is – but if 
20 
you look at it it is very different from this one.  This is the 
final document Chair that I had.  It is the one that went to 
the ADC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is it a document that we do not have in 
the bundle? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 252 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I think it is a document you do not have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  So I am sure Mr Chaskalson 
would love to get a copy. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Could I have a look at it? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:    I will share with you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you very much.  Can I just 
glance at it and then I – you keep it and I will make – I will…  
Chair I wonder if we could have copies made of this 
document for yourself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So that when I ask the questions 
you can at least see it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  In the meantime I will move on so 
that we do not waste time. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes that is fine. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But we will come back to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So we will come back to how 50.2 
became 82 but let us then see what happened after this 
20 
meeting.  On – this meeting was on 1 October – can we go to 
545?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say 545? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  545 Chair yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 253 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  545? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  545.  And there on 16 November 
you will see an email from yourself to yourself attaching a 
document called Trillian Mandate.  And if you go to the next 
page 546 you will see a draft of a mandate to Trillian and it 
runs for I think seven pages.  And if you go to 560 you will 
see the signed version of it on 18 November 2015 – well 
sorry I am just-  it is late in the day.  Can I go back to 16 
November do you recall sending this draft mandate to 
yourself on 16 November?  Do you re – yes well that is the 
10 
first question.  Do you accept that you – that this email 
where you attach the draft mandate send it to yourself was 
something that you did on 16 November? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I cannot recall. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Cannot recall? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Did you draft the draft mandate? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So who drafted the draft mandate? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I think it was picked for me. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry you think it was? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  This was picked – this was – this they 
drafted themselves.  I shared the – I shared the generic 
mandate. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Sorry you shared? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 254 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  A generic mandate. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  A generic mandate.  So this would 
have come from Transnet Legal? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It would have come… 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No, no this one was discussed between 
Transnet and Trillian. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  It is a document that you have in 
draft form.  Let us go to page 546 it says Print on Trillian 
headed note paper. And you have the draft.  How did – how 
10 
would a draft that says Print on Trillian headed note paper 
get to you? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Chaskalson did you say we 
should go to 506? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Oh sorry 546 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  546. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  546.  How would a draft which 
says Print on Trillian headed note paper get to you? 
MR 
RAMOSEBUDI: 
 
Because 
we 
deal 
with 
various 
institutions.  They do not want to deviate from the standard 
20 
clauses that a client has so you share them with them – a 
draft term sheet or a draft legal document or a draft facility 
agreement to put on their letterhead if they feel confident 
that it capture – it captures their interest. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And who would the relevant 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 255 of 297 
 
institution be here who would be concerned about? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  We deal with – we have dealt with 
[00:09:26] self Chairperson.  We are a number of counter 
parties in our – in either syndicated loans or club loans or bi-
lateral loan or facility agreements you know that I have dealt 
with most institutions.  And we exchange and share facility 
agreements or draft facility agreements or draft bi-lateral 
loan agreements to the extent that satisfies me and them 
then it gets concluded by the legals. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just so that I understand.  The mandate 
10 
would have been Transnet’s mandate to Trillian is it not?  
The mandate that we talk about. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  It could be Transnet’s mandate, it could 
be a draft mandate that we have used for the different 
clients. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes but what I am talking about 
ultimately. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Ultimately. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The mandate would – that we talking about 
would have been Transnet’s mandate to Trillian. 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  It will be a mandate between Trillian and 
Transnet ultimately. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Yes but somebody must give a 
mandate. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes you are right. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 256 of 297 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and that would be Transnet. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No you could give any. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  We could give any. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well who was going to be – I mean was 
Trillian not going to be rendering a service or doing work for 
Transnet and Transnet therefore had to say this is the scope 
of your mandate. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Ja they… 
CHAIRPERSON:  If I employ you as my financial advisor I 
10 
decide the scope of your mandate.  If I employ Mr 
Chaskalson as my advocate and I say deal with this criminal 
matter his mandate falls within the criminal matter he cannot 
start dealing with my commercial matters.  I decide the 
scope of the mandate.  And he can say if he – if he is happy 
with it that is fine if he is not happy with it I will go and look 
for somebody who will be happy with it. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No the scope of the mandate is what 
would have been agreed which should be reflected in the 
mandate itself. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but the principle as it were is it not the 
principle who says this is what I want you to do?  Then you 
can say I am happy with that or you might say Well I would 
like you to give me more – bigger scope of the mandate for 
reason ABCD and then the principle says okay I will give you 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 257 of 297 
 
more or no I am not giving you more. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No the scope is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or is there some… 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Sorry Chairperson that I talk over you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no, no I am saying is there 
something I am missing? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No the scope would have been agreed 
up front. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  But the nature of the mandate could be 
10 
anywhere – coming from anywhere.  You can from a – from 
the supplier or the service or it could be from the client who 
is will be receiving the service.  But ultimately we need to 
negotiate the terms and – of that mandate to be agreed upon 
and sign off. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson continue. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair.  Well I am not 
going to push this further but can I ask you then to go down 
to page 562?  And there we see the signed version of the 
mandate signed by Siyabonga Gama, Gary Peter and Daniel 
20 
Roy for Trillian on 18 November 2015.  Is this what was then 
the contract between Transnet and Trillian? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is the signed contract between 
Transnet and Trillian. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can I take you to page 568.  That 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 258 of 297 
 
signed contract is dated 18 November 2015.  Trillian wasted 
very little time on the same day they issued an invoice to 
Transnet for R82 million plus VAT coming to R93 480 000.00.  
The signatures on that invoice that I see do you identify 
them as Gary Peter and Siyabonga Gama? 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what page is that Mr? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  At 568. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can you identify those two 
signatures as Gary Peter and Siyabonga Gama? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So those – those would have been 
the people inside Transnet who authorised payment of this 
invoice? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And if we go to 569 we see a 
payment advice issued the following day 19 November 2015 
to pay Trillian Asset Management R93 480 000.00 is it again 
Gary Peter and Siyabonga Gama whose signatures we see 
authorising that?  Mr Ramosebudi. 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is their signatures yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  That is their signatures.   Is it the 
practice of Transnet usually to pay on 1 day – 1 day after 
invoice? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I would not know Chairperson the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 259 of 297 
 
arrangement between the client or the supplier and the 
client.  I – these things they had – they have happened you 
know outside my area of payment. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I see.  Well the evidence will show 
that the amount of R93 480 was paid into Trillians bank 
account on 4 December 2015.  Are you aware that four days 
later 80% of that amount being R74 784 was transferred to 
Albertime? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am not aware Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And you were not aware – you are 
10 
not aware now and you were not aware then? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I was not aware then and I am just 
coming to be aware now from this from the evidence leader 
Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Now can you think of any 
reason why – did Albertime play any role whatsoever in the 
club loan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Chairperson that is beyond the – my 
comprehension in terms of who was paid out of the payment 
that went to Trillian.  I did not know that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Well 
what 
Mr 
Chaskalson 
seeks 
to 
establish is whether to your knowledge Albertime had any 
role to play in regard to this transaction. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No they did not have a role to play in – 
with me directly. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 260 of 297 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Had you encountered Albertime at 
all in? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No I have never encountered Albertime. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Nobody mentioned Albertime to 
you at the time? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  You mentioned the name yesterday and 
I started seeing him from your 10.64 Directive. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And Mr Kuban Moodley did anyone 
mention his name because? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I started seeing the name from the 
media and then you mentioned the details here as from 
yesterday. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  But at the time nobody mentioned 
his name. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No I never heard of him at the time. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  We have to move I am afraid to 
one more of these spinning transactions and for that can I 
take you to page 570? And let us just recap a little bit before 
we get to 570.   
20 
 
We start off with Transnet having a rand base liability 
in relation to the purchase of locomotives.  Transnet then 
changes 2.5 billion of that rand based liability into a dollar 
based liability with the China Development Bank and in the 
process 189 million goes to Regiments Capital, 78% of which 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 261 of 297 
 
immediately passed on to Albertime who in turn transfer that 
in almost the entire amount to Sahara Computers. 
 
Then we have Transnet deciding that after all they 
want to turn some of their dollar liability back into a rand 
liability and a club loan gets arranged.  Initially that was 
going to JP Morgan then it became Regiments and eventually 
it becomes Trillian who at that stage seems to be Daniel Roy 
in terms of interaction with Transnet and for that Trillian get 
paid inclusive of VAT R93 480.000 to turn 1 billion dollars 
worth of loan exposure into the equivalent rand exposure 
10 
and within a couple of days 80% of the 93 million goes to 
Albertime. 
 
We now have a situation where there is a R12 billion 
exposure on the club loan.  Mr Ramosebudi was that a fixed 
or a floating exposure? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  This was a floating exposure. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Right.  And early in December 
bearing in mind that the ink was barely dry on the Trillian 
invoice for R93 million from 18 November for the club loan 
someone got the idea of actually swapping the interest rate 
20 
exposure on the club loan from floating to fixed.  And 
whoever that someone was told Danie Smit at Transnet and 
do you know who – can you tell the Chair who Danie Smit is? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Chairperson Danie Smit was one of the 
persons working in Treasury he was responsible for an area 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 262 of 297 
 
in Treasury called Risk Management and Compliance. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Can I ask you to go to page 570?   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am at 570 Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And there you will see that on 2 
December Danie Smit sent an email to you and to Gary Peter 
in relation to the interest rate risk on the R12 billion club 
loan.  Do you recall – oh sorry the narrative is: 
“Hi Gary and Phetolo my humble opinion on the interest rate 
risk exposure of the club loan.  Kind regards Danie” 
 
Do you recall receiving that email? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I cannot recall. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Well maybe if you read the 
memorandum it will refresh your mind.  It is drafted in your 
name to go to Gary Peter and it explains why Danie Smit 
thinks it would be a very bad idea to swap interest – floating 
interest on the club loan to fixed interest with an interest 
rate swap.  Let us look at the conclusion at 572? 
“Conclusion it is recommended that the club 
loan not be switched to a fixed rate exposure 
by means of an interest swap due to the 
20 
following: 
If there was a definite need to fix the rate 
during finalisation of the club loan the loan 
should have been dealt as fixed as any swap 
will create an amount of volatility in the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 263 of 297 
 
income 
statement 
due 
to 
fair 
value 
movements which could be minimised by the 
application of hedge accounting.” 
 
So can I – can I just put to you my understanding of 
what Danie Smit is saying there. 
 
If we thought we needed fixed when we were raising 
the club loan we should have raised fixed on the club loan 
not floating.  Is that not what he is saying? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I am not too sure of that Chairperson I 
think Danie is just simply saying he is not – he is not 
10 
recommending that … 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  No I do not want you to express a 
view on whether Danie was right or wrong but I just want us 
to understand what Danie is saying.  So is he saying in the 
first instance if we want it fixed for the club loan we should 
have raised fixed on the club loan and not floating.  Is that 
not what he is saying? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No that is true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Second point he says: 
“Interest rate swaps will use massive credit 
20 
lines from banks which is not that freely 
available over a fifteen year tenure and 
these lines are required to hedge forex 
related exposures due to MDS requirements.” 
He is saying: 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 264 of 297 
 
“If we do this interest rate swap we are going 
to tie up a whole lot – a big proportion of the 
credit lines that we need.” 
 
That is what he is saying is it not?  I am not asking 
you to express an opinion on whether it is right or wrong. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  This one he says yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Then he says: 
“Swaps will come at a cost which need to be 
determined in the market.” 
It is going to cost us to do these swaps.  Do you remember 
10 
what it ultimately did cost us to do these swaps?  Do you 
remember? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Come again. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Do you remember he says swaps 
will come at a cost which need to be determined in the 
market. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is what he says here. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes and do you remember what the 
cost ultimately turned out to be? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No I do not – I cannot remember. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  If I were to say to you R229 million 
would you be able to contradict me? 
MR 
RAMOSEBUDI: 
 
That 
is 
the 
number 
you 
saw 
Chairperson.  I did not have that exposure. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  I see.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 265 of 297 
 
“Liquidity for the 12 billion will have to be 
tested in the market.  There is currently a 
gap of around 200 basis points between the 
cost of a floating rate loan and the indicative 
cost to fix and based on the forecast of VER 
and the additional pressure the cost of 
swapping to fix will create on the cash 
interest cover ratio.  It is not recommended 
to swap the club loan from floating to fixed.” 
What is he saying there? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  He says the differential between the 
fixed and the floating rate is 200 basis points.  It is 2%. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is what he says. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  And that is going to put – the extra 
2% is going to put pressure on the cash interest cover ratios. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  [Talking over one another] cash interest 
cover ratio. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  That is what it says ja. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  So let us look at what happens.  
Gary Peter first responds.  Go to page – can you go to page 
577?  577.  Gary Peters response to this memo was 
“Thanks 
Danie 
it 
is 
well 
written 
and 
I 
understand the logic.  Phetolo are you in 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 266 of 297 
 
agreement that we do not enter into the 
swaps?” 
Do you recall receiving this from Gary Peter? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I see it here ja so it means it came to 
me. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Maybe this will refresh your 
memory.  Can you go to page 578?  This is an email from 
you to Eric Wood.  It forwards Gary Peter’s email and it 
says: 
“I need to sort this one out.” 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  True. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  What were you saying to Eric 
Wood? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I think subsequent to that I got a call 
from – from Eric Wood to say that Danie is not cooperating 
on what he was requested to do. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  Was Eric Wood going to be 
the one who was going to be paid R229 million if this 
transaction went through? 
MR 
RAMOSEBUDI: 
 
Regiments 
was 
working 
on 
the 
20 
transaction. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Yes.  And he said Danie is not 
cooperating and you said I need to sort this one out. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Precisely true. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Why did you say I need to sort this 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 267 of 297 
 
one out? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  As the head of the function I cannot you 
know allow somebody in my function or in my area not to be 
happy of something that needs to be done.  So I need to 
understand the reason why – the reason why he was not 
happy about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry can I ask you to repeat that 
answer but face this side I do not – I did not hear properly. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Sorry Chairperson.  I said that is true I 
wanted to make sure that I resolve the issues between Eric 
10 
and Danie so that I can – we can have a common ground on 
the expectation that needed to be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But or maybe I should let you Mr 
Chaskalson deal with the – what – what Eric Wood meant by 
saying Mr Danie Smit was not cooperating or do you want me 
to do that? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:  Thank you Chair I am – I am – it… 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did he mean by saying Mr Danie Smit 
was not cooperating? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  I think if I can recollect well because 
20 
Danie and Eric were communicating about the cash flow 
profile that needed to be swapped at the time.  And there 
was a - probably whatever Eric requested from Danie at the 
time Danie was not happy about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well obviously Eric would maybe wanted 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 268 of 297 
 
the swap.  Did he not want the swap? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  No he wanted a cash flow profile to do 
the swap.  Because you cannot do a swap without having the 
cash flow profile.  You need to have the cash flow profile to 
then be able to then model out what the interest rate profile 
is going to be.  What are the cash flow profile going to be, 
what are the interest rate is going to be derived from the 
[00:29:22] that we are using. So that is what I think they had 
an issue between the two of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did you get to understand exactly what 
10 
the nature of Mr Smit’s non-cooperation was as far as Eric 
Wood was concerned? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  Yes Chairperson which is [00:29:44] it 
into this memo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was it – what was the nature of his 
non-cooperation? 
 MR RAMOSEBUDI:  He did not want to give Eric the 
profiles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:  And then when he did not want to give 
20 
him the profiles or the cash flow profile in this memo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But what he was saying in this 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 269 of 297 
 
memo has got nothing to do with cash flow profiles.  It says 
the swap is a very bad idea.  We do not need to do this.  It is 
going to cost us.  It is going to put stress on our interest 
ratio.  It is bad for a range of different reasons.   
 
And when Gary Peter read it, he agreed.  So it has 
nothing to do with whether or not he is giving cash flow 
profiles to Mr Wood. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, I am giving you the 
genesis of the issues, why I said I will sort it out because I 
wanted to go and talk to Daniel about it.   
10 
 
Let me give you the Genesis of the – we saw it March 
time.  In one occasion - I cannot remember exactly well - in 
one occasion, I was asked about... 
 
Every quarter we present a risk management report to 
board, the sub-committee which was Risk Committee.  I 
forgot the exact name.   
 
And in that presentation, we did proffer our exposures in 
interest rate, extend rate, commodities because Transnet is 
exposed to commodities.   
 
And the question arose at one of the meetings, which I 
20 
cannot recall ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is the Audit and Risk Committee, I 
suppose? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes.  The question arise:  What is your 
interest rate strategy?  You know.  They were having a risk 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 270 of 297 
 
management strategy in detail.  And through that, the CFO, 
at the time was Gary Peter, who requested the Phetolo:  Can 
you do me a risk management strategy?  You know.   
 
Seeing that we have raised a whole lot of funding in 14 
rates and fixed rates.  And when I looked at one of the 
submissions, when there was a recommendation for the 
funding of the locomotive.   
 
There was a submission which details that we need to 
move our rand from wherever it was to something 40 to 60 
fees 40.  And we were not there.  We were sitting around a 
10 
very low level of around 20% of 14.  I mean fixed.   
 
A whole lot of funding was in 14.  So we developed a 
document to deal with the management strategy.   
 
Chairperson, as the head of the function.  With over 30 
employees, I cannot sit and write a document that deals with 
Treasury.  I have got respective heads.  I empowered them.   
 
And one of those was Danie.  And Danie had over 40 
years with Transnet and he was 12 years older than me.  I do 
not think I would be instructing him to do things that he was 
not willing to do.   
20 
 
When I got to Danie, I involved him because he is the 
real of expertise.  While this – my - also – my head of 
expertise that is – because he is the head of that function.   
 
I gave him the duty to work on the interest rate strategy.  
He developed it in the document.  And in the document, we 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 271 of 297 
 
presented it to Gary.  I think it also went to Risk and 
Management Committee.   
 
If he himself, Danie, recommended to do an interest rate 
swaps.  I did not.  He did it.  So sorting out was – Danie, is 
there any other thing that we could do other than...?   
 
Because we have developed it.  We have missed...  It 
means, if we do not do it, we have mislead the board and 
that is not what I wanted to do.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Ramosebudi, I have to put to 
10 
you that that answer is simply false.  Can I take you to page 
580? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And there is an email that you 
sent to Gary Peter at 12:15.  And I just want to put that in 
perspective.  Your one-liner to Eric Wood:  Need to sort this 
one out.  It was 12:32.  So 18 minutes later, you sent an 
email to Gary Smit(sic) of the...  Sorry, Gary Peter.  Copying 
in Danie Smit. 
“Hi Gary.  I guess this is true if the club loan is the 
20 
only transaction Transnet is doing for the entire 
MDS 
period 
and 
that 
the 
volatile 
economic 
environment ahead of us with higher inflationary 
environment, it is important to managed the interest 
rate expectations going forward to create that 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 272 of 297 
 
certainty in Transnet’s interest expense for the 
management of the CIC. 
It 
is, 
therefore, 
prudent 
in 
a 
high-inflation 
environment and volatile exchange rate to fix most 
of the commitment for the same reasons. 
This will help us to reduce the number of variables 
to manage the declining levels. 
I am sorry you received the conflicting message 
from Danie, who did not consult with me on this. 
As Head of Treasury, I am concerned with the 
10 
exchange rate and the inflation expectations and it 
is prudent to manage this risk appropriately. 
A proper submission is on the way for approval.” 
 
So that is what you wrote to Gary.  Do you accept that is 
what you wrote to Gary? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That is what I wrote to Gary.  Yes, I 
accept. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And what you were saying is, as 
Head of Treasury:  I need an interest swap.  Is that not 
right? 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Because of what we have already 
promised that we need to do.  We need to hedge our 
exposures 
to 
interest 
rate 
in 
a 
prosperity 
swap 
– 
transparency risk. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But if you did not want a floating 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 273 of 297 
 
exposure.  Why had you incurred a R 12 billion floating 
exposure the previous month, which you are now swapping 
to a fixed exposure at R 229 million cost that was going to 
be paid to Regiments? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It is known Chairperson in the market 
that is very difficult to get funding in a fixed rate in the 
market over the similar sizes that we have raised(?) in the 
market.   
 
You know, even from a personal point of view, just to go 
and raise a loan in the market, I mean the model is bought. 
10 
It do not give you a fixed rate.  They give you 14 rate.   
 
Because the banks, the fund managers, their easy 
funding rate is a 14 rate.  It is easy for them to expand that 
to a client than a fixed rate because what it calls for, is that 
they must go and had it without in appropriate counter party 
on the other side.   
 
So what they could want to do is to avoid that so that 
they can pass the raising costs from one entity to the other 
without being involved in that transaction.  And that is what 
happens in the market.   
20 
 
I have indicated, I have over 25 year in this market.  I 
have worked for National Treasury.  I did the same 
transaction.   
 
I have worked for the Development Bank.  I have worked 
for National Housing Finance.  I worked for ABSA, SAA and 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 274 of 297 
 
Transnet on two occasions.  And those are the transactions 
that we have been doing.  They are not peculiar.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But do you...  What do you say to 
Mr Danie Smit’s point in that email that he sent where he 
said if Transnet wanted a fixed rate, interest rate, that 
should have been done at the beginning?  If I remember 
correctly.   
 
The email that, I think, Gary Peter responded to by 
saying it is well-written.  It is like I can understand the logic.  
Remember, the point that Danie Smit made in that email? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja, I remember some points.  And some 
points that he raised were around - a swap comes at a cost.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  You did not respond to him or did 
you? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I did not respond to him.   
CHAIRPERSON:   You did? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I did not respond to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, he made a certain point and he was 
against this proposal. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Gary Peter agreed with him.  So my 
question is.  How do you meet his point or how did you meet 
his point? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, the issues that he was raising here.  
He was raising this issue of swap, will come at a cost.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 275 of 297 
 
Whether you raise a fixed rate today, the bank will price you 
from a 14 rate to a fixed rate.  They will add the cost. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   So that cost will be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The gap of 200 basis points between 
the cost of a floating rate and fixed rate, that is what is in 
the bucket.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   And you – in actual fact, what we have 
10 
achieved on an average – I do not think we have achieved 
over 200 basis points.  They have been less than 200 basis 
points.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson, I do not know whether 
Mr Ramosebudi answered your much earlier question, when 
you said, the explanation he gave was false.  And then you 
referred him to his email. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, I am just mentioning that and I am 
leaving it to you to – if you want to go back to it or you want 
20 
to move on.  He did not – he does not seem to remember 
that he... 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, I put it to him that the 
explanation about Danie not sending cash flow values to Eric 
Wood and problems of that nature, was simply false.  I do 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 276 of 297 
 
not propose to take it further. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Ramosebudi, do you know what 
these swaps had cost Transnet as of today? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I have – I am more than two years 
out of Transnet.  I do not know. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, at the point that you have 
left Transnet, was Transnet trying to get out of the swaps? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, Transnet was not trying to get out 
of the swaps. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It certainly is now.  These swaps 
has cost Transnet more than one and a half billion rands.  
Can you contradict that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I do not know.  I have never checked, 
you know, the valuations of those swaps. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, you ...[intervenes]  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I have never seen the valuations of 
those swaps. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  So, if I put it to you that 
these swaps are more than R 1.5 billion underwater from the 
20 
Transnet’s side at this point.  Can you – you cannot 
contradict that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I cannot contradict because the interest 
rate has gone down now, you know.  There was an official 
cutting of interest rate which is not necessarily what was 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 277 of 297 
 
happening in the market to, except to take care of the 
challenges that we were facing from a Covid point of view. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  Well, let us just finish off 
here.  If we go to page 582.  If Danie Smit was less resolute 
than we would hope him to be.  There was an email back to 
you on 2 December, 13:40. 
“Hi, Phetolo, I am really sorry that I created a 
conflicting message.  This was never the intention.  
My understanding from you earlier was to do the 
memo which I need to give to you and Gary. 
10 
My sincere apologies.  I do not want to a situation 
where the two of us are not working together. 
I want to cooperate with you all the time. 
Please let us discuss how I can change the memo to 
ensure that you are comfortable to take to Gary. 
I will also apologised to Gary.  I have no problem 
with that.  I will come and discuss when you are 
available.” 
 
Well, do you recall receiving that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I cannot recall receiving that but I know 
20 
me and Danie were there.  We had a good relationship.  He 
might have write – read it back to me.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I see.  And then if we go down to 
584, we see a new memorandum that says exactly the 
opposite of what Danie Smit had intended to say.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 278 of 297 
 
 
And the purpose is – the purpose of this memorandum is 
to obtain approval from the acting Group Chief Financial 
Officer to hedge the interest rates exposures from a float for 
fixed basis for the amount of R 12 billion to instruct 
Regiments Capital as per the 1064 Locomotives’ mandate.  
To 
execute 
the 
hedges 
with 
Transnet’s 
approved 
counterparts.   
 
And 1.3, the execution cost of hedges by Regiments 
Capital will be all inclusive in the rate of the interest swap.  
So I can I put to you what was going to happen?   
10 
 
You were now recommending that interest swaps take 
place and that the cost of those swaps in terms of the fee to 
Regiments would be hidden in the rate of the interest rate 
swaps.   
 
So there would not be a payment to Regiments that 
anyone at Transnet would see.  All that would happen is that 
the spread on the swap would go up by 20 basis points at 
Transnet’s expense.  Is that what was being suggested 
there? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   That is how pricing of these types of 
20 
transactions – of instruments happen in the market. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  But in terms of procurement, 
you will recall that this 1060 Locomotive’s mandate that I 
think initially started out under twenty million and then grew 
and grew and became ninety.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 279 of 297 
 
 
And then had a 166 added onto it for the China 
Development Bank to become 265 and then had another 
ninety – eighty-two added onto it to accommodate Trillian’s 
82 million bonanza on the club loan.   
 
Was now going to have to accommodate the present 
value of a 20 basis point fee to Regiments Capital if that 
went to the board at the BADC.   
 
It would have to be 229 million added to the 265 plus 82 
that we had seen already.  Do you think you would have got 
that passed the BADC? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I am asking you a question.  
Would you – what do you think the BADC, even that BADC, 
would have approved another 229 million on the 1064 
Locomotives’ mandate for Regiments Capital? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Because this system Chairperson, they 
are done under that mandate.  So it means that mandate is 
approved.  The management of risk ...[indistinct] that 
emanate from the funding of 1064. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, but if you had to pay 
20 
229 million out, the BADC would have to look at it and would 
have to put their names to another 229 million to Regiments.  
Do you think that - was there a risk that they would not have 
done that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 280 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is a question. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   To the extent that the motivation talks 
of the cost and benefit of the transaction.  I guess the 
decision would depend on what value or cost are derived 
from – what value is derived from the cost that is going to be 
spend from that type of a transaction.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Did this ever go to the BADC? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The 1064 mandate approval, I think it 
went to the BADC.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I am not talking about the 1064 
10 
mandate approval.  I am talking about this payment to 
Regiments that was going to have a present value of 
229 million. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I guess it was covered in that mandate 
for the funding and the risk management. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   No, Mr Ramosebudi, your answer 
is incorrect because we have seen what the mandate was 
from our previous visit to the BADC.  Prior to Trillian, that 
mandate had been fixed at 265 and there had to be a special 
decision of the BADC to get it up to 265. 
20 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The scope of work was covered in the 
mandate. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, but the money was not.  Was 
it? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   The scope of work was covered in the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 281 of 297 
 
mandate in the mandate Chairperson.  So the specific 
transactions in terms of how they are done – because they 
are not paid out of the budget of Transnet’s point of view.   
 
And not, it is because they wanted to be that way but it 
is the way of the nature of the instrument price is in the 
market.  It is not covered in the budget from a procurement 
point of view but from an interest cost line at the budget 
level. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, I want to put to you that this 
particular 
payment 
Regiments 
Capital 
or 
which 
was 
10 
supposed to be Regiments Capital was certainly not covered 
by any budget in 1064.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Chairperson, that line budget of 
interest expense, is the component of what funding were 
going to be done in the market and how it is going to change 
the profile of the revenue stream and it has to be captured 
appropriately in that.   
 
And 
these 
instruments 
or 
this 
funding 
or 
this 
integrating(?) instruments and the funding associated with it, 
has been part of what we call the project fact(?) in the 
20 
company, led by the CFO.   
 
Each and every individual was making sure that we – 
each and every one manages their budget lines in terms of 
what they are doing to make sure that we meet our cost – 
the cash in this cover ratio.   
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 282 of 297 
 
 
We meet our – the levels and we make sure that we do 
not breach the conveyance with financial institutions where 
we have borrowed money from.   
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
So 
the 
first 
two 
swaps 
Mr Ramosebudi were with Nedbank as Transnet’s direct 
counterparty.  Are you aware that Nedbank had back-to-back 
swaps in relation to these swaps? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Regiments were doing the transactions 
and I just know that the counterparty between – with 
Transnet is Nedbank. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So you did not know that Nedbank 
had mirror image swaps with another party? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   And that is what happens in the market, 
Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   They have done so. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But can I tell you the peculiarity of 
this mirror image swap?  Not quite a mirror image but it was 
three basis points stayed with Nedbank.  This mirror – this 
back-to-back was with the Transnet’s second defined benefit 
20 
fund.  Do you know who that fund is? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I know the fund Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And do you know who was 
representing the Transnet second to fund benefit fund on this 
transaction? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 283 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   If I recall Chairperson, I think it was 
Shane(?). 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, you are right.  Chairperson, it 
was Shane(?).  But who were the fund managers who did 
these back-to-back swaps? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It is Regiments Fund Managers. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Regiments Fund Managers.  You 
are correct.  Yes.  So Regiments were representing the one 
party on the side of the back-to-back swap.  And Regiments 
were also representing Transnet.   
10 
 
Do you know that Regiments Fund Managers took in a 
course of the four swaps 229 million out of the pension fund 
to pay for this fee that was to go to Regiments Capital, 
according to Transnet. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I do not know. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You did not know that? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, I can tell you that they did.  
And that they have settled litigation last year where they 
were forced to pay that back as well as a bigger amount 
20 
which they had misappropriated in the course of bond and 
transactions around these swaps. 
 
But for now, I want to raise one last...  Well, no, one 
second last point with you.  Can you go to page 589? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Maybe before we go there Chairperson.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 284 of 297 
 
May I ask a question?  Because I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Before he goes to the next page? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   May I ask you a question? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want some clarification? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Ja, just clarification. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  What clarification would you like? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Is – when a transaction is done... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Should there not be a fee?  Because I 
am just wondering whether there is a certain percentage of a 
fee that was supposed to be add(?)?  Because I am 
questioning 
myself 
whether 
this 
transaction 
that 
was 
happening, is the fee – was it not supposed to be add or was 
it a relatively number(?) that was supposed to be add which 
was not that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, you were involved and none of 
us were involved.   
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Oh.  No, no. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
[laughs] 
 
I 
think... 
 
Continue 
Mr 
Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Well, let me ask you another 
question.  Are you aware that this fee that your memo 
thought 
was 
going 
to 
go 
to 
Regiments 
Capital, 
the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 285 of 297 
 
229 million present value, was actually paid in its entirety to 
Trillian in Alberton and not to Regiments Capital? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I do not know that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   You did not know of it? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I ask you to go to page 589? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Do you recognise the letter on 
page 589? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, I do recognise it. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It is a letter that you wrote to 
Moss Brickman of Nedbank. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, I did. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And it says: 
“In terms of the interest swap transactions entered 
into with Nedbank and/or around 8 March 2016...” 
 
Would that be the second tranche, is for tranches of 
interest swaps? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Let me make it easier for 
20 
you...[intervenes]  
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   No, I remember this. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  So it is the second tranche 
interest swaps? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 286 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
“Transnet is aware that these trades were priced at 
a peer mid-market rate of approximately 11.42% 
NASCQ. 
Our team is further aware and agree that these 
trades were executed at a level of 12.37 NASCQ 
which results in a difference of 95 basis points over 
mid-market value.” 
 
Can you explain to the Chair what that means? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, Chair.  If you recall, on Danie’s 
10 
memo, he said the interest rate swap will come at a cost of 
200 basis points.  And I said:  No, we have achieve less than 
200 basis points.  So it means we did well.   
 
So now the interest rate swap has come at a cost of 95 
basis points, 0.95% instead of 2%.  So in this case, it means 
we relatively achieved better than what at the time Danie 
was expecting from the market focus.  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   What is mid-market value? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Mid-market value is – you take the off 
on the big price, the two – you divide by two and then you 
20 
find the mid-price. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  And your price is 95 basis 
points worse than that mid-market price, is it not? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Which...  worse is a difficult name – 
word to use.  It came above 95 basis points to the mid-
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 287 of 297 
 
market level.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Why do you think Moss Brickman 
wanted you to write a letter like this? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I do not know. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can I put it to you that he wanted 
a letter like this to protect him because people would ask 
questions about a swap that was priced at 95 basis point 
over mid-market value and he wanted confirmation that 
Transnet was aware that this was the case and agreed to it. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   He did not share that with me. 
10 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   We may have that opportunity.  
Mr Ramosebudi, in...  Oh, we have got to get back to 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   We are at quarter to seven.  [laughs] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, we have one... just this 
document that is coming. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   I must say, it certainly has been a 
long day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
20 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And Mr Ramosebudi, here is your 
submission that you presented to the board and the 
explanation for the 82 million fee appears – in fact, it is 
going to page 4, though it is not legible on my copy.  It is at 
paragraph 27.  Can you go to paragraph 27? 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 288 of 297 
 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe, so that we do not forget 
Mr Chaskalson.  Maybe we should admit this and put it at 
least in the bundle. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If it please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before we forget. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We can still make holes but let us admit it.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And I forget where we are in terms 
of annexures Chair.  This will be BB four point something but 
10 
I am not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Ja, maybe – will your junior 
check then?  When you are finished with the questions, they 
can tell you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Can you go to paragraph 27, 
Mr Ramosebudi? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I am on paragraph 27, Mr Chaskalson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And here is the motivation.  The – 
20 
it says: 
“Saving achieved by securing club loan at 52.5 basis 
points including cost, cheaper than the equivalent 
Dollar funding from China Development Bank.” 
 
And you have said that is 418 million.  And if I recall 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 289 of 297 
 
correctly, that is the apples and apples comparison, is it not? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  And then as the apples and 
oranges calculation underneath which is: 
“Saving achieved by securing club loan at a hundred 
basis 
points 
including 
costs 
cheaper 
than 
the 
equivalent Dollar funding from JP Morgan, which is 
now being inflated to 796 million and it has also had 
some fees thrown in at 24 million.” 
 
Do you know how it got to 796 million on this number? 
10 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I cannot remember.  I was not working 
on this submission. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But you do remember it is an 
inappropriate number because it is apples and oranges? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Mr Ramosebudi? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   Yes, from the previous submission, yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes.  But it is that number that is 
used after the addition of 24 million in fees.  Do you know 
why 24 million in fees was added here?  Was it not the very 
20 
point by JP Morgan that their fees were going to be included 
in the spread of their of their rate? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   I cannot recall it. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   If you go back to those 
memoranda and Eddie Thomas’ question, I think you will find 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 290 of 297 
 
that JP Morgan’s fees were going to be included in the 
spread.  It was going to be a cost or a cost of financing or 
cost of funding. 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   It could not have worked.   
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   The JP Morgan? 
MR RAMOSEBUDI:   There was no way that that fee could 
have been included in the rate because funding and fees 
were coming from different sources.  Funding was going to 
be syndicated from somebody, some other people, the fee 
that JP Morgan was charging was from somewhere else.  
10 
So when you pay A you cannot pay simultaneously with B.  
So this was going to be an upfront payment of 24 million 
and those were going to be payment as per the schedule of 
payment until the loan matures.  It could not have worked. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   It could not have worked.  But, 
in any event, it was an apples and oranges comparison, 
was it not? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   That is what the supplier, you know, 
brought to us.  They said no, you do not forget that. 
ADV 
CHASKALSON 
SC: 
 
 
Sorry, 
that 
is 
what 
the 
20 
supplier…? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   They said do not forget what we save 
you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Ja. 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 291 of 297 
 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But you are there to look after 
Transnet, not to look after the supplier, are you not? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Precisely. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   But the numbers talks. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yet but the number that. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I could not [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes but the number that you said 
was the correct comparison …[intervenes] 
10 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   They argued with me together with 
the team that I was presenting this, through yourself, 
Chairperson. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes but when we talked earlier 
about apples and apples and apples and oranges, the 
number that would have been appropriate would have been 
the 418 million. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   I think, Chairperson, you understood 
my position where I was.  I came with a point of comparing 
apples with apples but ultimately they were not happy with 
20 
what I presented and those people that were working with 
me, we concluded this thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think Mr Chaskalson wants to – 
effectively what he is saying is, earlier you had said this is 
comparing apples with oranges, how come you now have 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 292 of 297 
 
no problem with comparing apples with oranges?  Mr 
Chaskalson, do I represent …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Absolutely, Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the question. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   You are right, Chairperson, and it is 
precisely the position I took initially.  You have seen when 
they provided they came up with 776 or 763 million, I said 
it cannot work, where I know we need to move from a point 
of comparing apples with apples but then they say but 
these are the elements that we have saved you for and I 
10 
was not alone on this particular matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So does that mean that because of what 
they said you are prepared to compare apples with oranges 
instead of sticking to comparing apples with apples? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   No.  My position was – from the 
beginning was to compare apples with apples and then I 
changed that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but Mr Chaskalson says what you 
have on this document, which I think you said was your 
final document, reflects in this regard a comparison 
20 
comparing apples with oranges.  Are you saying that is not 
the case?  I thought you conceded that. 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   That we achieved because I did that.  
I came with that position, I achieved that but this memo 
was not compiled by me alone and the discussion between 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 293 of 297 
 
Regiments and Trillian and Transnet at the time was not – 
because it was not driven from my point alone.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Chaskalson? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, I cannot take that point 
any further but I do what to make the observation that 
nowhere in this document is anything about the black 
owned status of Trillian mentioned.  Can I assume then 
that you would not have told the BADC that Trillian was 
black owned? 
MR 
RAMOSEBODI: 
 
 
As 
I 
said 
in 
the 
beginning, 
10 
Chairperson, I said I presented what was written in the 
document.  If it was not in the document it means I did not 
present that. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   So we will have to ask one of 
those BADC members where that came from.  Chair, I am 
right at the end, I think in fairness to Mr Ramosebodi, I do 
have to put some of the adverse submissions that I will be 
making at the end. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Ja. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   And Mr Ramosebodi, I do not 
20 
enjoy doing this but I have to put to you that I will be 
submitting at the end of the Commission that you were 
guilty of corruption in your dealings with Nedbank and 
ACSA, in your dealings – sorry, take that back, I keep on – 
I must apologise to Nedbank for that – in your dealings 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 294 of 297 
 
with Regiments at ACSA, in your dealing with Regiments at 
SAA 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
tender 
for 
working 
capital 
management and at Transnet, Mr Ramosebodi, I have to 
put to you that you were grossly negligent in relation – you 
were at best grossly negligent in relation to your conduct 
relating to the funding for the 1064 locomotives.  Do you 
have any response to that? 
MR RAMOSEBODI:   Chairperson, I do not think so.  I 
absolutely do not think so.  My submission and my 
responses are very clear.  They could have made no 
10 
negligence whatsoever at Transnet.  My delegation of 
authority stipulate exactly my limits in terms of what I can 
and what I cannot do.  The risk management policy that I 
was following for any transaction that we were doing, I 
follow it for the team.  For all the transactions that I have 
done, 
I 
did 
not 
breach 
my 
responsibilities 
and 
accountabilities.  I do not understand the conclusions or 
the inferences from what had been presenting.   
ACSA, I really fail to understand why there was a 
corrupt relationship between me and Regiments.  I actually 
20 
am baffled.  Where I am sitting today I am baffled now.  
Regiments came into ACSA in 2006/2007, I came in ACSA 
in 2007.  When they wanted to do some work re the 
mandate that they purport that they had, I myself said I do 
not have that capacity to do that with there.  Came in the 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 295 of 297 
 
FD on the particular date which I could remember till today.  
They came in in the office of the FD, it was a Tuesday of 
April after the Monday of Easter Monday, I was coming 
from Limpopo.  My secretary – I had a meeting with my FD 
at ten o’clock.  When I was supposed to have a meeting 
with the FD at ten o’clock and then she tells me that they 
have been meeting with people from Treasury.  I asked – I 
went to the office and then the secretary says she has a 
meeting with these people.  It was Regiments.  And I said 
okay, I will wait when they are finished.   
10 
I went to the office and then I asked why do you 
have meetings with people when we have got a time for ten 
o’clock without telling me that do not worry, we will 
postpone your meeting.  She said that is none of – it is 
none of our business and we have got issues with you on 
these particular issues and you will cooperate with those 
people. 
How do I, from that type of a relationship, do I have 
a corrupt relationship with Regiments?  The fact that I did 
not respond on questions does necessarily mean that I am 
20 
guilty or charged, not at all. 
Similar to SAA – I cannot go on Chairperson, I think 
we have the whole day here today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair, I have no 
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 296 of 297 
 
further questions and thank for saying that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  I see your junior 
wants to give you something there. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Sorry, Chair.  The final 
submission can be VV4.4, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The document that Mr Ramosebodi has 
handed up will be admitted as EXHIBIT VV? 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   4. 
CHAIRPERSON:   4.  And then your team …[intervenes] 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   4.4, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   4.4.  Your team will then put it in the 
right place and paginate it appropriately.  Okay, alright. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, counsel for the witness, did you 
intend re-examining or not really? 
ADV NAIDOO:   I did not intend to, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, thank you.  Mr Ramosebodi, 
thank you very much for availing yourself.  I am going to 
excuse you now.  Should a need arise for us to ask you to 
come back we will ask you but hopefully it will not be 
20 
necessary.  Thank you very much, you are now excused.  
Thank you.  Thank you to everybody including the witness 
counsel for – cooperation for us to sit till late.  Thank you 
to you, Mr Chaskalson and your team and to everybody for 
being able to work till this time.  Thank you very much.  
27 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 314 
 
Page 297 of 297 
 
Next week - this is just for the benefit of the public, next 
week on Monday I will hear Mr Gordhan, will be cross-
examined by counsel for Mr Moyane and then I will hear 
some witnesses connected with SARS for most of next 
week.  I think on Friday, Mr Chaskalson, there is a witness 
that is connected with money flows but will be led by Ms 
Hofmeyr. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Chair, no, but if maybe you and I 
can have this conversation… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, that will be alright.  Okay, no, 
10 
that is fine, we can talk about it at the right time, I just 
thought I did not want to misrepresent that all the evidence 
I will be hearing is SARS-related in case on one day it is 
not SARS-related. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   Yes, Chair, I would happily take 
Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV CHASKALSON SC:   But I need to speak to you about 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is alright.  Okay, we are 
20 
going to adjourn for the day.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 30 NOVEMBER 2020 
