 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
20 MAY 2021 
 
 
DAY 399 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 269 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
20 MAY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 3 of 269 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 20 MAY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The witness Stephen has been 
sworn in chambers and is ready to give evidence under an 
order of protected identity issued by yourself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. So I just want to … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Stephen are you there? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  The media is reminded  
STEVEN:  I am here Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The media is reminded and the public are 
reminded that I issued an order in respect of this witness’ 
evidence aimed at protecting his identity.  I will not repeat 
the order everybody knows the substance of the order.  
Okay.  Good morning once again Stephen. 
STEVEN:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you once again for availing yourself 
to assist the commission.  We appreciate it very much.   
20 
STEVEN:  It is a pleasure Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You have already taken the oath so 
Mr Pretorius can start. 
STEVEN:  Thank you Chair.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC: Stephen do you have a bundle before 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 4 of 269 
 
you after the divider YY7?  Bundle SSA02. 
STEVEN:  Advocate I have it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Bundle SSA2(a) what appears on the 
face of it to be an affidavit attested to you by yourself.  Do 
you have that? 
STEVEN:  Yes I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  The affidavit appears at 
YY7 SSA page 302 would you look at page 302 please; is 
that your affidavit as the first page? 
STEVEN:  Yes it is my affidavit Advocate Pretorius. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And if you go to page 314 whose 
signature is that at the top of the page? 
STEVEN:  It is my signature Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. And as far as you are 
concerned are the contents of this affidavit true and 
correct? 
STEVEN:  Yes that is so. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Let us go to page 302 
please you state there in the introductory portion what your 
current position and current duties are.  We need not detail 
20 
those at present but you have a history of intelligence 
activities with the Intelligence arm of the ANC Mkhonto 
Wesizwe is that correct? 
STEVEN:  That is correct Chairperson – Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and in 1995 is it correct that you 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 5 of 269 
 
were absorbed into the New Intelligence Structure of South 
Africa? 
STEVEN:  That is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And if we can go on to page 10 the 
Chair can read the background set out in the other 
paragraphs but in paragraph 10 it says you were appointing 
– appointed as acting Deputy Director General Domestic 
Intelligence, is that correct in 2015?  Let me put it this way 
the allegations in paragraph 10 are they correct? Can you 
hear me Stephen?  Stephen can you unmute please.  In 
10 
other words switch your microphone on. 
STEVEN:  Yes I can. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And leave it on. 
STEVEN:  I did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
STEVEN:   I did.  I did.  I did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright so if you would look at 
paragraph 10 it talks of an appointment in 2015 and are the 
details in paragraph 10 correct? 
STEVEN:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Let us then go to the 
substance of your affidavit and paragraph. We know that in 
2015 the State Of Nation Address was set to occur at 19H00 
on Thursday the 12 t h of February 2015.  Do you recall that? 
STEVEN:  I recall that Advocate. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 6 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And what notice did the SSA 
receive regarding the potential for disruption of that event? 
STEVEN:  What we received at the time was that one 
political party in Parliament met the former President to 
address the joint sitting of Parliament.  Our task was to 
ensure that the President of the Republic is able to address 
the Joint Sitting of Parliament.  That is what we know – 
knew at the time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Were there concerns about the 
safety of the President? 
10 
STEVEN:  Yes there were concerns about the safety of the 
President. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. And in paragraph 18… 
STEVEN:  Because of the… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry I interrupted you. 
STEVEN:  I am saying because of what was then generally 
known in public that certain political organisations in 
Parliament were not happy that the President was going to 
address the Joint Sitting. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. In paragraph 18 you set out 
20 
the steps taken to deal with this threat.  What were those 
steps?  These are all matters of public knowledge now I 
might add.  But what were those steps? Paragraph 18. 
STEVEN:  The steps that we had to put in place as the 
National Joints because when we deal with events of such 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 7 of 269 
 
magnitudes – magnitude it may not necessarily be the State 
of the Nation but even events such as elections we work 
within the auspices of the National Joints.  So in terms of 
the decision that we took as a National Joint based on the 
threat assessment at the time ordinarily when there is a 
sitting of that nature the SONA there are role players. The 
military is part of the Nat Joints SSA, it is part of the Nat 
Joints and the lead department is SAPS who then becomes 
the Chair of the Nat Joints.  SSA becomes the co-chair as 
well as the defence. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
STEVEN:  So … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Just for the record before you go on. 
STEVEN:  (inaudible) 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry to interrupt you just for 
clarity sake Nat Joints – N-a-t J-o-i-n-t-s appears to be a 
joint committee representing various entities in which the 
SSA plays a leading role, is that correct? 
STEVEN:  Yes but it is not SSA that plays a leading role.  It 
is the SAPS that is the Chair.  The two departments 
20 
meaning SSA and the Defence are co-chairs of the National 
Joint Intelligence structure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
STEVEN:  In brief Nat Joints. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Okay.   
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 8 of 269 
 
STEVEN:  So as a rule when the sitting of Parliament we 
normally ask our colleagues in the Defence from the Joint 
perspective that they must ensure that the – there is no fly 
zone – the Parliament precinct becomes a no fly zone.  But 
below a certain radius the military cannot enforce the flying 
of smaller devices such as drones that is where the SSA 
then came in to deploy the device that we deployed which 
eventually jammed the signals in Parliament. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So a jammer was deployed to 
prevent a drone from being operated at a low altitude at the 
10 
State of Nation Address, is that correct? 
STEVEN:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  What do you say in 
paragraph 19 then? 
STEVEN:  The – this is correct it is true that the jamming 
device was to be placed outside the chambers in a position 
where the former President was supposed to take the final 
salute before he enters the chamber.  Then after that the 
jammer was supposed to be removed from sight because 
that is the area which was identified for that purpose.  But 
20 
what then happened a decision was taken without the 
knowledge of the Joint chiefs by Mr Thulani Dlomo.  The 
jammer ended up being deployed inside the chamber in the 
gallery where the visitors are allowed to access Parliament 
on that day.  That is what happened that day 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 9 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What was the effect of putting the 
jammer inside Parliament? 
STEVEN:  The effect would have meant that cell phones 
were not going to be able to function on that day if that 
jamming device was placed inside at the chamber.  Because 
the jamming device is – is operating on a radio signal. So it 
interferes with other radio signal and the cell phone works 
on the basis of that signal – the radio signals.  So it 
confuses the – the cell phone device – the GSM system and 
as a result of that cell phones would not function.  That was 
10 
the effect of placing the jammer inside the chamber. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 And 
would 
that 
have 
as 
a 
consequent – consequence that there could be no filming or 
sound 
recordings 
transmitted 
from 
the 
Parliamentary 
chamber to the public as to what was happening within 
Parliament. 
STEVEN:  No – no because the jamming device does not 
interfere with the terrestrial lines.  The billing of what is 
happening in Parliament is based on terrestrial lines.  So 
there would not have been any interference in terms of the 
20 
jamming device and the billing of the activities inside the 
chamber. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes but sorry I did not make it clear.  
It would prevent cell phone images being transmitted. 
STEVEN:  Yes. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 10 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
STEVEN:  That is correct.  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did this event or series of events 
particularly the use of the jamming device in Parliament to 
block cell phone transmissions raise concern amongst the 
public and particularly the South African National Editor’s 
Forum? 
STEVEN:  That is correct.  Not only the SANAF I think 
South Africans as a whole were not happy with what 
happened on that day. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  What did SANAF do?  You 
deal with that in paragraph22. 
STEVEN:  SANAF is the – SANAF is the organ – is the 
organisation 
that 
represents 
journalists. 
 
I 
think 
it 
represents editors.  That is where they are feeling dumb.  I 
would like to think that it is the board that represents them 
in the affairs that may affect journalism or journalists as it 
were. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right what did they do? Did they 
react to the series of events? 
20 
STEVEN:  Yes they did they filed – they actually challenged 
this issue at court in Cape Town meaning they challenged 
the State Security that we – we did something that was 
untoward and we did not have a mandate to place such a 
device in the chamber.  So we were challenged. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 11 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.   
STEVEN:  In other words we were being sued. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 21 you say that the 
basis 
of 
the 
South 
African 
National 
Editor’s 
Forum 
challenge was an assertion that the public had a right to  
know what was happening in Parliament and the… 
STEVEN:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The jamming device interfered with 
the exercise of that right.  
STEVEN:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Another issue you say – is that 
correct? 
STEVEN:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say in paragraph 21 another 
issue was that television viewers of the Parliamentary 
broadcast were deprived of the right to see visuals of the 
EFF MP’s being ejected from the chamber as the camera 
remained focussed on the Speaker of Parliament and the 
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces.  Is that 
correct? 
20 
STEVEN:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  So what happened then 
consequent to the launching by SANAF of legal proceedings 
after the 12 t h of February 2015 in relation to yourself. 
STEVEN:  (Inaudible) 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 12 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 23. 
STEVEN:  After that there was an outcry – after the 
jamming then Minister Mahlobo instructed me to meet with 
him at his official residence in Tshwane.  I did go to his 
house.  I was in the company of my colleague who was 
assisting me in terms of moving me from point A to point B.  
We arrived at Minister Mahlobo’s residence.  I entered the 
house alone.  I found him inside the house but at the gate – 
maybe let me first describe what the situation was like at 
the official residence of Mr Mahlobo. 
10 
 
Every time I am requested to or instructed to come 
to Mr Mahlobo’s house – Minister Mahlobo’s house his 
protectors would be outside the residence at the gate to 
usher me in because inside the yard there would have been 
police who are securing the official residence.  I would not 
be made to sign any document in terms of indicating my 
presence in the official residence.  I would walk straight into 
the house.   
 
As you get into the house you would turn right.  On 
the right side of the house that is where this meeting – the 
20 
meeting that I had with Mr Mahlobo took place.  It is a 
lounge.  I think that lounge is basically meant for these 
meetings because every time I go there that would be the 
space we sit for discussions. 
 
That is what happened on that day when I was called 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 13 of 269 
 
after the journey. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Where is this residence? 
STEVEN:  So it must have been a week –  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry. 
STEVEN:  The residence is in – the residence is in Pretoria. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay. 
STEVEN:  Next to Waterkloof. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right if you would go on please; 
what happened? 
STEVEN:  Then whoever entered the house Mr Mahlobo 
10 
said to me hey Boetie – Boetie is brother I will talk in Zulu 
but I will translate.  (Speaking in vernacular).   Meaning he 
is going to connect me to is – to use a colloquial language 
Tsotsi’s.  These Tsotsi’s are judges.  So I was anxious that 
okay for a first time I would be able to talk to people of that 
calibre – judges. 
 
So after we had our own small talk the two 
gentlemen were ushered into the house.  There was a black 
guy and a white guy who looked a bit older.  I think he must 
have been in his 50’s – late 50’s and a black guy shorter I 
20 
think not that – very tall.  He must be what 1.65 in terms of 
height.  So – and very dark without spectacles.  The white 
judge also did – or the person who was introduced as a 
judge – white judge did not have spectacles but the white 
guy was a bit nervous whereas the black person who was 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 14 of 269 
 
introduced 
as 
Mgwenya 
[?] 
Mr 
Mgwenya. 
 
I 
cannot 
remember the white judge’s name or the person who 
Mahlobo said is a judge – the white one as well as this guy 
– the black guy.  The black guy I remember because he said 
he is Mgwenya.   
What made me to remember the name even now is 
because when you look at this person who was introduced 
as Mgwenya he does not look like a person who have come 
from KwaZulu Natal or Eastern Cape or Mpumalanga 
because Nguni people would have certain features as a 
10 
South African I would be able to distinguish that.  But this 
person Mgwenya seems to be a person who may have come 
from Bushbuckridge or Limpopo Province.  That is why I 
could remember the surname.   
But 
I 
was 
not 
convinced 
that 
this 
person 
is 
Mgwenya.  It must have been a code name given to me by 
Minister Mahlobo.  Then after… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry before you go on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja maybe before you ask the next 
question Mr Pretorius can you let me ask this.  Stephen you 
20 
gave a translation for (speaking in vernacular) as my 
Tsotsi’s. 
 
I 
think 
that 
translation 
is 
not 
necessarily 
inaccurate but do you also agree that can be translated as 
criminals? 
STEVEN:  Yes, yes it can be that if you broaden the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 15 of 269 
 
translation Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And maybe you might be able to say 
this – to say something about this.  Would it be true that 
sometimes in the township people use that term for people 
that – they have some admiration for – they use it in a 
positive sense even though it is a bad term because if you 
are a (speaking in vernacular) it means you are involved in 
crime.  Is that your experience or is that something you do 
not know? 
STEVEN:  For me coming from a township as well if I say 
10 
(speaking in vernacular) nickname mean it is my friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
STEVEN:  And they mean there is people that we do things 
together. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
STEVEN:  And are comfortable with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no I think I … 
STEVEN:  That is what I would think. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think you are right.  Sometimes it is 
used in a positive sense by the person who is using the 
20 
term but it is normal meaning is that of somebody involved 
in crime.  Is that right? 
STEVEN:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay no that is fine.  I just wanted 
to 
make 
sure 
whether 
you 
have 
that 
experience 
of 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 16 of 269 
 
understanding it is in that way.  Mr Pretorius you may 
proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Can you tell Stephen from the 
manner in which the term was used and the context within 
which it was used what meaning the term had for Mr 
Mahlobo? 
STEVEN:  I would like to believe that the term was used in 
the context of what these two gentlemen were going to do 
for us because Mr Mahlobo said we are in trouble we would 
need to find a way to win this case against us in – on what 
10 
transpired in Cape Town as we are being challenged by 
SANAF. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright let us go back again. 
STEVEN:  So he then went on to say  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry I would like to… 
STEVEN:  I missed that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I did not want to interrupt you but I 
wanted to take you back to paragraph 25. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you do that Mr Pretorius I just 
once – want to go back to the term just so that I know 
20 
whether 
Stephen 
understands 
it 
in 
the 
same 
way 
I 
understand it.  Now Stephen you have said that you – you 
live in the township or you have lived in the township.  You 
know the use of the term Inja in the township? 
STEVEN:  Yes Chairperson. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 17 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Inja is the same. 
STEVEN:  (inaudible) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja Inja is a dog is it not and ordinarily 
nobody would like to be called a dog is it not? 
STEVEN:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But in the township can it be used in a 
certain positive way among certain people? 
STEVEN:  You can only use it to people that you are 
comfortable with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
10 
STEVEN:  Because a dog cannot be associated with a 
person. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And.. 
STEVEN:  So the context is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And when it is used the people who 
are referred to as my dog Injayane they would also not take 
offence would they? 
STEVEN:  No they would not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
STEVEN:  They would not take offence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright. Continue Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well perhaps just finally for clarity 
Stephen in case it becomes a matter of dispute later when 
referring to the two persons present in the manner he did.  
Do you think Mr Mahlobo was intending to insult them or 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 18 of 269 
 
address them in a friendly collegial way? 
STEVEN:  I think the – it was more the collegial way than 
insulting them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  If I may take you … 
STEVEN:  But my view was that the white (inaudible) 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry. 
STEVEN:  Yes.  No I was saying he – the white guys did not 
seem to be comfortable he was a bit jittery. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
STEVEN:  Whereas the black person Mgwenya was more 
10 
relaxed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Let us go back to before the 
two men arrived in the lounge.  When you arrived in the 
lounge as I understand it you were alone with Minister 
Mahlobo, is that correct? 
STEVEN:  That is correct – that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you go back to paragraph 25 
because we have left out some of your evidence. Did 
Minister Mahlobo explain to you what the purpose of your 
visit to him was? 
20 
STEVEN:  On the phone he did not.  I only got to know 
when I was in the house. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What did he tell you? 
STEVEN:  That the purpose was really – the purpose was to 
discuss what transpired in Parliament and to deal with the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 19 of 269 
 
legal challenge because we needed to get this thing 
managed through the help of lawyers.  That is what I got to 
know when I was in the house.  But when I was still on the 
road I did not know why I was being called. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right in paragraph 26 you talk about 
your relationship with Minister Mahlobo and what you knew 
of his activities.  What – what did you know? 
STEVEN:  I enjoyed a very cordial relationship with Minister 
Mahlobo. 
1. Because of the position that I occupied in my acting 
10 
capacity.  I was managing operational work of the 
agency meaning collection work.  I would not want to 
go into details.   
And I would be requested from time to time to assist 
with 
operational 
work 
especially 
when 
there 
were 
challenges in the country. What comes to mind is that 
during the elections I think it was in 20 – local government 
elections there were problems in Tshwane and then we were 
asked to prepare a presentation to brief Lithulu House as to 
what was the problems  Were we going to have a safe – or 
20 
safer elections so I would prepare such presentations 
together with our analysis at headquarters.   
Then he would then say he wants me to accompany 
him so that I can do the presentation.  So I would do those 
presentations of course there were – they would have been 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 20 of 269 
 
sanctioned by SSA.   
On certain occasions he would say to me hey you 
must come to my house when I am in Parliament – in Cape 
Town.  When I get to the house I would not really why I am 
being invited to the house at such general talk things that 
are not even operational.   
So that was the type of cordial relationship I had with the 
Minister Mahlobo.  On occasion when there would be 
something that he wants to be checked maybe there is 
somebody whose phone is being taken by a criminal he 
10 
would say hey Boetie can you assist to locate the phone?  
Boetie is a brother.  He used to call me Boetie can you 
locate – help locate the phone because this phone is 
[indistinct – word cut] So I would then work with the service 
provider to assist us to check where the phone is and then 
– he would then use that information, maybe to ask the 
police to assist whoever might have lost the phone.  So, I 
would be working with Minister Mahlobo on some of those 
issues. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Apart from those specific incidents.  
20 
Did you ever come to learn of Mr Mahlobo’s activities or 
conduct in relation to operations? 
STEVEN:   Yes, yes.  I came to know about them.  I would 
cite one example but there are many.  If the Commissioner 
allows me, I will go to two or three.  One.  We visited a 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 21 of 269 
 
place called Eersterus.  The President was going to have 
to engage with the communities there because there were 
complaints or grievances from communities ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said Eersterus? 
STEVEN:   One of the visits was...  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Did you say Eersterus?  
Eersterus, yes.  Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
STEVEN:   So when I got there – when the communities 
were complaining about the government not building them 
10 
RDP Houses since they have been there.  There are no 
RDP 
Houses. 
 
Amongst 
other 
complaints, 
was 
that 
Eersterus is invested with drug dealing and they even knew 
the houses where drugs would be.   
 
So the police were not doing anything about 
that.  So I sat next to Minister Mahlobo in a marquee.  He 
then said:  Hey, buthi.  I can see that you guys, you try but 
I do not seem to get a feeling that you know exactly what I 
want.  That is why I am now handling this operation by 
myself because you are not giving me what I want.   
20 
 
When we were talking like that, I then said to 
him:  Minister Mahlobo, I think you must seize to involve 
yourself in operations because you will get into trouble.  
Ministers must confine themselves to their role which is 
executive oversight because if you are part of us who are 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 22 of 269 
 
doing this work and there is a challenge one day, who is 
going to be a referee?   
 
He said:  No, no, no.  I was grade(?).  I got a 
training for three weeks.  Or something like that.  I said:  
No, three weeks are not enough in Intelligence.  You need 
at least ten years to begin to know basics.  Ten years 
would just give you the basics.  But if you have been 
around and you have been working for more than ten 
years, then you begin to develop a sense of what this work 
is all about.   
10 
 
And then after that, he then said:  Hey, buthi.  
After the meeting in Eersterus.  He said:  I needed to pay 
one somebody but talk to my Head of Ministerial services 
and give him an amount of R 4000,00.  And I said:  What is 
this for?  Is there a record that you are paying somebody 
so that I can then put a claim against that asset?  The 
answer was that:  No, no.  This matter will be managed by 
my Holmes(?).   
 
We went back to HQ to do what the Minister 
instructed we do – we must do.  I then said to Holmes, 
20 
Head of Ministerial Services:  Do you want some kind of 
coverage as we drop off this money to your asset?  And the 
answer was yes.  I think asked my colleagues, who are in 
surveillance, to monitor the space where the drop off was 
going to happen.  Nothing happened.  There was no one.   
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 23 of 269 
 
 
I called this person – to Holmes to say:  What 
happened?  Because we were there.  We never saw any 
movement.  Where did you drop this thing?  He just 
laughed at me.  That was one. 
 
The second one.  Minister Mahlobo instructed 
myself and the now Provincial Commissioner, General 
Molwena(?) about an alert that there was going to be 
somebody who would have come from the neighbouring 
states and that person was in Zeerust in a hotel.  They 
were coming to sabotage Pelindaba(?).  And it was a 
10 
Friday afternoon.   
 
We 
went 
to 
see 
Minister Mahlobo 
at 
his 
residence.  When we left, we then said to ourselves, 
because this was mine.  Chairperson, ...[indistinct] I was 
his courtship(?).  We needed to bring in a defence because 
we can leave and alert without testing the veracity of the 
information and the only to test that veracity of information 
would have to been operationalise the alert.   
 
Then on my side, I was then saying:  Okay I will 
deploy surveillance.  We deployed surveillance.  Molwena 
20 
said:  I will deploy the police to conduct roadblocks in and 
around that space of Pelindaba.  The minute we said we 
would deploy our forces inside – now we deployed all these 
forces for a period of two weeks.  There was nothing.   
 
I called Minister Mahlobo because we discussed 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 24 of 269 
 
with General Molwena that maybe we should see the – this 
asset 
that 
gave 
this 
alert 
to 
Minister Mahlobo.  
Minister Mahlobo said:  No, no.  Did I not know what he 
reported has already happened at Pelindaba?  I said:  
What would have happened?  He said: What I reported that 
there will be a sabotage happening.   
 
So I said:  No, but it cannot be.  We have been 
here throughout with our forces, taking them from their 
homes on a Friday, working for two weeks, deploying huge 
amounts of resources, putting petrol, putting – giving them 
10 
substance allowance because they are in an operational 
work, for nothing.   
 
Then I called Frank because Frank knew about 
this...  I asked Frank:  Who is this asset?  Because we 
would like to have an engagement with the asset to 
determine exactly where this thing is coming from.  Frank 
said:  No, no.  This thing – this asset belongs to the 
Minister.  He the forwarded me in a rural area with kids 
around ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.   
20 
STEVEN:   [Indistinct] [Break in transmission] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Steven.  We did not hear you 
for a few seconds after you said you spoke to Frank.  So 
we missed out something.  You want to go back to that 
part? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 25 of 269 
 
STEVEN:   Okay.  I spoke to Frank.  Then Frank laughed at 
it.  He said:  No, this asset – this information came from 
Minister Mahlobo.  It is not his.  It is not one of his assets.  
He then forwarded me a photo of an old man who was 
surrounded by kids.  I asked:  Where is this old man 
based?  He just laughed.  He said:  This is the person who 
gave the alert to Minister Mahlobo that something was 
going to happen at Pelindaba.   
 
But part of what he was also saying is that I 
must prepare an amount of three million to pay this 
10 
particular person.  That is why we decided to launch a full-
scale verification process of this alert.   
 
And the answer was nought.  It was zero.  There 
was nothing.  No thread whatsoever at Pelindaba.  So 
there are two examples that I want the Commission to 
know, the extent to which Minister Mahlobo was so close to 
operational work. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
STEVEN: 
 
 
The 
third 
one. 
 
We 
were 
discussing 
...[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just before the ...[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just before the third one.  Just before 
the third one, Steven.  Just for the benefit of the public.  
The name of Frank you are using is a pseudonym name.  Is 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 26 of 269 
 
that correct. 
STEVEN:   Yes.  Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  
COUNSEL:   Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
COUNSEL:   Sorry.  Good morning again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning. 
COUNSEL:   As you will know that I present the witness, 
Mr Mahlobo and the other witness...  Chair, I listened to 
this evidence and I would choose or from the witness to 
10 
say he is using examples.  And I must place it on record 
that whatever examples in his testimony so far to these 
transactions and whatever, not contained anywhere in the 
documents including his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes. 
COUNSEL:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Thank you. 
COUNSEL:   And just for the record.  We are hearing for 
the first time.  So let me ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
COUNSEL:   ...we all follow and ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, thanks for that.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I have not stopped the witness.  It 
is quite correct.  This is not in the statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 27 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But generally ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is an elaboration. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it is an elaboration of 
something said there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   A general statement made that 
Minister Mahlobo spoke openly to me about operations he 
ran but I do not want to – I just want to place on record, 
which I was going to do in any event Chair, is that anything 
that still needs to be put to Minister Mahlobo will be 
10 
...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would be. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...subject to the written process of 
question and answer ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So he will have a full opportunity to 
respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To deal with it, ja.  No, that is fine. 
20 
COUNSEL:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  You may then proceed, 
Steven. 
STEVEN:   The third one, which I think those colleagues 
who were working with me as General Managers, meaning 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 28 of 269 
 
Chief Directors because I was acting DG at that time.  
There was another operation that was run by Mr Thulani 
Dlomo.  How we got to know about this operation is 
through a capacity that we have at HQ.  This capacity 
supports operations, light operations.   
 
If 
we, 
for 
instance, 
conduct 
a 
surveillance 
operations, they will be able to say this number plat is 
wrong because they are linked to the ...[indistinct].  So 
they gave us the heads up that you are being investigated 
as a collective by Mr Thulani Dlomo.  And the name of that 
10 
operation was called Project Greenleaf.   
 
In the document that was shared with us as 
General Managers and myself and General Managers, 
there were names of people.  Our names as officials were 
there.  The name of the President was there.  The name of 
Mr Paul Mashatile was there, Minister of Basic Education, 
amongst others.  The list is endless.   
 
There were also names of generals from the 
army, generals in the police.  We then confronted the DG, 
DG Kudjoe.  I think at that time, DG Kudjoe was supposed 
20 
to be travelling outside the country.  We requested an 
urgent meeting.  She returned.  She cancelled the trip.  
She came back to HQ because this was more like a revolt 
by senior members of the SSA.   
 
We conveyed at her boardroom.  When we 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 29 of 269 
 
convened, she called Minister Mahlobo that there is a 
problem here.  There is an operation that is directed at my 
officers, 
senior 
officers 
and 
we 
are 
raising 
serious 
objection.  Do you know about it?  Minister Mahlobo said:  
No, I will be coming to HQ.   
 
When he came to HQ, we were already convert 
in a boardroom and Ms Kudjoe was there.  We then asked 
a 
question 
because 
now 
it 
was 
a 
meeting 
where 
Minister Mahlobo was present.  We said to DG Kudjoe:  
DG, did you approve this type of an operation against us?  
10 
 
DG Kudjoe’s response was a big no.  I did not 
approve of any operations against members, let alone 
senior politicians in the country and members of the army 
and the police.  Then one member, a general manager, 
said:  If DG it is not you who approved this operation, then 
it could only be Minister Mahlobo because Mr Dlomo, his 
junior, to approve an operation that includes senior people.   
 
That is not the protocol of how we do work in the 
agency.  Then Minister Mahlobo starting losing his cool.  
He said to us:  Who do we think we are?  But also 
20 
targeting the person who was raising a question.  I would 
not mention the name of the member because he is still – 
others who retired last year.   
 
Other colleagues who retired last year but they 
know this.  He then instructed us, Minister Mahlobo, that 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 30 of 269 
 
we must launch an investigation to check as to who 
authorised 
this 
thing, 
this 
operation 
called 
Project 
Greenleaf, two general managers who were appointed to 
investigate.  The source of information was interviewed.   
 
The person who signed that form which went to 
that structure that I spoke about earlier on, we support 
operation, was interviewed.  She denied that she got an 
instruction to work on this operation on Project Greenleaf 
but she was, basically, saying:  You know who I report to.  I 
do not know who approved it but you know who I report to.  
10 
I do not report to myself.   
 
A report was written for Minister Mahlobo and 
that was the end of the problem.  We never got to know 
why were being investigated.  So I am trying to show the 
extent to which Minister Mahlobo was involving himself in 
operational work. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
STEVEN:   Thank you.  Thank you, advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  If we could go back then 
to paragraph 27 and back to the meeting that took place at 
20 
the then Minister ’s residence in Pretoria.  Let us go back 
to the point at which the – you said two men arrived and 
joined yourself and Minister Mahlobo in the lounge. 
STEVEN:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Describe the two persons, as you 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 31 of 269 
 
have described in paragraph 28?  Did a conversation then 
take place? 
STEVEN:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was – between whom did the 
conversation take place? 
STEVEN:   [Indistinct]...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did he cover that, Mr Pretorius?  What is 
in paragraph 28, did he not cover that already?  You 
remember he spoke about the – even the ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, paragraph 28 has been covered.  I 
10 
am on paragraph 29.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  I thought you said 28, ja.  And 
then maybe, Mr Pretorius.  Remember to just ask him to 
indicate timeframes about the Eersterus visit, for example. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The incidents that you have reflected on 
and told the Chair about the three incidents.  The first 
incident, when did that take place? 
STEVEN:   The Eersterus one?  It was just before the local 
20 
government elections on ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In 2016? 
STEVEN:   ...the first one – it was 2016, yes.  The second 
one is the Pelindaba.  That was around 2017 because soon 
after that, the former DG left, resigned from the agency.  It 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 32 of 269 
 
was in 2017.  It must have been around June 2017.  The – 
including the one, the Project Greenleaf was around 2017. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Alright. 
 
When 
did 
Minister Mahlobo seized to hold office for sometime in 
2017, was it not? 
STEVEN:   Around September I think.  September/October, 
there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  If we could go then to 
paragraph 29.  Does that cover the issues, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is covered, ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Please go to paragraph 29 and 
deal with the conversation that took place as you set out in 
that paragraph. 
STEVEN:   Yes.  The meeting was about the discussion 
following what transpired in Parliament and our role in 
respect to the equipment that was used there and the 
challenge by SANEF(?).  So the – during the discussion, 
Minister Mahlobo said:  Now that you guys are here in 
Gauteng and the matter will be presided on – or will be 
heard in Cape Town.  How is it going to be arranged?   
20 
 
It looks like they were saying:  No, no, no.  It 
should not be a problem.  They would know how to handle 
it so that we get the outcome that is desirable to SSA.  And 
desirable to SSA would have been that we must win the 
case, I guess, because I do not think we would get the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 33 of 269 
 
lawyers so that we get into jail.   
 
Now after that, my view was that, maybe when I 
was – he instructed me that I should make plans to travel 
to Cape Town so that I must then deal with these issues. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry, before you go on. 
STEVEN:   ...assisted by Sibo(?). 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Can you please ...[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...did it not strike you as odd or 
strange that two judges in Gauteng would be asked to 
10 
influence two judges in Cape Town?  That seems to be a 
rather extraordinary proposition.   
STEVEN:   It was.  It was a bit strange because – but I 
thought – because I have never been in a court of law 
where I would have to deal with these issues on my own 
other than when I appeared before the TRC.  That was a 
different matter.  Now on this one, I thought, because this 
judges are in Gauteng, maybe one of them would travel to 
Cape Town so that as I talk to these issues because my 
engagement with the senior counsel in Cape Town was to 
20 
talk about the technicalities of this device.   
 
What it can do, what it cannot do and why did we 
take the decision as – to place the device there.  So I had 
to explain all those things.  But to my surprise, when I was 
in Cape Town, I did not see the faces that I have met at 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 34 of 269 
 
Minister Mahlobo.  However, we won the first round in 
Cape Town.  The verdict favoured us.  There was one 
dissenting judge.  The matter was then referred to the 
appellate division. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we know ...[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We know of the litigation.  We need 
not to go there for the moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Pretorius, let us take the tea 
adjournment. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As it is quarter past. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then we will come back at half-past.  
We will take the tea adjournment, Steven.  We will come 
back at half-past eleven.  We adjourn. 
STEVEN:   Thank you, Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, let us proceed. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Steven, you 
were about to tell the Chair of the conversation that 
occurred between the two persons  who joined the meeting 
between yourself and Minister Mahlobo.  You deal with that 
in paragraph 29.  Could you tell the Chair please of the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 35 of 269 
 
detail of that conversation? 
STEVEN:   Thank you, Advocate.  Maybe before I deal with 
that let me just correct the timelines.  What I spoke to I 
think it was in 2015, late 2015/2016.  Not 2017. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Which incident was that? 
STEVEN:   In terms of the – the three incidents that I was 
talking to.  They happened in 2015/2016, not ’17. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, thank you.  Let us go back 
then to paragraph 29. 
STEVEN:   Yes, Sir.  What happened there, was we were 
10 
discussing there is the issue about jamming and how they 
would have to help given that the matter is not going to be 
in Gauteng, it will be in Cape Town.  The person who was 
introduced to me, this other guy, the white judge, seemed 
a bit uneasy whereas the black guy, Ngwenya, was saying 
no, no, no, they will do it, they will use their contracts in 
Cape Town and all these things but I did not know who 
those contacts were because in my mind I thought in one 
or the other we will see one of these guys called judges 
who are going to talk to us in Cape Town, but I did not see 
20 
either of them, I only interacted with senior counsels.  
There were two senior counsels in Cape Town. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, you have dealt with the 
…[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   And after... 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 36 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry, go on, please? 
STEVEN:   Then after that I was released, I left Mr 
Mahlobo and the two gentlemen.  I left, I was released. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, before we go on to the next 
issue, may I just ask, do you know or did you know at the 
time that these two persons who joined the meeting were 
actually judges? 
STEVEN:   Well, I knew when Mahlobo told me when I was 
in the house.  I did not know beforehand as I was driving to 
the house that I was going to discuss judges.  [inaudible – 
10 
speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes but other than what Mr 
Mahlobo told you, did you of your own knowledge know 
them to be judges? 
STEVEN:   No, no, I did not know them because I really did 
not pay attention to that seeing that they are not even 
people that ordinarily we would do business with.  We do 
not vet them.  If we were vetting judges, I would have 
known then. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
20 
STEVEN:   In this instance I did not know them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And since that meeting have you 
ever through your recollection of having seen these two 
gentlemen, have you ever been able to identify them to 
your knowledge as judges? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 37 of 269 
 
STEVEN:   I would not be able to say I have seen them.  
What happened is that in 2018, when Jafta was appointing 
Acting, he called me to his office to discuss this matter.  
He then showed me photos of all the judges in the 
republic.  I was not able to say with certainty this is the 
person that I think I met in the house.  It is even worse 
with the white judge, I could not recall his basic features 
but the black judge was dark, without spectacles, shortish 
a bit, 1.65 in terms of his height.  That is all I could 
remember.   
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
STEVEN:   In any case, I did not think at the time when I 
was discussing this matter regarding the matter we were 
seized with in parliament that at some point I would be 
required to recall these faces because we are trained as 
spooks to memorise but in this instance I think I failed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Is it correct then that after 
this meeting you travelled to Cape Town on instructions 
and assisted in briefing counsel in relation to the aspects 
relating to the jamming device. 
20 
STEVEN:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  We do not need to deal with 
the SONA litigation it is a matter of public record but if we 
could go to paragraph 48 please on page 310. 
STEVEN:   Yes, Sir, I am there. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 38 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would you just deal with the 
matters 
that 
you 
testified 
to 
in 
paragraphs 
48 
and 
following? 
STEVEN:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Tell the Chair about that. 
STEVEN:   Yes, in terms of that paragraph, yes, Director 
Langa, when he came to join the SSA I was already acting 
in the position of a DDG, meaning that I was the only 
person that he could rely on as he was appointed, recently 
appointed.  So for a number of days that would have 
10 
required him to deal with alone he would call me and say I 
am new here, tell me how do I manage this one, how do I 
deal with this issue?  He had been presented with a green 
form, I think the Commission has heard a number of 
witnesses talking about the green form so he was given a 
green form.  This green form was requiring him to sign for 
an amount of 12 million.  He then asked me whether he 
must sign.  I said no, you cannot sign, ask for a document 
that details as to what is this thing that you are paying for, 
that document must say this is a project, if it is a project or 
20 
if it is an asset, this is an asset, this is what the asset is 
doing and it warrants that type of a payment but ordinarily 
we do not pay such amounts of money as an organisation.  
It was an anomaly in my view so said no, be extra careful, 
do not do it.  He then went on – I think on leave or trip, I 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 39 of 269 
 
was acting in his position.  So I acted twice.  This 12 
million requisition came to me that I must sign, I refused.  I 
said I am not signing …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, Steven, I am sorry Steven, 
just one second?  Mr Pretorius, I do not want to adjourn 
and talk in chambers, can we do what they do in other 
jurisdictions, can you approach? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The bench?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Steven, just a 
10 
note please.  In relation to yourself at any particular time, 
if you could not mention your – the office that you held or 
the position that you held and in relation to others too, do 
not mention what positions they held so that we can stick 
to the identity rules, if we may.  Okay? 
STEVEN:   Thank you, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, so tell us about this R12 
million. 
STEVEN:   So this 12 million, then the requisition came to 
me, I refused to sign because the incumbent was not 
20 
around.  I waited for him to come, I submitted this thing, 
the requisition of 12 million.  I think he succumbed to 
pressure, he signed for this 12 million.  After signing this 
12 million he then said to me, you know, I saw this money 
being loaded in paper bags by Frank and he took it to the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 40 of 269 
 
former Minister.  After that he was worried.  I said to him 
do not sign anything that involves such huge amounts of 
money. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you speak to Frank about this 
issue? 
STEVEN:   Yes, yes, I did, I did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What did you …[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   But I think even numbers that I spoke to him, all 
he could say is that Minister Mahlobo took 4 million out of 
this for his project, the rest I think Frank managed, I do not 
10 
know what they did about it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was the purpose of the 4 
million being taken from the 12 million.  I would not know, 
Advocate, I would not know but there were projects, 
Mayibuye 1, Mayibuye 2, Project Justice.  I suppose the 
money could have been for those projects because I came 
to know about those projects when Minister Mahlobo came 
to see the former director to push that we must send giving 
the money for this projects because he is running projects, 
we cannot be sitting with money.  At that time Special Ops 
20 
had depleted its budget so I happened to know those 
project in that context otherwise I would not have known 
about them because of the need to know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright in paragraphs 48 and 50 
you do mention the specific purpose of the delivery of the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 41 of 269 
 
monies but I take it you are not going to place that 
evidence on record now. 
STEVEN:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right is that because it is not 
correct, what is stated in the affidavit? 
STEVEN:   No, no, it is correct, it is correct, it is not 
because it is not correct, I thought it is a given that Frank 
took money and I also spoke to Frank in my capacity that I 
would not [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the money was taken to 
10 
whom? 
STEVEN:   To Mahlobo, two paper backs. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Right 
and 
the 
purpose 
…[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   According to Frank. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So the purpose of the money was 
related to – or the purpose for which the money was 
delivered and taken as stated in paragraphs 48 and 50 is 
what you were told.  You do not know directly, is that 
correct? 
20 
STEVEN:   Yes, I was told by my former boss. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When was this?  When did this happen? 
STEVEN:   It must be around 2016, early 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Early 2016? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 42 of 269 
 
STEVEN:   That is correct, Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes so, for example, in paragraph 
51 you say in the affidavit: 
“Mr Frank told me that he regularly transported 
cash to 
Minister Mahlobo and was sometimes 
accompany by Dorothy.” 
I must just say to you that Dorothy denies that. 
STEVEN:    Well, I am not surprised because from what I 
have seen from the Commission is that it has become a 
10 
normal to deny everything, so I would not be surprised. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
STEVEN:   That Dorothy would deny it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And do you persist in the evidence 
that you give in the first sentence of paragraph 51 as to 
what Frank told you? 
STEVEN:   Yes, I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And just to make sure, that sentence 
says Frank informed you that he had delivered the R12 
million cash to Minister Mahlobo. 
20 
STEVEN:   That is correct, Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us deal with the next issue 
then and that is the issue of the establishment of a trade 
union to rival AMCU.  Did you attend a meeting as set out 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 43 of 269 
 
in paragraph 53 on page 311? 
STEVEN:   Yes, I did, I did attend this meeting. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do not mention any names please 
but …[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   No, I will not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Pursuant to that meeting were you 
ever given an instruction by Minister Mahlobo? 
STEVEN:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was that instruction?   
STEVEN:   The instruction was that there is a problem and 
10 
this person must be paid because if we do not pay this 
person the former President’s involvement in this project 
would have been exposed and the issue was that the asset 
had even taped that meeting so there was proof that this 
meeting – that involved the former President did actually 
take place.  So the issue was that in order for this person 
not to go to court he must be paid the amount of money to 
silence him. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was that …[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   Minister Mahlobo then said... 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry, in paragraph 54 the 
meeting apparently discussed the fact that… 
STEVEN:   Oh, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That a particular person had been 
kidnapped and threatened and needed money to deal with 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 44 of 269 
 
his security. 
STEVEN:   No, no, sorry, I am mixing the two, I thought we 
were now on the issue of the other one. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Alright, 
let 
us 
deal 
with 
…[intervenes] 
STEVEN:   This one is true, the person …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us deal with the incident – I am 
sorry to interrupt you, let us deal with paragraph 54 first. 
STEVEN:   Okay, yes, because I was dealing with 
paragraph 54 instead of paragraph 53. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
STEVEN:   But let me first say on 53 it is correct, this thing 
that is – the paragraph, that is on 53, is correct.  I paid 
this person 120 000 every month for his protection but I 
became 
concerned 
because 
we 
are 
audited, 
serious 
audited by internal audit, by the IG and the AG.  I then 
asked what am I going to say when the auditors are coming 
to me to ask about these amounts of money that I am 
paying because I do not have any record except the details 
of this person and the signature where he signs for these 
20 
amounts.  Then I then said can I do some checks if this 
person indeed his life is under threat?  He agreed.  I then 
did what we call counter-surveillance.  It is not following 
the person but it is to check whether this person that we 
are giving money is being followed by others.  There was 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 45 of 269 
 
nothing.  This person would drive to a mall, stay in his 
house, no problem.  So I then report to Mr Mahlobo that I 
am not going to be able to continue paying because from 
what I got as a report from my colleagues who did the task, 
there is no problem here, so I stopped, but after having 
paid what Mr Mahlobo said I should do.  In any case, I 
reported these issues to my former DG. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How long did you pay this person if you 
able to remember? 
10 
STEVEN:    Chairperson, I am sure I can get those – I am 
sure I can – but it was not once, it was a number of times 
but I am sure I can get those records. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, you spoke of a second 
meeting with Minister Mahlobo which is dealt with in 
paragraph 57.  What happened at that meeting? 
STEVEN:   At this meeting - I think I spoke to some of the 
issues earlier on that it is a project that was run by Special 
Ops and it had gone wrong because this asset started 
20 
demanding huge amounts of money and if they were not 
prepared to pay those amounts of money, he threatened to 
go to court and expose the operation but also to expose 
the fact that at some point he was personally sitting in a 
meeting involving the former President to discuss this 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 46 of 269 
 
matter.  So the issue was that – from Mr Mahlobo, manage 
this issue so that it does not go to court, pay this person.  
My problem with that was that but why executive members 
playing a role in operations because if you plan an 
operation you also plan how you are going to wind it down.  
So this was a classical example of an operation that is 
poorly planned.  He said I must pay this person 6 million.  I 
said I cannot pay this 6 million because your MPDs do not 
allow me to do this thing, I cannot pay for that amount, I 
have no authority to pay such a lot of money.  I refused in 
10 
carrying his instruction but I was subsequently informed 
that this person, asset was paid some monies, huge 
amounts of monies. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  You deal in paragraph 62 
and following with a third security contract.  I do not want 
to necessarily deal with that now, it is on record, but you 
confirm the facts set out in paragraph 62 to 67.  Are they 
correct? 
STEVEN:   They are correct, Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  What happened in 
20 
September 2016? 
STEVEN:    September 2016 we were called to the 
Minister’s office, all senior members of the agency were 
called then, especially the domestic side but there were 
some from foreign side.  We were then introduced to the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 47 of 269 
 
new DG, Mr Arthur Fraser, that this was going to be our 
new DG.  Then Mr Arthur Fraser immediately embarked on 
a process which he termed realignment process.  That 
realignment process he also said he has got a vision or a 
vision was developed for 2035.   
Immediately when that process of coming up with a 
vision was being developed, an organogram was also being 
created that talks to this vision.  The first people to be 
victims of this vision, 2035, was the Director Domestic 
Branch because the Director Foreign Branch had already 
10 
indicated that he was leaving the agency.  I think the 
reasons are better known to him but he was uncomfortable 
with the arrangement especially following the appointment 
of Mr Fraser. 
Then the Director Domestic Branch was removed 
from his position through an organogram that you can see 
when it was presented that you do not have a box anymore 
in the Domestic Branch, so eventually he was forced to 
leave.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What happened …[intervenes] 
20 
STEVEN:   He kept on coming to work, he kept on coming 
to work. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What happened in regard to 
yourself? 
STEVEN:   To who? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 48 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To you? 
STEVEN:   To me?  I will come to that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
STEVEN:   I want to give a picture so that the Commission 
must see what really happened there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
STEVEN:   Then the director is moved, his office is flooded  
– one day he gets to his office, the whole office is flooded 
with water, he cannot come in.  He then calls me to say 
hey man, come and see my office is flooded, the whole 
10 
carpet is soaked.  We then check whether maybe the 
problem with the bathroom because their offices have 
bathrooms.  There was no sign of any leakage of water 
from the bathroom.  So clearly somebody came to put 
water into his office.  Then he said to me it means I am no 
longer wanted here, I must work from home.  That was the 
last time he sat, it is for HQ. 
 
Following that, the next person that was to be 
removed was myself after worked in that position of acting 
for two and a half years.  This happens within a period of a 
20 
week.  The second week, all these are happening that I am 
just explaining.    
 
Then as this project begins to take shape, all 
general managers are told that he is going to work with 
those general managers who are fit for purpose but he 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 49 of 269 
 
does not explain what the purpose is, there is no study that 
is conducted to say if you fail to do the following you are 
not fit for this particular purpose.   
He then appoints junior members who are three 
levels below our levels to occupy our offices.  In my case I 
was left even without an office, I had to come to HQ for a 
period of two and a half years without being given any 
work, being called or telephoned.  Others were told that 
they would be advisers and that position does not exist in 
the agency, it never existed, it only existed in the offices 
10 
of the ministers and that position of advisers is regulated 
by ministerial directives. 
In my case I questioned that are you chancing my 
conditions of service because I do not know what you are 
talking about, I have been here since ’95, we never had 
this thing.  So I was then left in the cold for two years 
whilst getting my salary, getting a bonus, my cell phone 
was fully paid for, everything that you can think of which 
comes as perks and this applied to all other GMS, general 
managers, during Mr Fraser’s reign. 
20 
This project that he had was never even approved 
by JSCI and yet it was implemented and whilst it was 
implemented, certain DDGs were appointed under the 
auspices of this project which was not sanctioned by JSCI.  
We kept on asking where is the approval of this thing that 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 50 of 269 
 
has been implemented?  There was nothing.  Thank you, 
Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, what happened in April 2018? 
STEVEN:   In April 2018 Mr Fraser then gets moved to 
Correctional Services and then – no, no, I think it was in 
March when we got to know that he was being moved.  
Then I was called to come back but not to Domestic 
Branch, to go Foreign site by …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, do not mention the… 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  Initially I was called by DDG 
10 
Foreign Branch to come and help her because she was not 
coping.  This vision 2035 had killed Foreign Branch from 
being a branch into a Chief Directorate without proper 
funding.  So they were not coping because the world did 
not shrink when the Foreign Branch was shrunk.  They had 
to contend with the world as we know it with limited 
capacity.  So I was called to come back.  I then asked the 
DDG that if you call me to come and work, where is the 
report that says now I am fit for purpose because I am still 
waiting for the report that I am not fit for purpose.  Then 
20 
when Mr Jafta was appointed, I was also called back.  I 
came back this time because Mr Jafta had nothing to do 
with the fitness for purpose.  He then asked me to go and 
work in Foreign Branch to assist because there were 
challenges.  I worked there up until I was brought back to 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 51 of 269 
 
the Domestic site again. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  Former Minister 
Mahlobo is aware of the evidence that you have given by 
way of notice and otherwise and it has been put to him in 
his own evidence and he used the term in respect of you, a 
peddler, an information peddler.  What is your response? 
STEVEN:   Thank you, Advocate, maybe let me explain or 
give a definition of what we understand as peddlers or a 
peddler 
or 
peddling. 
 
A 
peddler 
is 
somebody 
who 
purposefully gives wrong information about something.  Let 
10 
me make an example.  At some point there was an 
information that SSA or NIA then had to deal with.  The 
information was coming from some person in Mpumalanga 
who said the current President and Mr Tokyo Sexwale were 
planning – I think even [indistinct], they were planning a 
coup against the administration of President Mbeki.  We 
worked on that only to find out there is nothing like that but 
that information can only be confirmed by him alone, no 
other source could confirm that information.  So a peddler 
is somebody who cooks information but the objective is to 
20 
get money but also to sow confusion.  A peddler would not 
be in the agency as I know it, as a person who would be 
working in this organisation since ’95.  Even in my previous 
years as a member of the Intelligence of the ANC we knew 
peddlers to be people who are outside our ranks who would 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 52 of 269 
 
come to us to sow confusion.  That is how I understand the 
definition of a peddler, but if Minister Mahlobo was saying 
members of the Agency can at times be surrounded by 
peddlers maybe that would make sense, but in my case I 
would not be surrounded by pedlars, because the position I 
occupy in the organisation does not allow me to handle 
sources.  I only deal with the directing of the work that 
needs to be done, at the time when I was doing operational 
work. 
 
That is the understanding I have, so to call me a 
10 
pedlar would be something that is frowned upon in the 
profession and the pedlar we classify them, work on them 
and we blacklist them, we don’t want to do anything with 
pedlars, in fact they are a nightmare to any intelligence 
officer because you then follow the shadows based on what 
they give you as alert.   I think I alluded to something 
earlier on about…[indistinct], that was a pedlar who gave 
us that information because we could not confirm it but 
there is no pedlar inside the …[indistinct], there is nothing, 
thank you. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Steven, the accusation that you 
are a pedlar was based, amongst other things, on Mr 
Mahlobo’s denial of the meeting that took place between 
the two persons whom he referred to as Judges and 
yourself at the former Minister ’s home.  As I understand his 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 53 of 269 
 
version, you made the whole thing up, what is your 
response to that? 
STEVEN:   I would not lie about the Minister and in my 
history of working in this environment, firstly, in the 
movement, I never was a liar. In the history of the 
Intelligence since 1995, I worked in various capacities 
there has never been an accusation directed at me that I’m 
a liar. I have briefed senior people in the country, including 
presidents, give them briefings.  I have briefed Parliament 
even with the current Minister on several occasions.  Why 
10 
would I target Minister Mahlobo only on this one of the 
Judges and it confirms the other issues in terms of these 
projects that he instructed me to…[indistinct] he does not 
have a problem with that, I’m not a pedlar when I talk 
about that.  I only become a pedlar when I talk about the 
Judges.  Well, my guess would be as good as the guess of 
those 
members 
of 
the 
pubic 
who 
are 
watching 
the 
proceedings, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It was somewhat difficult to follow, 
the answers to questions, put to former Minister Mahlobo in 
20 
relation to why you would invent, in its totality, the story 
about the persons whom he said were Judges but as I 
understand it, in summary he suggested that you might be 
part of a faction within state security that sought to create 
problems or discredit him and others, what is your 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 54 of 269 
 
response to that? 
STEVEN:   I know that is plausible enough for a person of 
Minister Mahlobo’s calibre to say, I’m a faction.  I am not a 
card carrying member of any political organisation.  Yes, in 
the past I used to be a member of the ANC but when we 
amalgamated in 1995 Minister Nklantla said he does not 
think it’s a good idea that we must be card carrying 
members because we are not going to be impartial.  So, 
from then on, I never took part in any political work of the 
ANC.  So, why would be a faction because factions would 
10 
only exist in a political organisation.  In the agents there 
are lots of possible as new Ministers gets appointed those 
people who…[indistinct] who seek to be promoted because 
in a situation that we have, where – especially during 
Minister Mahlobo’s time, there was no one who was 
appointed to a permanent position.  Even if you were 
appointed when it came you were told that you are now 
acting in your own substantive position.  So, that situation 
created a state of flux where people were not sure and it 
then brings this behaviour where people will then go and 
20 
drink tea about people’s  name.  In my case, I am not a 
member of any faction.  Yes, there are a lot of issues in 
the agents, a moral issue, appointments that are not done 
correctly in some instances without adhering to the policies 
and that breeds contempt amongst members but that does 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 55 of 269 
 
not make one to be a faction and if you raise issues that 
are correct and you raise them on the basis of policies and 
principle and regulations then you are classified as a 
faction.  Maybe that is what he meant, but I’m not a 
faction, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He also referred, that is former 
Minister Mahlobo, also referred to an investigation when 
pressed in questions about you being known to him to be a 
pedlar and being asked, well, what was done about it?  Are 
you aware of any investigation that took place within the 
10 
SSA in regard to whether you reported false information? 
STEVEN:   If I knew I would have said it to the 
Commission.  I’ve said, since 1995 I’ve worked in various 
capacities in the agents, domestic, foreign even abroad, 
I’ve never been investigated, even now as I’m sitting here, 
I’ve never been investigated, nothing.  Now to be told that, 
hey, there’s a suspicion about you, that you have done the 
following thing, never.  I was hearing it for the first time 
yesterday on TV. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, do I understand your evidence 
20 
you 
have 
never 
been 
warned 
about 
peddling 
false 
information, 
you 
are 
not 
aware 
of 
any 
investigation 
conducted in relation to the peddling of false information 
and I suppose it follows that no inquiry ever, has taken 
place in that regard? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 56 of 269 
 
STEVEN:   Nothing at all, nothing not even under Mr 
Fraser, nothing. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Bear with me a moment, Chair.  
Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Steven for availing 
yourself, you are now excused. 
STEVEN:   Thank you Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Steven. 
STEVEN:   Chairperson,  may I say something, if I’m 
allowed? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
STEVEN:   Chairperson, I would want the Commission to 
seriously, as they conclude this process, that this agency 
can only work if the President exercise his prerogative to 
take political control of the agency because in my 26 years 
of being part of this agency, Ministers who get appointed, 
they come with their political agenda and they cause a lot 
of problems in the agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
STEVEN:   And I don’t think that is helpful for the 
20 
taxpayers who are paying us the salaries to do nothing to 
protect them as well as the Constitution.  So, my view and 
my appeal is that maybe we must not have a Minister for 
some time until all our problems are sorted but the high 
level 
panel 
recommendations 
have 
never 
been 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 57 of 269 
 
implemented, this is the third year I guess and nothing has 
moved in that regard and if there is a process that process 
does not involve members or senior members of the 
organisation, if it exists somehow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
STEVEN:   Those things, I think, they need to be done to 
ensure that we are back to our glory days, thank you 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you very much Steven I’ve 
heard you, thank you very much.  Thank you and then Mr 
10 
Pretorius…[intervenes]. 
UNKNOWN 
COUNSEL: 
 
 
Sorry, 
before 
my 
learned 
colleague proceeds, Chair if you have, obviously, the 
document or the affidavit deposed by this witness and 
we’ve agreed that there was some elaborations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Taking cue of that, there were 
considerations last night. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   That we will be furnished with 
20 
questions from the Chair, I would want to think that will 
also form part of this questionnaire and will be sent to us, 
this elaboration by this witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the transcript certainly the parts 
that constituted or the elaboration should be given and Mr 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 58 of 269 
 
Pretorius will take care of that, maybe it will be more than 
that part but that would be taken care of. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Thank you Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Two things will be done Chair, the 
transcript of these proceedings will be made available to 
all parties implicated by additional evidence or elaborating 
evidence and secondly questions will, in addition to that, 
be put but Minister Mahlobo certainly – Deputy Minister 
Mahlobo 
certainly 
will 
be 
invited 
to 
make 
whatever 
comment he wishes quite apart from the questions that 
10 
he’s been asked. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Thank you Chair, thank you to my 
colleague. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, just to set-up, may we take 
a five minute adjournment please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we’ll adjourn for five minutes. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Frank are you present, can you 
hear us? 
20 
FRANK:  Very good afternoon, I am present.  Thank you so 
much.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Good afternoon Frank. 
FRANK:  Good afternoon Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you once again for availing 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 59 of 269 
 
yourself to assist the Commission.  We appreciate it very 
much. 
FRANK:  Thank you very much Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes the oath was administered to you 
earlier this morning, so Mr Pretorius can continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right Frank … 
FRANK:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Before you should be a file 
containing various documents, including documents behind 
the folder YY16.  You have that in front of you? 
10 
FRANK:  Let me just compare that.  YY16, yes I do have. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  There are a number of 
documents that I will ask be admitted, including an affidavit 
which we will deal with now.  But if you could go Frank to 
page 1146.1 towards the end of that divider.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And forget to admit Steven’s affidavit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Ja, going to do that now.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So are you at YY16 and at page 
1146.1? 
20 
FRANK:  Let me check.  You are saying yes on 1116. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, no. 
FRANK:  And page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  1146. 1-1-4-6. 
FRANK:  Oh 1146.  Okay hold on we will get it there just 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 60 of 269 
 
now.  Definitely I am there sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  1146.1.  Is that your affidavit?  
Been identified by your attorney already? 
FRANK:  [Indistinct], yes it is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, if you would go to page 
1146.34.   
FRANK:  46.  1146? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  1146.34.   
FRANK:  1146.34 né. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You got that. 
10 
FRANK:  No, I am getting there.  1146.34.  Definitely, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That signature has been redacted, 
but do you recall signing this affidavit? 
FRANK:  I recall definitely. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And as far as you are concerned, 
and to the best of your knowledge are the contents of this 
affidavit true and correct? 
FRANK:  Yes sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair, may that then be admitted as 
EXHIBIT YY16.1? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Frank which starts at 
page 1146.1 will be admitted and marked as EXHIBIT YY –
what is the number? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  16.1 
CHAIRPERSON:  16.1.  Ja.  Mr Pretorius I do not want to 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 61 of 269 
 
forget this.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Frank is it correct and I am now 
going to page 836 of EXHIBIT YY16, that on the 19 t h of 
January a request for … 
FRANK:  Hold on sir, do not – you are saying YY? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Page 836.  I am only going to refer 
now to the page numbers in the top left hand column, the 
black page numbers. 
10 
FRANK:  Okay page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Top left hand corner, page 836. 
FRANK:  [Indistinct], same mark you gave me? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yeah, no, no, not the affidavit.   
FRANK:  Oh okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Page … 
FRANK:  800 … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And 36. 
FRANK:  836.  Hold on for me quick.  836.  836.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  On the 19 t h of January 2021 … 
20 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The Commission sent to you are 
request for an affidavit.  Correct? 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that was followed up by a letter 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 62 of 269 
 
dated the 9 t h of February 2021 on page 841.   
FRANK:  841.  Yes sir, I recognise that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And Ms Jabulani Lavuno and 
Advocate Sam Ngiba were they your representatives at the 
time, 9 t h February 2021? 
FRANK:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  Contents of those letters are 
self-explanatory.  And I do not want to deal with them in 
any detail.  Is it correct that on the 6 t h of November 2019 
an interview was conducted internally with an SSA as part 
10 
of the Veza investigation?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it Veza? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Veza. 
FRANK:  Are you making ...[indistinct]), are you making 
...[indistinct] turn the page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, page 845.  
FRANK:  Yes sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is a transcript that was 
provided to us by the SSA and do you confirm that you 
were indeed interviewed on that date? 
20 
FRANK:  May confirm that I have been interviewed on that 
day, however I also want to place it on record that this 
transcript before me I saw it for the first time a year after 
when served to me by the Commission.  So it was never 
shared to me as an affected party by the investigators.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 63 of 269 
 
Only to say or suffice to say I see this transcript for the 
first time as provided by the Commission. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  All I want to put to you at this 
stage is the fact that you were interviewed.  I will put 
passages to you and can comment on whether those 
passages accord with your own memory of what happened 
in that investigation.  So you will have a chance to 
comment.  But when you say it was not shared with you by 
the 
investigators, 
you 
are 
referring 
to 
the 
SSA 
investigators, is that correct?   
10 
FRANK:  Yes.  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  If you could go to page 861 
please.   
FRANK:  Yes sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  As part of the project being referred 
to there, to your knowledge who were the persons who 
received protection under the rubric of the project there 
being discussed?  First of all what project was discussed 
at page 861?  And then who were the persons being 
protected? 
20 
FRANK:  [Indistinct], can you repeat that for me sir? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you look at page 861. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  During the course of the interview it 
appears from this transcript that you were being asked 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 64 of 269 
 
questions about a particular project.  You see that? 
FRANK:  Yes, I see. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Two thirds down the road or down 
the page rather, two thirds down the page a project is 
mentioned, what project is that? 
FRANK:  Project Construção. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright, Project Construção.  Now 
as part of Project Construção who received VIP protection? 
FRANK:  In reference to this page were Dudu Myeni and 
Colin Maynier, Maynier. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At the time who was Colin Maynier, 
what office did he hold? 
FRANK:  He was the president of the ANC youth league. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Youth league? 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And was there a third person who 
received protection? 
FRANK:  Still on this page.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Who was that? 
FRANK:  And the deputy, the deputy president.  The then 
20 
deputy president Desmond Muela.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Of the ANC youth league? 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And you say just above the 
passage where you mentioned Project Construção,: 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 65 of 269 
 
“I will tell you why I know for sure because the 
protection of these people fell squarely on projects 
I was running.” 
Is that a correct statement? 
FRANK:  Can you read?  Where does that follow? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright it is two thirds down the 
page 861. 
FRANK:  Yes I can see that.  I can see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Next to the word in red Frank. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It reads: 
 
“I will …” 
FRANK:  I see that.  [Indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct?  Is that correct? 
FRANK:  It is correct.  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And then in page – sorry.  
And then on page 860 you refer to co-workers.  Or co-
workers are referred to in the transcript.  Do you see that? 
FRANK:  No, I am trying to look at it, specifically, what?  
Where?  Yes sir. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Were co-workers employed or 
pointed to conduct operations such as Project Construção? 
FRANK:  Can I, can I clarify? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes please. 
FRANK:  I think there is a, there is a misconstrued idea 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 66 of 269 
 
here.  Co-workers did not fall under ...[indistinct] Project 
Mr ...[indistinct].  Co-workers was another, it was a team of 
other employees operative within the EDSO.  It did not fall 
within my spec, my … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But do you have a mask on? 
FRANK:  Yes I do.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Won’t you take it off please and 
make sure that nobody is near you?  So that I am having 
difficulty in hearing your words.  
FRANK:  Alright then. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  Explain who were co-
workers. 
FRANK:  Co-workers was a set of other employees 
attached to CDS chief directorate.  Special operations, but 
they did not fall within my area of work.  So that part of the 
transcript it’s not correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well are you saying you did not say 
that?  That part of the transcript? 
FRANK:  Yes.  Yes it might have been misunderstood.  The 
co-worker specifically part of it.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well next to the word Frank, one 
third down the way, page 860 it says, now I like that part: 
“One of the things I did was primarily, one we had a 
letter that we wrote to DG Kudjoe at that time to 
say, look based on the fact that we are working in 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 67 of 269 
 
this environment with these people, we request a 
waiver of advertisement and adsorption of these 
people so that they can be taken for necessary 
training 
within 
the 
environment 
which 
is 
our 
environment here, although most of them would 
come from a foreign country.” 
 
Is that incorrect? 
FRANK:  Let me have a look at it quickly.  I am not sure 
the construction of the word of the paragraph as it ends, 
they come from a foreign country.  I am not sure what it 
10 
was meant there.  But I remember that part of the 
discussion. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did you say that apart from 
the fact that they came from a foreign country? 
FRANK:  Yes we had a discussion around that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And further down that page, 
mention is made of the fact that at least some of these co-
workers were relatives of people involved in SSA.  You see 
that? 
FRANK:  Where is that sir?  Can you direct me please? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well you say two thirds down the 
page of page 860: 
“Let us not say these people.  Most of these people 
were relatives of Thulani.  I just want to say it 
bluntly.  They were relatives of Thulani you were 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 68 of 269 
 
asked.  Frank, yes.” 
Did you say that?   
FRANK:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No? 
FRANK:  It’s misconstrued here.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But what was misconstrued?  It is 
just a recording of what was said. 
FRANK:  I mean … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No one is construing anything.  It is 
just a recording of what was said, so all that I think that I 
10 
am asking you is, did you say this or did you not say this? 
FRANK:  No, I did not say.  Let me leave it at that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So someone must have inserted 
this in this transcript, is that what you are suggesting?   
FRANK:  I am not suggesting that.  I was, I was actually 
saying the wording there, it might have been but as far as 
my recollection is concerned.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Could it be, would it make a difference 
Frank if the position is that in the conversation you 
specified the country from where you believe they came.  
20 
And what is confusing you now is that, in the place of the 
name of the country it is simply written a foreign country.  
Is that what maybe confuses you? 
FRANK:  No, no, no.   
CHAIRPERSON:  It’s not that? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 69 of 269 
 
FRANK:  Not at all Chair. Not ...[indistinct] if you say, if 
you say they came from a foreign country, the insinuation 
was that these were not South African citizens.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
FRANK:  The discussion there was making reference to 
say they were trained outside a foreign country.  That was 
the discussion, as far as I can recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would, is it possible that what you said 
was that most of the people were trained from a foreign 
country and maybe whoever transcribed thought you were 
10 
saying they came … 
FRANK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From a foreign country? 
FRANK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it possible that … 
FRANK:  Exactly that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, you … 
FRANK:  Exactly Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may have said they were trained … 
FRANK:  [Indistinct]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may have said they were trained 
from a foreign country, not that they were coming from … 
FRANK:  Yes.  So there is an omission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
FRANK:  So there is an omission there. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 70 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But further down the page the 
statement appears on that page and it reads: 
“Let us not say these people, most of these people 
were relatives of Thulani, I just want to say it 
bluntly.” 
 
You asked according to the transcript, at least they 
were relatives of Thulani.  Frank, yes.  I have difficulty in 
understanding how a statement could be misconstrued in 
this regard.  It seems pretty clear, but perhaps you can 
10 
explain.  Perhaps you did not say it at all and someone 
else inserted this, so surreptitiously or perhaps it is … 
FRANK:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  A incorrect record of what you did 
say.   
FRANK:  Chair, in the same context that I was trying to 
correct there, that that paragraph with the foreign country, 
I want to make reference even to this paragraph there.  
The discussion was to say there were also relatives of 
Thulani.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Who were employed as co-
workers? 
FRANK:  Yes, they were.  So ...[indistinct] I do not know, 
but I say there were. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 71 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unless if, if most were relatives of 
Thulani, would that indicate in any way whether they were 
South Africans or people from another country or would it 
not?   
FRANK:  Chairperson can you repeat yourself? 
CHAIRPERSON:  If most were relatives of I think he has 
just referred to as Thulani, if they … 
FRANK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If most were relatives of Thulani, would 
that indicate whether those who were relatives of Thulani 
10 
were South Africans or were from another country? 
FRANK:  I am not there Chairperson, but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not sure. 
FRANK:  But ...[indistinct] it would be, it would – let me 
say I am not sure what does the name but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
FRANK:  To me it will be misleading information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  If we could go to page 892 
please.   
20 
FRANK:  Yes sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And I want to first ask you about 
what appears on this page, the bottom one third of the 
page.  It is recorded here at least that you were asked: 
 
“You were chosen again to do wave.” 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 72 of 269 
 
 
That is W-A-V-E.  You are recorded as having said, 
what wave.  The answer is, the project, to run Project 
Wave.  And you are recorded as having saying, having 
said: 
“No, no, no I just wrote it, I wrote it.” 
And then you were asked who wrote the operational 
plan, the answer is: 
“I wrote it ma’am.”   
The question is why and then the answer is: 
“I was asked to do so.” 
10 
What was Project Wave?  Well firstly did this 
exchange take place to the best of your recollection? 
FRANK:  I may not remember the exact wording but I 
remember it could have fallen(?) amongst the things that 
we had discussed in that particular interview. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Did you 
write the 
operational plan for Project Wave? 
FRANK:  Let me put it clearly, that is why I am saying 
some of the words do – I just put it on paper, the 
conceptualising, conceptualising of it, it was as per the 
20 
estimate at the time and in a brief discussion which I was 
also present with other members.  Was given to me and 
then I was asked to put the whole thing into pen, pen and 
paper. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What was the purpose of Project 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 73 of 269 
 
Wave? 
FRANK:  I may not be able to give a exactly detail, the 
exact detail of the project, but it was one of the counter 
intelligence measures that were, were meant to be put in 
place.  Specifically or initially to assist in counter – 
intelligence operations ...[indistinct] of the country. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright, there was no spec of the 
project that we will deal with later.  We do not need to take 
that any further for the present.  You could go with me to – 
if you would bare with me Chair because I am trying to up-
10 
down … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Given time constraints. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, that is fine.  Maybe during lunch you, 
you could check with Mr Meyberg, his evening witness from 
what I recall did not appear in ...[indistinct] somebody who 
would take very long.  And therefore maybe the 3 o’clock 
cut off point might not be strictly adhered to for your 
purposes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I should ...[indistinct] adjournment. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you could go to page 898 please.  
Again two thirds … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now let us … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Two thirds down the page.   
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 74 of 269 
 
FRANK:  [Indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Page 898.   
FRANK:  Yes sir, I am there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It says next to the word Frank: 
“There were no people at that time at Wave.  The 
only time I started paying Wave ma’am it is when 
this team were, was that came in to be trained by 
Media.  I think they were paid for about five months 
if I am not mistaken for the entire duration.  At one 
point you see it is a pity.  At one point I know there 
10 
was a problem where Thulani wanted R20 million on 
Wave to be paid.” 
 
And then later on a few lines down, Frank: 
 
“I do not know what it is, but all I know there was 
money at one point and Thulani wanted R20 million.  He 
was ...[indistinct] at nothing.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Indistinct].  That is R20 million.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  R20 million, yes.   
“He was stopping at nothing that Lilly must make it 
available because I was close to …” 
20 
Then that sentence ends there.  But I wanted to ask 
you was this matter discussed during this interview.   
FRANK:  There was a discussion definitely yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you know what the purpose of 
the request for R20 million in relation to the execution of 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 75 of 269 
 
Project Wave was?  Or? 
FRANK:  Chairperson can I put it on record, that at that 
particular time or at that particular phase of the project I 
was not involved there, so I will not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Page 901.   
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Two thirds down the page.  You see 
that?  Next to the word, Frank: 
“Ma’am I do not know, I do not know, I do not know.  
Really I do not know.  These are instructions that 
10 
come.  This is what has to be done, do that.  
Everyone knows that we are drawing this money, 
even the money that goes to the minister for 
example was going cash.” 
 
You are asked: 
 
“Why was it going to the minister?” 
 
Frank: 
 
“I do not know.” 
 
You were asked: 
 
“Who was giving an instruction that money had to 
20 
 
be given to the minister? 
 
Your answer, or Frank answers: 
“It was him and Thulani.  Remember there were two 
projects that were running from the minister ’s 
office.” 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 76 of 269 
 
 
Question: 
 
“Which are?” 
 
Frank: 
“It is not project it was operations.  One of them it 
was Lock(?).  Yes.” 
 
And then there is a discussion about Lock.  Did this 
discussion take place? 
FRANK:  I could say it would have taken place.  However I 
need to put it to context.  [Indistinct] writing that.  It says 
the minister.  And I had not, at no given stage in my 
10 
...[indistinct] to the minister.  I think the reference was 
made to the ministry.  I think I need to put that on record. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Well to you knowledge what is 
the difference between the minister and the ministry? 
FRANK:  The minister could be the person himself.  The 
ministry could be an office in which we were dealing with 
officials in that office.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did you as part … 
FRANK:  [Indistinct] perhaps elaborate.  Sorry.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry. 
20 
FRANK:  Perhaps at a later stage you clarify that entire 
thing with that office.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  We will deal with that later 
when we get to your affidavit Frank. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 77 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But for the moment do I understand 
your evidence to be that you told the investigators in the 
Veza investigation that money was being taken to the 
ministry.  Is that correct? 
FRANK:  Ministry, yes that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that a correct statement, a fact 
you were obviously telling them the truth? 
FRANK:  I am telling them the truth, correct sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is it correct then that money for the 
execution of SSA Project was according to your evidence 
10 
taken to the ministry? 
FRANK:   Yes, yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that something that you had 
personal knowledge of or was it something that you had 
heard about? 
FRANK:   I am saying in as far as I am concerned the 
monies that I was taking through to ministry was delivered 
by an official.  I have never taken money personally to 
Minister Mahlaba.   I am talking in relation to me, myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you were talking about occasions 
20 
when you, personally have taken money to the Ministry, 
that’s what you are talking about? 
FRANK:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On page 902 in the third line you 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 78 of 269 
 
say, 
“No, it was not always me ma’am or it is recorded 
that you said, no it is not always me ma’am so I 
would deliver this money to the office”, 
 
Is that the office of the Ministry, is that correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now, when you delivered money to 
the office or to the Ministry to whom did you deliver the 
money? 
FRANK:   To the officials referred to in my affidavit, J and 
10 
B. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   J is that Jay? 
FRANK:   No, no, I’m not sure how it is written in these 
documents…[indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What officials, what office did they 
hold? 
FRANK:   In the Ministry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second Frank, the names 
you are using for the record, when you said J that’s a 
pseudonym is that right? 
20 
FRANK:   Yes, correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Pretorius you may 
have thought about it, I was just asking about the positions 
they held but they might not be operatives. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, they – that’s what I wanted to 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 79 of 269 
 
get to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Were these persons members of 
the SSA or operatives? 
FRANK:   Yes, one of those was a member – I mean, was 
yes because he’s no longer – was a member of SSA and 
…[indistinct] operative yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In the office of the Ministry? 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the other one? 
10 
FRANK:   Was an official in the office. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just an employee at the office of 
the Ministry is that correct, not a SSA member or 
operative? 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was his name? 
FRANK:   [Inaudible audio distorted]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I’m sorry. 
FRANK:   I may not be able to disclose that, but he was a 
member of SSA but not an operative. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, is that the second person? 
FRANK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, Frank, just to clarify the 
distinction.  When reference is made to a member of the 
SSA, is that different from an employee or official of the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 80 of 269 
 
SSA? 
FRANK:   Chairperson, in this context, yes because we are 
making reference to operations so try distinguish what’s 
that.  One had capacity to be involved in operations, one 
did not have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so if you – if you are the 
employee of the SSA who is also authorised or whose 
duties include being involved in operations you would be a 
member of the SSA but if you are an employee of SSA 
whose duties do not include being involved in operations 
10 
then you’ll just be an employee or an official, but you are 
not a member, is that right? 
FRANK:   No, it’s not right Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, what is right just explain it to me? 
FRANK:   What is right in terms of …[inaudible – audio 
distorted] particular persons and trying to distinguish in 
relation to capacity of what would be, one with the capacity 
or two can be participating…[indistinct], would not be able 
to have a …[indistinct] member because any person that is 
an employee and there’s an issue with the appointment 
20 
…[indistinct] is therefore, a member. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, to be a member you have to be 
issued with a specific number? 
FRANK:   Have an appointment number, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay so those who have not been 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 81 of 269 
 
issued with such a number would then be, just ordinary 
employees or officials. 
FRANK:   Of which I don’t know any of – any of such 
person. 
 
[Indistinct] 
establishment 
is 
a 
…[indistinct] 
regardless of his particular position or casting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
FRANK:   So, you’d not be in that…[inaudible – audio 
distorted] not a member. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would not be at SSA unless you are 
a member? 
10 
FRANK:   Yes, whether at the Ministry or at OTC, unless 
you’re a member. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even if you are – no matter what your 
position is, you would be a member? 
FRANK:   Within those two establishments I’m referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja that’s what I’m talking about. 
FRANK:   Because there could be people who were part of 
the agents who are not…[indistinct] that is something else 
outside those two establishments I’m making reference to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Pretorius? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, could I ask you to go to page 
905 please. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The first paragraph on that page, 
line three reads as follows, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 82 of 269 
 
“So, when that happened ma’am that’s how the 
Ministry took over the project.  It went out of my 
hand, I know nothing about it, the subject was paid 
from the Minister ’s office, I would draw the money 
under Ops Lock, deliver the money to them at the 
Ministry, 
they 
would 
sign 
for 
it, 
either 
two 
pseudonyms, Bokani or Jay, he would sign for the 
money they would go and deliver and bring back the 
certificate.  They would take the money and I would 
take the certificate, I would settle like that.  There 
10 
was another project, for example, Ops Justice there 
was money being drawn, that money started as 
R1.3million up to R21.8million I used to draw that 
money”, 
 
Did that discussion take place? 
FRANK:   Chairperson that discussion took place, however, 
I need to put certain things into context because I think the 
describer omitted that context part.  This taking over by the 
Ministry 
was…[indistinct] 
saying 
after 
facing 
some 
challenges in this operation …[indistinct] intervention  by 
20 
the Minister in which the Minister himself, then tasked 
these two officials to …[indistinct] with operatives how best 
can these be dealt with and one of the agreed propositions 
with the officials was that the withdrawal of this money 
needs to be confirmed either in the office delivered to 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 83 of 269 
 
them.  They would then arrange a …[indistinct] and upon 
that – and upon return from it would then receive 
certificate with a signature of the subject, which we had in 
our disposal as, what do you call, as an example, so we 
knew exactly how the subject would sign upon receiving 
this money and I would then collect that certificate for 
settling 
the…[indistinct], 
but 
I 
want, 
also 
to 
correct 
something,  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   It talks here about money that started at 
10 
R1.3million…[indistinct] Ops Justice and that money went 
up to R21.8million, that’s an incorrect affirmation of the 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   The operation, when it started, it was allocated 
R1.3million and then at a later stage the operation was 
allocated R1.8million to …[indistinct] for the operation.  
So, that R21.8million, it’s wrong information…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the correct figure? 
FRANK:   R1.3million to R1.8million. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
FRANK:   Not R21million I don’t know anything about 
R21million, 
I’ve 
never 
drawn…[indistinct] 
of 
me 
ever 
drawing that R21million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 84 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja, so apart from the figures and 
the context, and I’ll come to the context now, is it – did this 
discussion take place as recorded here? 
FRANK:   Definitely it was recorded but…[indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, let’s go back then to page 
904, you do, in fairness deal with the context there. 
FRANK:   [Inaudible – audio distorted]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the same Bundle. 
FRANK:   Yes, but I’m saying what part of  that 904? 
CHAIRPERSON:   He will tell you just now. 
10 
FRANK:   Oh, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   904, two thirds down the page. 
FRANK:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, you were asked, 
“Do you think and the name there is the subject of 
Operation Lock, has a relationship with the former 
President Zuma”.  
FRANK:   Hold on, hold on, where are we? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Two thirds down the page, or three 
quarters down the page, 904. 
20 
FRANK:   Okay…[indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You there, Frank says, 
“He didn’t have but he had, did they meet, in 
answer to the question, do you think the subject has 
a relationship with the former President Zuma.  I 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 85 of 269 
 
think they met, because one thing that I intervened 
was him, at one point, wanting to go meet the 
President with Thando and I said but where is this 
man going to meet the President.  Even with my 
discussion with the President I said, but baba he 
only said to me, now that I’m telling you what the 
President said to me, he said that this man, at one 
point was helpful to him especially when he was 
released.  He helped him with some things but when 
I 
went 
to 
ask 
him, 
but 
why 
do 
we 
have 
a 
10 
relationship with this particular person, but why are 
we allowing and the question is, the President saw 
his value, that’s the former President.  Frank, at 
that time he said he had a point that’s why they’re 
working.  Then I said in my intervention, I’ve got 
that report ma’am, I said even – I even said in my 
intervention, this is a problem that we are sitting 
with.  We can no long, the Minister for example has 
promised this guy R3million”, 
 
Did this discussion take place? 
20 
FRANK:   Sir can I confirm that we had a discussion of that 
nature, 
however, 
the 
construction 
of 
that 
paragraph, 
…[indistinct] the end, has been taken out of context.  
Perhaps I need to explain one thing sir, my involvement 
with this project or…[indistinct], was merely because there 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 86 of 269 
 
were challenges…[indistinct] the Minister request me to 
conduct an investigation, together with some officials from 
the Department of Correctional Services and report back 
with my findings.  So, this issue discussed here, it refers 
to that investigation in which, according to these officials, 
according to these officials there indicated the reason why 
the subject was placed under the care of SSA Special Ops, 
it was because he was helpful in conducting or revealing 
some information which was not revealed even through the 
GRC or any other form for which did help the President in 
10 
some decisions that he had to make and that they, 
themselves did a discussion with the President in that 
matter, it’s not my discussion with the President.  It’s a 
discussion with…[indistinct] the officials of Correctional 
Service and their understanding, that was the reason why 
the subject was placed under our care.  So, I wanted to 
clear – and …[indistinct] it was not in accordance to words 
told to me by the Minister it’s in accordance to information 
of the officials when I interacted with them.  So, I could not 
– I  don’t have the proof of that particular …[indistinct]. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright so…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think we should take lunch. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I’m sorry I missed that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it’s about seven minutes past one, 
we’ll take the lunch break and resume at ten past two, we 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 87 of 269 
 
adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue.  Frank. 
FRANK:   Good afternoon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon. Let us continue, 
Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Hello, Frank, 
again.  Frank, we are on page 905 of wire 16. 
FRANK:   905? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, please. 
FRANK:   I am on page 905, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At the end of the first paragraph 
the following appears.  There was another project for 
example Ops Justice, there was money being drawn and 
then there is a reference to figures which you have dealt 
with.  I used to draw that money.  The question is asked 
why.  The answer that you give is deliver because it was an 
instruction and the question then is where did it go and the 
answer 
is 
it 
would 
go 
to 
the 
Minister. 
 
Did 
that 
20 
conversation take place? 
FRANK:   Yes, remember in the context that I have alluded 
to with that correction of the Ministry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you say it should read the 
Ministry? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 88 of 269 
 
FRANK:   Not Minister, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now when you refer to the Ministry, 
I take it you are referring to officials within the Ministry 
rather than the building. 
FRANK:   Yes, yes, yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct.  Now from all the 
knowledge that you had and the context that you have 
described, these officials, were they acting in their official 
capacity as officials of the Ministry? 
FRANK:   Yes, they were.  Remember, they were part of 
10 
the team that was asked to resolution – to rectify the 
actual [indistinct] that existed... [intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but now we are talking about 
Justice now, huh? 
FRANK:   Yes, I am talking – remember, all those projects 
that are there or those operations, not projects, are as a 
result of the ministerial intervention. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, fine. 
FRANK:   So the money is combined for all ops, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then it goes on to say for what 
20 
purpose. 
“Frank - they knew who they were dealing with.  
Remember that there was a point where Justice was 
complaining that...” 
And then you correct yourself, you say: 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 89 of 269 
 
“No, there was a complaint that the judges were 
colluding 
to 
overthrow 
the 
government, 
so 
an 
operation was established.  So they said there is 
someone who is working closely to understand that.  
So this person was being paid this money to deliver 
this.” 
Did that conversation take place? 
FRANK:   I can confirm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  So there was a project that 
had something to do with judges and a person within the 
10 
Ministry was paid – being paid money to deliver that money 
in execution of that project.  Is that correct? 
FRANK:   May I correct something, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
FRANK:   There was never a project.  There was an 
operation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  I am sorry, that technical 
distinction sometimes eludes me.  An operation.  But 
otherwise my proposition, do you agree with it? 
FRANK:   Yes, that there was that conversation in and 
20 
around these operations and the officials would facilitate 
that transactions [indistinct] distributions. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Frank, just so that I 
understand, are you able to... [intervenes] 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 90 of 269 
 
FRANK:   Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to explain the distinction 
between a project and an operation publicly? 
FRANK:   Yes, I can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, please do that for my benefit. 
FRANK:   Yes.  Remember a project, Chair, a project is 
established based on the national intelligence estimates 
which [indistinct] that is put forth.  There is a [indistinct] of 
the 
planning, 
the 
costing 
and 
all 
those 
things, 
né... [intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   ...that results in the project with the [indistinct] 
and with a person who is allocated to run that particular 
project. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
FRANK:   Now with the preparation if there is anything that 
arises within the context of evidence that needs to be 
taken 
care 
of, 
remember 
part 
of 
our 
work, 
every 
information that comes to us is valuable, as a result of 
such part of it is that we need to put counter-intelligence 
20 
measures in place to confirm or refute the existence of that 
particular threat.  So this operation comes in the midst – in 
the middle of the project running, so we then accommodate 
within a particular project. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 91 of 269 
 
FRANK:   The operation arises because of a particular 
[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so within a project there could be 
different operations.  Is that right? 
FRANK:   Operations, exactly.  Exactly, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and there could be an operation that 
is not attached to a particular project or an operation must 
always be attached to a project? 
FRANK:   Because of the cost factors, né, we look at the 
relevant projects that can be related to that particular 
10 
threat.  So I would [indistinct] within that context of a 
project [indistinct] which had its own purpose, then a local 
or a threat that arises it was well best to place it within 
that particular project. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
FRANK:   Yes.  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us go a little further down the 
page, the next paragraph. 
“Frank - no it was meant to deal with the issues of 
20 
the judge.  Actually let me not confirm whether this 
person is a judge or not.  I do not know.  All I know 
is that I am delivering this money to the office to 
deal with the issue of the judges.  That is the one 
thing I know.” 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 92 of 269 
 
Did that conversation happen as stated there? 
FRANK:   Chairperson, it seems going forward in that 
particular statement it was a mixture of two factual issues 
looking at the figure that follows there.  That particular 
issue deal with [indistinct] Operation Justice. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, so in so far as you were 
referring 
to 
Operation 
Justice, 
that 
conversation 
did 
happen? 
FRANK:   Yes, we did have a conversation around that 
Project... [intervenes] 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes and what is said in the first 
three lines of that paragraph, that is correct from your 
point of view as I understand it? 
FRANK:   No, although it is not put into context, but it is in 
line with what I have explained around Operation Justice.  
I then meant to investigate, confirm or refute, yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Yes 
and 
then 
the 
issue 
changes... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   So it is not well explained there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry, I interrupted you.  What 
20 
did you say? 
FRANK:   Yes, I am saying in that particular paragraph 
there is a reference of issues instead of putting into 
context what issue, what it was. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, so I am coming to that now. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 93 of 269 
 
FRANK:   [Indistinct 00:08:42]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay.  I am only dealing in the 
questions to date or to this point with the first three lines 
as 
it 
deals 
with 
Operation 
Justice. 
 
Then 
you 
do 
change... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Okay, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The topic does change.  You say 
then there was another money, 2.5 million I think we used 
to take.  They used to call this money Commitment.  That 
is another issue as I understand it.  Commitment is another 
10 
operation.  Is that correct? 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
FRANK:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then you asked what was it for 
and the answer is recorded here as: 
“This money was going to some operation.  I do not 
know what operation it was, but I would take this 
money.  Actually there was no money.  We would 
not receive the money.  We would get a call from 
20 
the 
Minister forcing that this 
money 
must be 
available.  I said but Minister, this money only 
comes out when we draw the entire money for the 
month.  So if we cannot even draw money to pay 
people, where will we get this 2.5 million.  Do you 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 94 of 269 
 
understand?  So I would draw this money and take 
it, so at the Ministry I would drop off R2.5 million, 
this 1.3 and this 200 000, I would drop these 
monies in the Ministry, take what is due for me to 
make the payments for the workers, that is it.” 
Did that conversation take place? 
FRANK:   Chairperson, that conversation took place. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  So you did get a call from 
the 
Minister 
saying 
that 
the 
money 
must 
be 
made... [intervenes] 
10 
FRANK:   Made available [indistinct] ... [intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry, let me finish the question 
please. 
FRANK:   No, no, no. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, you make your answer, I 
will then ask the question. 
UNKNOWN MALE:   Chair, I think there is a technical 
glitch.  I do not think my learned colleague understood.  It 
looks like there is a break in the technical.  The witness 
was still proceeding [indistinct]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you remember to take off your mask, 
Frank, after lunch? 
FRANK:   No, no, no, I am well placed, Chairperson.  I am 
well placed.  I am [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 95 of 269 
 
FRANK:   It is just a technical – it is a technical issue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, so I interrupted you.  I am 
sorry.  The technical issues are difficult.  Give your answer 
and then I will ask my question. 
FRANK:   Yes.  I wanted to confirm, but again I want to 
correct the [indistinct] because there is reference of the 
Minister and then the Minister again, so I want to put those 
things into context. 
Firstly, remember we said these are ministerial 
intervention projects which then forced that all these 
10 
particular monies and operations need to be coordinated 
with the officials in the office of the Minister.  So that 2.5 
fall squarely within those operations that are identified to 
the need to be there.   
Now, there would be instances where there would 
be a complaint to the Minister.  I do not know by whoever it 
is related to the project, because I am not privy to the 
project to say we have made the delivery late or not yet.  
So I would explain to the Minister, no, we have not done 
the monthly withdrawal of funds with respect to all the 
20 
other operations inclusive of our own which are not 
necessarily the ones within the Ministry for intervention. 
So that paragraph there, it needed to establish and 
put that into context so it is understood that that call was 
not specifically because there was only people that the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 96 of 269 
 
Minister – no, no, no.  The Ministry would call to say we 
are aware that there is this intervention in these particular 
operations and we have received a complaint, this has not 
taken place, what has happened.  Then I would explain 
that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So I understand your evidence to 
be that even though there is a clear distinction in this text 
here between the Minister on the one hand and the 
Ministry on the other.  The Minister having made the call 
and the money being taken to the Ministry.  You say that is 
10 
wrong.  It should be the Ministry in both. 
FRANK:   No, no, no, no.  I am saying it is correct to say 
the Minister did call.  Remember he is part of the people 
that is receiving this [indistinct] intervening, so he would 
call me to say what is happening because [indistinct] 
intervene in this matter. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
FRANK:   So what is happening.  I am hearing that you 
have not complied or you have not delivered this particular 
operation and I would explain the reason to say but, 
20 
Minister, we have not done our monthly withdrawals or we 
still face the challenge of funds or we are still waiting, 
whatever the case. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  So what emerges from that 
is that this recordal here appears to be correct, firstly, and 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 97 of 269 
 
secondly that the Minister knew about the monies being 
paid to the Ministry. 
FRANK:   He knew about the intervention by the Ministry 
and that it took [indistinct] officials for that.  So he made to 
be understand by whoever was the recipient that that 
particular operation has not taken place.  So that is what 
he meant there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes and he spoke to you personally 
about this as you say in this paragraph. 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Thank you.  The 
R2.5 million or the project referred to in relation to the 
R2.5 million appears later at the bottom of the page to be 
in regard to Commitment.  Do you see that?  It is a name 
we have heard before in evidence. 
FRANK:   Ja, let me put it on record, sir, that Commitment 
it is what was referred to because we were not privy to the 
operation.  Nobody wanted to what you call [indistinct] the 
purpose, so we would always make that reference as the 
Commitment, but remember there is this part of the 
20 
commitment of monies that needs to go out.  So it was not 
in relation to 2.5.  It was in relation to all the commitments 
that we placed as part of [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is the position that sometimes you 
would use the word commitment to refer to undertakings or 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 98 of 269 
 
promises or obligations that you had undertaken that 
sometimes you would use the word commitment to refer as 
a code for money? 
FRANK:   That [indistinct] the point, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The reception is not good.  I have 
messaged 
or 
I 
have 
asked 
that 
the 
technicians 
be 
messaged on the other side to deal with the... [intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that is... [intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The connection is not good. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But we will be patient. 
CHAIRPERSON:   His response to my question was that 
they sometimes use the word commitment to refer to 
undertakings or promises or obligations, but sometimes 
they used the word as a code for money. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Well, whatever the case, 
we have heard the word commitment in another context, 
but that we can deal with in due course.  What I want to 
refer you to, please, Frank, is the top of page 906. 
20 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Kim says, in terms of where you 
thought the money was going, Frank is recorded as saying: 
“They were actually saying the money was going 
towards the project of the President.  That is what 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 99 of 269 
 
they used to say, but I do not know where, which, 
who was receiving.  You see, the one person who 
was also delivering this money was that boy who 
passed on.” 
Right, well let us leave the quote ‘boy who passed on’ out 
for the moment.  Did you hear from anyone that the money 
was going towards the project of the President and that 
would be the former President? 
FRANK:   If I can also put that into context.  I think it was 
the writing that you are not understanding.  When we heard 
10 
about these other commitments to operations that we were 
not informed, there was also reference – there was always 
reference that, you know, some of these operations would 
be looked at at the presidential level.  So there was no 
direct reference to say it was for the formal projects.  
There were projects looked at at the presidential level.  
That is my understanding. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So were the words ‘project of the 
President’ in that context used by you? 
FRANK:   No, it was the presidential project – presidential 
20 
level, sorry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is a presidential project? 
FRANK:   I do not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So whether it was project of the 
President or presidential project, those words were used. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 100 of 269 
 
FRANK:   At the presidential – no, no, no.  At the 
presidential level. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, what is it?  You have said 
presidential project and you have said projects at the 
presidential level.  What words were used? 
FRANK:   I used presidential level that these 2.5 had to do 
with anything at the presidential level. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Now what is a project at 
the presidential level? 
FRANK:   I would not know.  That is why I am saying it is 
10 
something [indistinct].  I do not know anything about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that how they were referred to by 
other people as well? 
FRANK:   Yes, that is what I heard around.  Remember this 
was [indistinct] as operatives, as [indistinct] if someone 
else would have to do – to deliver that money, because I 
was not the only one delivering.  My understanding at the 
level of operations and our operatives, that was the 
understanding that there is a presidential level.  As to what 
is that presidential level a need-to-know principle applied.  
20 
I had never asked about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I would like you to go to page 909, 
please. 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 101 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The last line, Demi is recorded as 
having said: 
“What was the spending on Wave?” 
W-a-v-e.  And at the top of the page 910 you are recorded 
as having said: 
“Exactly, that is what I am saying, ma’am.  We 
would draw money from the beginning which I do 
not dispute.” 
Demi is recorded as saying: 
“Because the first withdrawal of 20 million.  Frank -
10 
exactly.  Demi - of the 30 million.  Frank - exactly 
there was those withdrawals as instructed to go to 
the relevant person that we must go and give and 
they do.  So I agree with you that there was 
expenditure not related.  Demi - okay, which is 
irregular.  Frank - yes, I agree with you, ma’am.” 
Did that conversation take place? 
FRANK:   The conversation took place and that reference 
of 20 million it was a reference of allocation.  The first 
allocation of the project was 20 million, not withdrawn.  
20 
And then later the project was further allocated 30 million. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And do you confirm that you said 
that that was irregular, that particular withdrawal? 
FRANK:   What irregular? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I am asking you the question, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 102 of 269 
 
if I may, because... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   What is that was irregular?  I do not follow. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I asked you... [intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will help clarify.  You said withdrawal 
was the wrong word used there.  What was the right word 
that you said... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Yes, it was allocation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Allocation. 
FRANK:   Allocation, yes.  And later 30 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So instead of withdrawal of R20 million 
10 
it is supposed to be an allocation of R20 million. 
FRANK:   Allocation, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But then you say or it is recorded 
against your name as you having said: 
“So, I agree with you that there was expenditure not 
related.  Demi - okay, which is irregular.  Frank - 
yes, I agree with you, ma’am.” 
Let me ask you, you confirmed that that conversation took 
place.  What does that mean? 
20 
FRANK:   Okay, what it meant here is that remember when 
these projects [indistinct] personnel had to be [indistinct] 
to this project, which means Project Wave was going to be 
utilised in conjunction with personnel recruited specifically 
to deal with that operation or that project. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 103 of 269 
 
So when an approval took place in January 2015 or 
in November 2014, somewhere there, I am not really sure, 
personnel had not been recruited as yet.  However, 
because of the pressing need to carry out the operation 
money was utilised in that process, you know, without this 
particular personnel.  So the personnel came into being 
almost, you know, towards the middle of the project 
already.  So other personnel within other assets were 
utilised for the implementation of the project. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  I must just say, Frank, that 
10 
we do have a recording of the interview in fairness to you 
that is the source of this transcription.  So if you need to 
listen to that or obtain it, we can possibly make it available 
to you, but I just want to place on record that this 
according to the investigators... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   I was just... [intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let me finish.  Let me finish, 
please. 
FRANK:   I was making a... [intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That this is according to the 
20 
investigators an accurate transcript of a tape recording of 
the interview.  We can move on then to page 922. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think, Mr Pretorius, if there is a 
recording available it should be made available to him to 
listen to and compare with the transcript. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 104 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then subsequently he can do an 
affidavit to say whether where he said it is not correctly 
recorded he still sticks with [indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we will do so.  That would be 
very useful. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because then we have it in its 
totality. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us go to page 922 if you will. 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I do not want to go into too much 
detail now because we are really pressed for time, Frank, 
but there is a discussion here about two amounts, one 
R20 000 
which 
is 
R20 000 
extra 
and 
an 
amount 
of 
R300 000 from halfway down the page to the bottom.  Do 
you see that? 
FRANK:   I can see that.  Yes, I can see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did that conversation take place? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, what... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Yes, it did... [intervention] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 922. 
CHAIRPERSON:   922, okay.  Continue.  You may continue. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 105 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Demi asks you two-thirds the 
way down on the page in relation to the R300 000: 
“That was meant for Mahlobo and was discovered 
by Daryl.  You do not know of that?  Frank - no, no, 
no, it is not 
possible that 
Daryl 
would 
have 
discovered such.  I will tell you why, ma’am.  Money 
that was meant for Mahlobo would leave here to the 
Ministry.” 
Was that said by you? 
FRANK:   Again, I know we have discussed about the 
10 
excess money, the issue of excess money.  I am not quite 
sure – conversant with the direction in which the money 
was taken.  I know we spoke about was there a possibility 
that you guys would draw extra money and then I made a 
reference that I [indistinct] which money was sent to us in 
the office and it was in excess of 20 000 which were 
refunded back to the office. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is not clear... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   I know I had that discussion, but going forward I 
am not [indistinct]. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, but I just want to know whether 
you said the words ‘money that was meant for Mahlobo 
would leave here to the Ministry’.  Did you use those 
words?  If necessary we can check on the transcript 
recording. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 106 of 269 
 
FRANK:   Yes, that is why I am saying I am not sure about 
that, but I know we had a conversation of extra funds – 
withdrawals from funds, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say you cannot remember 
saying money that was meant for Mahlobo would leave 
here to the Ministry? 
FRANK:   Specifically that, yes.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You cannot remember that. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if we give you the transcript 
10 
you can confirm with us whether you said that. 
FRANK:   Will confirm, sir.  Will confirm, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  If we could please then 
move on to – Chair, can we admit this as EXHIBIT YY16.2?  
The affidavit is YY16.1 and this transcript beginning at 
page 845 would that be YY16.2. 
FRANK:   Can you repeat for me, sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, he is speaking to me, Frank.  On 
mine, Mr Pretorius, the transcript starts at page 845.  I 
thought you said 842. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It starts at 845. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  The transcript of an interview 
involving Frank that starts at page 845 would be admitted 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 107 of 269 
 
as 
an 
exhibit 
and 
would 
be 
marked 
EXHIBIT YY... [intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   16. 
CHAIRPERSON:   16. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Point 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Point 2.  Yes.  And you said you would 
like me to admit the affidavit as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, as 16.1.  I think we have done 
that, but [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not think we did that at the 
10 
beginning, but it is important we should do it.  What page 
does it start? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The affidavit appears at 1146.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1146.1.  No, you are right, Mr Pretorius, 
we did it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  It was at that stage that you 
called me forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you at page 933, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   933. 
20 
FRANK:   933, you said. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
FRANK:   933.  Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At page 933 is a certificate of 
veracity completed it appears by Gauteng Transcribers and 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 108 of 269 
 
then there is a transcript of an interview at page 934 and 
following.  It appears that – well, let me ask you.  Were 
you interviewed by Mr Mufamadi as part of the high level 
review panel investigation? 
FRANK:   Yes, I was. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if we could go to page 1010, 
please.  Well, before that let us go to... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   One? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry.  Let us go to page 950. 
FRANK:   950. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
FRANK:   I have got up to 945. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On the first half of the page it 
appears from the transcript at least that you told the panel 
about 
Operation 
Justice. 
 
Did 
you 
tell 
them 
about 
Operation Justice? 
FRANK:   Yes, I think we did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the content of the first half is 
consistent with evidence you have already given in that 
regard.  Do you have any comment? 
20 
FRANK:   Can you repeat for me, sir? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  At 975 if you would go 
there, please. 
FRANK:   975. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, please. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 109 of 269 
 
FRANK:   975.  Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  That speaks about 
Operation Lock and traverses issues that we have already 
traversed.  Can you confirm that you told the high level 
review panel about Operation Lock? 
FRANK:   Yes, we did discuss with the panel.  I did discuss 
with them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then if we can go to 1010, 
please. 
FRANK:   1010. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At the bottom of page 1010 you will 
recall there is... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Hold on, sir.  Hold on, sir.  I am at 1010. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  At the bottom of the page 
you are recorded as having said: 
“Project Wave, W-a-v-e, was established in the 
sense 
that 
we 
wanted 
to 
recruit 
and 
handle 
journalists around Africa specifically because we 
felt that South Africa actually at that time there was 
a need for us to expand in terms of exposure in 
20 
understanding, you know, of what South Africa is 
doing and so forth, especially around the areas 
of...” 
And I have read it exactly as it is printed there.  Did that 
conversation take place and did you tell the panel that? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 110 of 269 
 
FRANK:   I can confirm it took place, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it is correct, is it? 
FRANK:   It is correct, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then let us go over the page to 
1011, the second paragraph. 
FRANK:   Yes, sir.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You are recorded as having been 
asked – well, not asked, but speaking about Project Justice 
and you say halfway down the first paragraph: 
“It was an operation, the one that I referred to 
10 
earlier when I said it was intended to have an 
understanding who sit where within the justice 
fraternity.” 
The next paragraph reads: 
“Specifically issue that pertain the judges, because 
there was this feeling with these judges are being 
handed...” 
I presume it should mean handled. 
“...by 
foreign 
intelligence 
services. 
 
So 
my 
understanding of the project was there.” 
20 
Unknown female is recorded as having asked: 
“Was it not intended to influence decisions of 
judges.  Frank - at a point I can say it was because 
I know for [indistinct] even within Project Justice we 
are paying a lot of money a month and these 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 111 of 269 
 
monies were said to be paid to a certain set of 
judges that were working on high profile cases and 
so forth and so forth.  Unknown female – yes.  
Mr Frank - but I was not directly involved.  I only 
know because I used to draw money for Masanda he 
gave direct to the office of the Minister because 
that project was being handled direct from that 
office of the Minister.  Mr Mufamadi says it is fine.” 
Did that conversation take place? 
FRANK:   Conversation took place, Chair. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It took place... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Yes, I would say also... [intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry, I interrupted you. 
FRANK:   Suffice to say I can assume now that it is making 
reference to the issue of the 2.5 million that we spoke 
about – I mean, the Operation Justice that we spoke about 
in last transcript. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Can I ask whether what you 
said here was to the best of your knowledge what you knew 
correct? 
20 
FRANK:   No, no, no, I did not know much about it.  I just 
made speculation of investigation of the judges, because I 
did not have in depth of that project [indistinct], you know.  
I 
only 
know 
that 
there 
was 
this 
assumption 
– 
not 
assumption or that information that reflected a threat, you 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 112 of 269 
 
know, by judges colluding with foreign intelligences within 
the justice system.  Therefore there was a need to confirm 
or refute that information by form of investigation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, you knew as I understand it, 
and correct me if I am wrong, that within Project Justice, 
we, that is the SSA, were paying a lot of money a month.  
Is that correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, remember I was making reference to that 
1.3 and then 1.8. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it goes on to say, and these 
10 
monies were said to be paid to a certain set of judges.  Is 
this what was said? 
FRANK:   No, these monies were paid to deal with set of 
judges suspected of being involved in actual fact. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry, just say that again.  These 
monies were paid... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Were paid to deal with a set of judges suspected 
of being involved in this particular threat. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Did you say however ‘and 
these monies were said to be paid to a certain set of 
20 
judges’.  Did you say that? 
FRANK:   Not set of judges. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, no. 
FRANK:   Set of judges – monies were paid to deal with a 
set of judges, yes.  Not paid to the set of judges. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 113 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Because I would not have the information. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay.  You say your understanding 
of what you learnt was that they were paid – the money 
was paid to deal with a set of judges... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Set of judges, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...and you did not say, as I 
understand your evidence, and these monies were said to 
be paid to a certain set of judges. 
FRANK:   No, I would not because I do not have that 
10 
evidence.  I do not even know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Well, again we have the 
recording.  We will provide the recording to you and we will 
ask you questions in relation to the recording, okay. 
FRANK:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because the last sentence of that 
paragraph says, that where – I presume it means were, 
that were working on high profile cases and so forth and so 
forth.  That sentence only makes sense if the money was 
paid to judges.  At least that is something that can be 
20 
extrapolated or inferred from that.  Maybe it is not the only 
interpretation.  What do you say about that? 
FRANK:   Ja, Chair, it could be that you choose to 
understand that way, however in my context this set of 
judges that were suspected [indistinct] is because these 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 114 of 269 
 
are a set of judges that are working on high profile cases 
that foreign intelligence seeks to influence.  That is my 
understanding. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Let us get the transcript 
and we can clarify that in later questions.  Right, then the 
next page, page 1012 and this in fairness to you when you 
placed matters of the Minister and the Ministry in its 
context, I just want to put this on record.  In the middle of 
page 1012 you are recorded as having said: 
“We just drew the money to say look, there is this 
10 
operation running.  So on your monthly withdrawals 
can you include this particular [indistinct] and that 
money was directly taken to the office of the 
Minister because he had people in his office.  
Mr Mufamadi - who was receiving that money?  
Mr Frank - 
sometimes it would be pseudonym 
Fukani [?].  Mr Mufamadi - yes.  Mr Frank - who was 
the resurgent office of the Minister or it would have 
been IT XXX...” 
And I think it is XXX he is the manager and then his 
20 
particular post is described, which I am not going to detail.  
Did that conversation take place? 
FRANK:   Yes, I can confirm it did.  I was making reference 
to JMZ. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, subject of course to all the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 115 of 269 
 
evidence 
that 
you 
have 
given 
about 
the 
Minister ’s 
knowledge and his phone calls and the like.  But that is all 
in the transcript and I do not want to go back there.  Then 
on page 1013, line 10, Mr Frank is recorded as having 
said: 
“Remember this tasking that you were given that 
come from above.  Mr Church - where is above?  
Mr Frank 
- 
the 
Minister 
or 
the 
DG 
because 
remember we work directly longer with the DG, 
Mr Dlomo.  That is the only person we work with or 
10 
the Minister.” 
Is that correct? 
FRANK:   [Indistinct 00:13:12]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  The passage at the bottom 
of the page is inconclusive, but we may ask you about that 
later.  If I could just take you then to page 1036. 
FRANK:   1036.  Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At a stage you were suspended.  Is 
that correct or... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   That is correct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is that stage? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 1034. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but what is that stage?  It is the 
stage of the letter? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 116 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, no, no, page 1034 of the 
bundle, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but that page I have got a letter. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so that letter is dated June 2019. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   3 June 2019, yes.  I am going to 
ask about this letter, but in leading up to that question I 
must first establish as Mr Frank would want the context, 
Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You were suspended, Frank? 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And this letter at page 1034 
appears to be a letter written by yourself requesting a 
review of the suspension of yourself.  Correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, sir.  Correct, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you write this letter or did you 
have this letter written on your behalf? 
FRANK:   I wrote it personally, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You wrote it personally. 
20 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And can we rely on its contents as 
being true and correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Could this be EXHIBIT YY – no, the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 117 of 269 
 
transcript, 
the 
Mufamadi 
panel 
transcript 
should 
be 
EXHIBIT YY3, Chair.  I do not know if we have done that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, we did not do that here, but we 
would have done it when Dr Mufamadi gave evidence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now I am not sure whether this 
was admitted with Mufamadi, but perhaps it could be 
admitted again just for safety’s sake. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, no, Chair, I am going back.  
Sorry, I am confusing issues. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But it is in the nature of the time of 
day.  Page 933... [intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you finished late yesterday. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
Chair, 
so 
[indistinct] 
mitigating circumstances.  Page 933. 
CHAIRPERSON:   923. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   933. 
CHAIRPERSON:   933. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the... [intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...Mufamadi panel transcript.  If 
that could be admitted as YY3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It starts at – it actually starts at 934, but 
the cover page is 933. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 118 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair.  Certificate of veracity.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Certificate.  I think we start there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, in fact the cover page is at 
932, but I do not want to confuse issues, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think let us do it at 932. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Page 932 as YY3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is this transcript is the whole – does the 
whole of it relate to the interview of Frank? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair, only Frank. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it will be 16.3? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   16.3, yes.  YY16.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  The transcript of an interview 
between Frank and the high level panel which starts at 
page 932 will be admitted and marked as EXHIBIT YY16.3. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then, Chair, if I may ask you 
please at page 1034 to admit that letter that has just been 
identified by Frank as YY16.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter of Frank dated 3 June 2019 
that appears at page 1034 is admitted and will be marked 
as EXHIBIT YY16.4. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Frank, you say that the contents of 
this letter we can rely on as being correct.  It was penned 
by yourself. 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Go to page 1036, please, and I just 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 119 of 269 
 
want to very briefly put the paragraphs in the middle of the 
page on record where you say under the head ‘members 
activities within CDSO’: 
“There were a number of other operations that were 
undertaken by CDSO which the member had no 
direct involvement to them other that the fact that 
the member was instructed to draw funds as per 
submissions and approval, deliver to the specified 
individual, place or office.  Such was the case with: 
Operation Justice, started from 1.3 mil to 1.8 mil 
10 
withdrawal delivered to the Ministry, received by 
code name Fukani or Head of the Ministry code 
name J.  Commitment Fund, 2.5 million delivered to 
the Ministry.  Operation Lock, R200 000 delivered to 
the Ministry.” 
Is that a correct recordal of the facts to your knowledge? 
FRANK:   Correct, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And there of course commitment is 
used in a different context.  It appears to refer to a specific 
project or operation rather than just a general reference to 
20 
a promise or undertaking.  Correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, sir.  Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  Let us then go on, 
please, 
to 
your 
own 
affidavit 
which 
appears 
as 
EXHIBIT YY16.1 at page 1146.1. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 120 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   The page is? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   1146.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am going to go through it fairly 
fast because we do not have much more time.  We can go 
to paragraph 8, please. 
FRANK:   Paragraph 8. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Yes. 
 
You 
refer 
there 
to... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Which page is this? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 1146.3, paragraph 8.  1146.3. 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
You 
talk 
there 
of 
Project Constração and Project Wave and you talk of an 
allocation 
of 
30 million 
to 
Project Constração 
and 
20 million in respect of Project Wave.  It is misspelt but I 
presume it is W-a-v-e there.  Is that correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are those facts correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, this is correct, sir. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right and then at paragraph 14 on 
page 1146.4 you talk of Project Constração and you speak 
in paragraph 14 of recruits coming from outside the 
intelligence environment and these recruits were also 
trained in firearm handling.  Is that correct? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 121 of 269 
 
FRANK:   That is correct, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We could go then to – well, I am 
not going to – well, perhaps I should, other witnesses 
given evidence in this regard.  Firearms – you say in 
paragraph 14: 
“Firearms were sourced from the SSA armoury 
through Mr XXX at the instruction of Mr Dlomo and 
another person.” 
Is that correct to your knowledge? 
FRANK:   That is correct to my knowledge, sir. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then if we go on, please, to 
1146.7, I just want to ask you generally, please, is it 
correct that... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   114? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   6.7. 
FRANK:   Can you repeat for me, sir? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   1146.7. 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is it correct that on occasion the 
SSA would employ external service providers companies to 
20 
undertake tasks on its behalf? 
FRANK:   Yes, sir, that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright and what you say here in 
detail is indeed correct in that regard.  Is that correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 122 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The statements in paragraphs 38 
and following at page 1146.9 regarding Ntwanano Tours & 
Travel, are those statements correct? 
FRANK:   Sir, I will have preferred if you did not mention 
the name there, suffice to say... [intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Oh, my apologies, it is not – I am 
sorry. 
FRANK:   [Indistinct 00:25:02]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I mispronounced [indistinct].  You 
would never guess the spelling from my bad pronunciation.  
10 
I would like to go to paragraph 44 that is on page 1146.10. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Were there dealings with the 
company mentioned there?  Its pseudonym is Kale, K-a-l-e. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And were you introduced to the 
relevant persons connected to Kale by Mr Dlomo and/or 
Minister Mahlobo? 
FRANK:   Yes, I think one of those, yes, that would have 
been correct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And can you confirm that an 
amount of R12 million was allocated for that operation? 
FRANK:   I can confirm, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Then on page 1146.11 you 
give details in relation to Project Constração.  I am not 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 123 of 269 
 
going to put those all on record, but those are set out there 
and as far as you know they are correct.  Is that so? 
FRANK:   They are correct, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then on page 1146.12 you deal 
with Project Wave.  It was spelt there W-a-i-v-e.  It should 
be W-a-v-e as I understand it.  Correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  You say in paragraph 54: 
“My involvement with the project was limited to...” 
And then there is an incorrect number. 
10 
“...one, 
coordinating 
resources 
and 
requesting 
funds for the payment of identified operations and 
assets with the obvious financial accountability.” 
Is that correct? 
FRANK:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then 50 – or it is numbered 
53.2 on page 1146.13: 
“Spotting and profiling of media personnel and/or 
journalists with the aim of recruiting them for the 
purpose of satisfying identified operational needs.  
20 
These targeted journalists were to be recruited from 
outside South Africa.: 
Let me just ask firstly, what were the operational needs 
that had to be satisfied? 
FRANK:   Sir, I think that will have to be limited to that, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 124 of 269 
 
given that they actually copied a version of that needs and 
better explain [indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you do speak here of targeted 
journalists being recruited.  Do you see that? 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that correct? 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Targeted 
journalists 
were 
recruited.  Correct?  From outside South Africa. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You do frankly admit – sorry, I did 
not mean that.  You do candidly admit that your wife was 
involved in a particular company and one of your children 
was recruited.  Is that correct in the context of what you 
say in paragraph 55 for your daughter?  Is that correct? 
FRANK:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you do say children and 
relatives of other members within CDSO and SSA were 
recruited. 
FRANK:   Yes, that is correct, which is nothing out of the 
20 
normal. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Paragraph 56 reads: 
“Project Wave’s implementation of the media and 
journalist operations... [intervenes] 
FRANK:   Can I – sorry, sir.  Chair? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 125 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, Frank. 
FRANK:   Can I draw you back to the issue raised by 
Mr... [intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Pretorius. 
FRANK:   Yes, yes, with relation to my wife.  I am not sure 
there, but that the [indistinct] was made that the company 
that [indistinct] it was registered under her name, that is 
why it is not her involvement.  It is not involvement.  I think 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  But it is important also in 
fairness to mention that you do say that that company 
received no financial benefit. 
FRANK:  Oh yes very very correct.  It was not (inaudible) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
FRANK:  And that played 00:00:19 by myself. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright then on page 1146.14. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You record your knowledge of 
Project Mayibuye, you see that? 
20 
FRANK:  Yes, yes Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say in paragraph 58 
“I generated the memo requesting the establishment of this 
project at the request and briefing given to me by Mr Dlomo 
in a meeting attended by myself and two others.” 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 126 of 269 
 
FRANK:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And in paragraph 52 you say: 
“I 
however 
need 
to 
mention 
that 
my 
involvement under this project was as a 
result of newly established operations within 
the 
project 
namely 
Operation 
Justice, 
Operation 
Lock, 
Operation 
Seskona 
and 
Operation Safe Return.” 
 
You see that? 
FRANK:  Yes.  Yes Sir. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then in paragraph 61.1 you 
describe Operation Justice.  We have dealt with that. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say at the end of that 
paragraph: 
“Such funds were dispensed” 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well you do mention R1.3 million 
and R1.8 million on a monthly basis for the purpose of the 
operation.  Is that correct as far as you know? 
20 
FRANK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Such funds… 
FRANK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say were dispensed to the office 
of the then Minister of State Security Mahlobo.  Is that 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 127 of 269 
 
correct? 
FRANK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then Operation Lock is referred 
to in paragraph 61.2 again the last sentence of that 
paragraph reads: 
“The dispensing of these funds” 
That is the funds you mention in the paragraph. 
“Was through the office of the Minister.” 
You see that? 
FRANK:  That is correct. Yes Sir. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then Operation Seskona you 
deal with in paragraph 61.3 and you describe its origins. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Being a consultative meeting that 
took place in the presence of various persons including 
Minister Mahlobo.  Correct? 
FRANK:  Correct Sir. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
And 
Operation 
Seskona 
you 
described 
as 
being 
an 
operation 
designed 
to 
launch 
investigative operations monitoring and penetration into the 
20 
civil society movement that was responsible and the 
destabilising and causing disorder in the City of Cape Town 
in the name of protest against lack of service delivery.  Is 
that correct? 
FRANK:  Well described.  That is correct. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 128 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and then paragraph 61.4 you 
refer to Operation Safe Return being an operation designed 
to penetrate, investigate in order to confirm or refute the 
involvement of the then newly formed political party in the 
destabilisation of the Bojanala region in the North West 
Province – Bojanala region of the North West Province.  Is 
that correct?  
FRANK:  That is correct.  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then in paragraph 61.5 you say the 
following: 
10 
“In 
addition 
and 
operation 
code 
named 
Commitment was undertaken by CDSO.  I 
have no recollection of the intended purpose 
however I remember that the funds allocated 
were to the value of R1.5 million on a 
monthly basis and were dispensed to the 
office of the Minister and or at times given 
to my colleague.” 
And then you mention two colleagues.   
“The operation had the approval of the 
20 
Minister D Mahlobo and Mr Dlomo.” 
Are those statements correct? 
FRANK:  Certainly it is correct Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then paragraph 62 you deal with 
Project Khusela – K-h-u-s-e-l-a and it is said here: 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 129 of 269 
 
“The establishment of this as a project was 
after the Minister’s intervention into the 
CDSO financial matters in which the budget 
of CDSO needed to be reallocated as at the 
time it had been depleted.  Notable and 
important is that the depletion of the CDSO 
budget was as a result of the establishment 
of the Presidential support unit which had no 
allocated budget.  Instead general CDSO 
budget was utilised for the purpose of 
10 
supporting 
PSS 
logistical 
needs 
of 
members.” 
Correct? 
FRANK:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And Project Khusela’s operational 
needs it appears from paragraph 6.1 arose out of the 
establishment of the toxicology unit or operation. Correct? 
FRANK:  Repeat the sentence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  About which we have heard in 
evidence.  Is that correct? 
20 
FRANK:  Can you repeat that for me? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Project Khusela’s operational needs 
included the requirements or the needs of the team of the 
counter intelligence named Toxicologist forming part of the 
Presidential support operations. Correct? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 130 of 269 
 
FRANK:  Sir I do mention all the elements or components 
which comprised that (inaudible) which includes not only 
toxicology 
but 
also 
the 
technical 
compass 
and 
the 
legislature. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  But that is all there in the – 
in the paragraph. 
FRANK:  Yes it is all there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
FRANK:  Yes.  6.2 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 62.1 huh? 
10 
FRANK:  62.1 Sir – Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  62.1 yes I apologise Chair.  On page 
1146.16.  Then it seems that in paragraph 74 you respond 
to a number of documents – operational documents. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That were provided to you by the 
commission’s investigators.  You were asked for you 
response and you give your response.  Do I understand the 
position correctly?  You were given a pack of documents – 
20 
financial documents – documentary evidence. 
FRANK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And I stress documentary evidence 
in relation to various transactions.   
FRANK:  That is correct Sir. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 131 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So in the left hand column of the 
table that appears at 1146.20 and the following pages there 
is a brief description of the transaction as recorded in the 
documents and referenced to your name.  Is that correct? 
FRANK:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in the right hand column are 
your comments.   
FRANK:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright now I am only going to refer 
to a few.  If you could go to page 1146.25. 
10 
FRANK:  Yes Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Are you there? 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You will see there is a document 
referred to in the extreme left hand column as M3. 
FRANK:  Yes Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right now before we go on I am 
afraid I am going to confuse you a little.  There is another 
bundle. 
FRANK:  Yes Sir. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Bundle SSA1.  Do the persons who 
are with you. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Have that bundle and can they give 
it you please. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 132 of 269 
 
FRANK:  Yes.  I have got it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  They are ahead of me then.  Thank 
you.  If you could go to SSA1 page 01 page 378. 
FRANK:  3 page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  378. 
FRANK:  378? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.   
FRANK:  Did you say 378? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I did. 
FRANK:  Yes.  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right on that page certain details 
appear. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Which are detailed in the left hand 
column of the table that appears on 1146.25. 
FRANK:  Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That document is a declassified 
document.  It is the Financial Record received by the 
investigators from the SSA.  It is headed Certificate of 
Receiving Cash. 
20 
FRANK:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And your name appears at the top. 
FRANK:  Which page is that Sir? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    Page 378 of SSA01. 
FRANK:  Yes I am on it. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 133 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Are you there? 
FRANK:  Yes that is correct now. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You see it is a certificate of 
receiving cash. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the name of the person giving 
the cash is Frank that is you, is it? 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the amount is R2.5 million. 
R2 500 000.00 and the reason for giving cash is Operation 
10 
Mayibuye.  You see that?  Whose signature is that below 
there? 
FRANK:  It is mine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Your signature and it is dated the 8 t h 
of July 2015. 
FRANK:  15. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and the name of the recipient is 
recorded here as a pseudonym as being Lilly but that is 
what has been inserted as a pseudonym together with your 
name inserted as a pseudonym.  Now your explanation 
20 
appears in the right hand column.  It says: 
“According to what I can remember she Ms 
Lilly requested that I collect and deliver on 
her behalf.  She was not available to handle 
the transaction herself.  I took it to the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 134 of 269 
 
relevant recipient and they signed for it.  
The recipient’s signature will not be that of 
Ms Lilly but that of a recipient.” 
Are those facts correct? 
FRANK:  Yes. Can I explain. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Please. 
FRANK:  As to you so that we can (inaudible) 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes of course. 
FRANK:  I collected the money from the headquarters to our 
remote office which I made Lilly to sign that she has – she 
10 
has received what she had asked me to collect.  And in turn 
she has delivered the money to the ended recipient.  So 
that signature at the bottom it is of the ended recipient.  I 
made her sign and then she makes the other recipient sign.  
When she sign I keep a copy then finally she makes them 
then sign and she give back to me and I take this one for a 
settlement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right now you need not mention the 
name of any person. 
FRANK:  (Inaudible)l. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry. 
FRANK:  So giving her to sign it was also to safeguard self. 
I have delivered the money to her before she delivers.  
Anything that can happen in between her trying to deliver 
the money to the actual intended recipient I am covered that 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 135 of 269 
 
I had given it to her. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Who was the relevant recipient? 
FRANK:  I would not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You would not know? 
FRANK:  I would not know.  Not in this particular context I 
do not know. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes well all the evidence we have so 
far is that monies for Project Mayibuye were delivered to 
the 
Ministry. 
 
Would 
that 
be 
consistent 
with 
your 
knowledge? 
10 
FRANK:  You see (inaudible) 00:14:06.  But within Mayibuye 
there are operations of which commitment was one of those 
that money derives and the projects are delivered to the 
Ministry.  It is not an entire 00:14:20 project monies that are 
delivered to the Ministry.  Those identified three operations. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I understand that but what I am 
putting to you is we have other evidence that states that 
monies in the amount of R2.5 million were delivered for 
Project Commitment or Operation Commitment – I am 
mixing it up again I am sorry and delivered to the Ministry. 
20 
FRANK:  Yes but that is what we have been saying 
consistently. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. And that is consistent with your 
knowledge is it? 
FRANK:  Yes. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 136 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Then let us go on please to 
M14 on page 1146.   
FRANK:  From the original bundle. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well I am going to ask you – yes.  
So the bundle with your affidavit in. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Deals with the issue of M14 at 
1146.26. 
FRANK:  Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And if I can take… 
10 
FRANK:  M14. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  1146.26 M14. 
FRANK:  Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Are you there? 
FRANK:  Okay alright.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now if I can take you to the other 
bundle, Bundle 1 at page 449.   
FRANK:  449. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.   
FRANK:  449.  Yes Sir. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You will see another certificate of 
receiving cash.  This is a declassified document from the 
financial records of the SSA.   
FRANK:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The name of the person giving cash 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 137 of 269 
 
and we will have to redact a portion of those – or those 
initials as they appear there in part but it is Frank.  Do you 
see that? 
FRANK:  I see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The amount is R2.5 million. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Reason for giving cash Operation 
Mayibuye and the word thereafter seems to be Commitment, 
you see that? 
FRANK:  That is correct.  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And the signature is the 
same as the previous one is that your signature? 
FRANK:  Yes it is mine yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the date is the 30 t h of June 
2016.  You see that? 
FRANK:  16 that is correct.  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then there is a recipient’s 
signature I do not think we need go there but do you know 
who that person is rather than give his name? 
FRANK:  Ja. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is he a person at the Ministry by any 
chance? 
FRANK:  Look I do not want to speculate I am not sure that 
is our view but it is definitely not – I am not sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright do not worry about that.  So 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 138 of 269 
 
once again we have a financial record that talks of the 
receipt of cash in amount of R2.5 million for the purposes of 
the Operation Mayibuye, Project Commitment.  Correct? 
FRANK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now there are two documents under 
M14.  I have just referred you to one and your comment is: 
“These 
dates 
refer 
to 
two 
separate 
transactions. 
 
One 
for 
Operation 
Commitment 
the 
other 
for 
another 
transaction.  These transactions have the 
10 
same withdrawn amount.” 
You say: 
“I have no good memory of both however do 
understand that my name reflects on the 
document relating to Project Commitment.” 
FRANK:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right but at least what we know from 
the document as confirmed by your evidence that there is a 
financial record of R2.5 million in cash being withdrawn 
from SSA for the purposes of the implementation of 
20 
Commitment.  Correct?  Project Commitment. 
FRANK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Then let us – before you – 
do not worry there is something I wanted to point out but I 
will come back to it in a moment.  If you could go to 1146.27 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 139 of 269 
 
please.  M15. 
FRANK:  I am there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Against the document number M15. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now there are several documents. 
FRANK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry Chair I am just getting the 
document that I want to put. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And I am going to be in time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
FRANK:  Chair may I ask we take five minutes to run to the 
bathroom while that is being sorted out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay no that is alright. 
FRANK:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He has asked for a five minutes break. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So let us take that five minutes break. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn for five minutes. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 140 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Hello, Frank.  Thank you, Chair. 
FRANK:   Good afternoon, sir.  Good afternoon, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I could take you, please, to page 
1146.27 and the documents ...[intervenes] 
FRANK:   Yes, I am there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...in 15. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if I may take you to the other 
bundle, Bundle 1 at page 463? 
FRANK:   Yes, sir.  463. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Again, this is a certificate 
of receiving of receiving cash.  It has been classified, 
extract from the financial records of the SSA.  Name of the 
person 
getting 
cash, 
Frank. 
 
Amount, 
R 2.5 million.  
Reason for giving cash, Operation Mayibuye.  Underneath 
that, commitment.  Date, 30 June 2016.  I am going to go 
through all the documents if I may and then ask for your 
comment. 
 
At page 464 of Bundle 1.  The name of person – 
a similar document.  Name of person giving cash, Frank.  
20 
Amount, R 1.4 million.  Reason for giving cash, Project 
Mayibuye, Operation Justice.  Date, 9 June 2016. 
 
The third document at page 465.  Amount, 
R 1.4 million.  Name of person giving cash, Frank.  Amount 
in words, one million four hundred thousand rand only.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 141 of 269 
 
Reason for giving cash, Operation Justice (Mayibuye).  
Date, 30 June 2016.   
 
Another document.  Similar document.  Page 466 
of Bundle 1.  Name of person giving cash, Frank.  Amount, 
R 300 000,00.  Amount in words, three hundred thousand 
rand.  Reason for giving cash, Operation Lock.  Date, 
30 June 2016. 
 
And finally.  Page 467.  A similar document.  
That is a certificate of receiving cash.  Name of person 
giving cash, Frank.  Amount, R 200 000,00.  Reason for 
10 
giving cash.  And this becomes a little bit difficult to read 
but 
R 30 000,00 
remuneration. 
 
Operation, 
Lock.  
R 70 000,00 
it 
appears. 
 
Logistics 
and 
expenses.  
Signature, 30 June 2016.  Name of recipient,  Correctional 
Officer.  And at the bottom of the page is a note.  
R 30 000,00 remuneration.  R 100 000,00.  Current invoice, 
R 70 000,00.  Current ops expenditure.  But appears to be 
related to Ops Lock.   
 
Now those documents were described on page 
1146.27 in a table to you.  And your comment in the right-
20 
hand column is:  Transactions herein are clear and self-
explanatory.  Do you see that? 
FRANK:   I see that, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So I take it, you have no difficulty 
with the contents of the document or the description in the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 142 of 269 
 
left-hand column? 
FRANK:   No, I did not have at all. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry.  I did not hear that. 
FRANK:   Yes, I think I was answering to the column with 
no difficulty.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Now if you would look at 
the description of the document on the left-hand page and 
it may not be apparent because of the redaction but 
...[intervenes] 
FRANK:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...the investigators described the 
documents in M15 as – and I am looking at the bottom half 
of page 1146.27.  Cash receipt, 30 June 2016.  Operation 
Mayibuye.  Commitment, R 2.5 million handed over by 
Frank to, and there is a name, right?  And then underneath 
that.  Cash receipt, 30 June 2016.  Operation Justice.  
R 1.4 million handed over by Frank to, and then there is 
another name.   
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now because of the similarity of 
20 
that name to a different name, I am going to be asked that 
it be redacted.  But is that person – does that person work 
at a place that we have mentioned in evidence? 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what is that place? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 143 of 269 
 
FRANK:   The last one? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
FRANK:   The last one works at that facility, remember? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that the ministry? 
FRANK:   No, no, no.  The last one.  Are you referring the 
one on page 1146.28? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  No, I am talking about...  Oh.  
No, no, no.  I am not talking about 1146.28.  I am talking 
about, the bottom of the page, 1146.27. 
FRANK:   ...seven. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you see there? 
FRANK:   Yes, I see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It was handed over by Frank too 
and we are not going to mention that name. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then handed over by Frank to 
another name. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   My understanding is that that 
person works at the ministry. 
20 
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Alright.  You deal with certain 
other facts on page 1146.30 and following.  Do you have 
anything to add? 
FRANK:   Can you repeat for me, what page is that? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 144 of 269 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, we have finished with the 
tables in relation to documents. 
FRANK:   Yes?  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We are not going to deal with 
anymore but at page 1146.30, your affidavit continues.  It 
is there for the record.   
FRANK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I do not intend to ask you any 
questions unless you have anything you wish to say? 
FRANK:   No, not at this juncture.  It is fine. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  Chair, if you bear with 
me for a moment, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Other projects are mentioned but I 
take it as they are mentioned in your affidavit or in your 
commentary, we can rely on that evidence as being correct. 
FRANK:   That is correct, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Okay, Frank.  Subject to 
your confirmation that the transcripts of your interviews 
with the Internal SSA Investigator and with the Mfumadi 
20 
Panel, our concern – we will let your legal representative 
have those.  I have no further questions, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Frank.  We, once 
again, appreciate that you have availed yourself.  I will 
now excuse you.  You are now excused. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 145 of 269 
 
FRANK:   Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
FRANK:   I am not sure but, you know, from the beginning 
of this exercise ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK: 
 
 
...I 
thought 
perhaps 
I 
will 
find 
space 
...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
FRANK:   ...to, you know, at – to say something to you, 
Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
FRANK:   And this one, Chair, is ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, go ahead. 
FRANK:   The first one is just to make an indication that 
me being here, it is in response, not only to the request 
made by the then acting DG, my being here, also, it was 
also motivated, myself consciousness and willingness to 
assist the Commission with this furthering of evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   However, also within my own context that I 
20 
thought, you know, this exercise in the end would have 
been able to dispel some of the things that, you know, 
were presented by some witnesses to the Commissions to 
which they have made or that built(?) to the fact that, you 
know, we operated, you know, as we believe, you know, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 146 of 269 
 
without control, without discipline(?) and so forth. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   However, I know this is a matter that can be 
dealt with perhaps in the correspondence forum(?), but I 
want to put it on record sir, that my understanding and my 
view of things is that we only did the most(?) things(?)  on 
narratives as provided for in the investigation. 
 
But that also we acknowledge that there might 
be areas in which we might have acted or done things 
wrong or perhaps we could have done it better or in a 
10 
better way ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   ...but we did not do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   Is the notion that suggests that we deliberately 
created empowerments(?) in which we tend to mislead or 
categorically(?)  we walked(?) in the wrong boots. [Speaker 
not clear – transmission not clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   The brisket(?) in terms of the legislation, the 
20 
directives that we must not – that empower us in whatever 
we are doing.  Some witnesses may even said things that 
in our view(?) there were no reports, that were no need(?) 
in the planning.  [Speaker not clear – transmission not 
clear] 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 147 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   In this particular(?) witnesses, they are not 
familiar with operations like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   [Break in transmission – speaker unclear]  Even 
in covert operations, if product assets are custodian(?) 
...[indistinct] reports inclusive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
FRANK:   So, this – not have received reports.  Witnesses 
may not have seen the need. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
FRANK:   Witnesses may not have seen whatever they 
referred to but that is not suggesting that these things 
were not there.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
FRANK:   These things were there.  [Indistinct] [00:11:55] 
particular areas, we have not done wrong but we have 
never 
done 
it 
with 
any 
intent 
to 
cause(?) 
harm(?) 
[00:12:03] [Speaker not clear – transmission not clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
FRANK:   I am not saying this because some of us still 
have a career within the industry(?).  We would love to 
continue to this country going forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   So, place that on record because I do not want 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 148 of 269 
 
anything that is to suggest we are here because we are 
guilty, as said to be by some of the witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
FRANK:   Might be the point maybe some witnesses that 
even without evidence of things even without making 
reference to legislature but confidently stood and say to 
the Chair that this particular animal did conform to the 
regulations of the states.  So, perhaps, as we go on, Chair, 
we will find a way of assisting the Commission further to 
understand that this was done within the ambit of, you 
10 
know, serving our country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, mister – well, Frank, what you 
have said is important.  So I would then suggest that to the 
extent that you believe that some witnesses have given the 
Commission a wrong picture or inaccurate picture about 
the State Security Agency and how things are done there.  
I would be interested in hearing your side of seeing things.   
 
So I would encourage you to be in touch with the 
20 
Legal Team and I would encourage the Legal Team to 
obtain an affidavit from you to the extent that they might 
not already have which deals with that aspect.  And if you 
need to go to certain particular features of the evidence of 
some of the witnesses who you believe did not give an 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 149 of 269 
 
accurate picture, I would like you to deal with that in an 
affidavit.   
 
And then within the constrains, time constrains 
that the Commission has, we would try and find a way, 
either for you to come back and deal adequately with that 
or we could arrange that your affidavit or a summary of 
your affidavit or the main features of your affidavit be read 
out to me in a public hearing by an evidence leader so that 
the public knows what you have to say so that the picture 
that you believe is not accurate, is corrected at least from 
10 
your point of view.  Would that be fine with you? 
FRANK:   Ja, I think you have said it well.  I would prefer 
to actually dispose to a kind of an affidavit which you know 
can 
be 
used 
and 
by 
the 
omission 
going 
forward 
...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK:   ...without me having to come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
FRANK:   Or even if you want to something of – without me 
having to come back. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  If you prefer not 
to come back, that is fine. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just thought you might ...[intervenes] 
FRANK:   I will prefer(?) to dispose that. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 150 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
FRANK: 
 
 
I 
will 
definitely 
dispose 
to 
an 
affidavit, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is alright. 
FRANK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Pretorius will let me know once 
he has got it and we can have it or at least its main 
features ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, perhaps we could extent that 
invitation to all the material witnesses. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, and if I may make a 
comment.  From whatever perspective and whatever role 
was played or alleged to have been played, all witnesses 
seem to recognise that there are problems. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that there may be solutions 
and perhaps they could deal with that issues as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  So any witness who feels that 
the correct picture of SSA has not been given or some 
20 
witness gave a picture that is not accurate, they must feel 
free to be in touch with the Legal Team of the Commission 
and to depose to affidavits that puts what they believe is 
the correct picture of the State Security Agency.  But thank 
you very much, Frank. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 151 of 269 
 
FRANK:   Thank you very much Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  We are going to 
adjourn the day session and then we – I am going to come 
back after 15-minutes and then I will hear the evidence of 
Ms Gigaba, Norma Gigaba, I believe.  And after that, I will 
hear the evidence of Mr Peter, I believe.  So I will adjourn 
for – I think I see the evidence leader for the next work 
stream.  Mr Myburgh is there.  So I will take a 15-minutes 
adjournment and then resume.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon, Mr Myburgh.  Good 
afternoon, everybody. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Good afternoon, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  Ms Gigaba is legally 
represented? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, the representation is the same 
as before. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright.  Thank you, thank 
you, thank you.  Okay alright.  Good afternoon, Ms Gigaba. 
MS GIGABA:   [No audible reply] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your mic is off. 
MS GIGABA:   Good afternoon. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 152 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Thank you for coming 
back.   Okay, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  Chairperson, 
Ms Gigaba’s exhibit is Exhibit 26.  I understand you have it 
in front of you.  I am going to start by taking her to a 
supplementary/clarification affidavit that she recently filed.  
I assume you would want the ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes ...[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...the oath to be administered? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But maybe before that.  For the 
10 
benefit of the public, you could just indicate why she is 
back to give evidence. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  Chairperson, you will recall 
that we had a marathon session that went on, I think it was 
until half-past eleven on one evening with Ms Gigaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ms Gigaba did indicate, in the 
course of her evidence, that there were certain things that 
she was unhappy about.  The content of the affidavit and 
other things. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It was always envisaged that she 
would put in that affidavit and that we would then have to 
deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 153 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is one leg of sitting this 
evening. The other leg and I suppose it must follow after 
we have dealt with the supplementary affidavit and any 
corrections that she wants to make, we need then to put 
Mr Gigaba’s version to her for her comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So those are the purpose of this 
evening’s session. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is alright.  Please 
administer the oath or affirmation. 
10 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   I am Norma Mngoma Gigaba. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
20 
but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say, 
so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:   Thank you. 
NORMA MNGOMA GIGABA:  (d.s.s) 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 154 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, DCJ, sorry.  I have just been 
advised that the oath has not been recorded because the 
witness spoke too softly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Please try again.  Okay. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   I am Norma Mngoma Gigaba. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
10 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say, 
so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
NORMA MNGOMA GIGABA:  (d.s.s) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   Chairperson, I apologise.  I would have 
20 
wanted 
to 
probably 
just 
assist 
by 
inserting 
a 
few 
corrections 
on 
the 
supplementary 
affidavit 
which 
Mr Myburgh might be dealing with now.  There are just 
some two cosmetic changes so that we place them on 
record so that we can place them on record ...[intervenes] 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 155 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, those have not been conveyed to 
Mr Myburgh as yet or is he aware of them?  Do you want to 
...[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   I would believe from the correspondence we 
have had that they have not been brought to his attention.  
However ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   ...they do not appear as such on the 
supplementary affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Myburgh, are you of any 
10 
corrections to be made? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I – there were some things that were 
discussed.  I am not aware of exactly what correction 
...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...my learned friend had in mind but I 
have no objection ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...to her placing on record if she 
wishes to. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay let us do that. 
MS GIGABA:   Chair, it is strictly to deal with paragraph 
66.4 of the original affidavit bundle, page 1015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the affidavit at – oh, the affidavit is 
997 – page 977 is the ...[intervenes] 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 156 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the main one? 
MS GIGABA:   [No audible reply] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS GIGABA:   At the first line, paragraph 66.4, shows the 
date of 18 June 2020 ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 66.4? 
MS GIGABA:   66.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, page 1015. 
MS GIGABA:   At page 1015, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you say that the – so the correction 
you would like to bring to my attention are corrections that 
should 
be 
made 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
main 
affidavit 
...[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   The main affidavit ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But ...[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   ...the content is otherwise ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but those corrections are not catered 
for in the supplementary affidavit? 
MS GIGABA:   No, no.  We missed them for something 
20 
stated here.  I think we printed the final version, somebody 
just did not put that up ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay you can point them out but it would 
be important to still have then another supplementary 
affidavit to put them in because otherwise they may be 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 157 of 269 
 
missed out because we cannot amend the affidavit. 
MS GIGABA:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Point them out. 
MS GIGABA:   Chair, it will be the ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   66.4 paragraph ...[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   66.4, first line. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS GIGABA:   The date reflected there is 18 June 2020.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   It should state the 20 t h of July 2020.  At the 
second line, the date reflected is 24 June 2020.  The 
correct date would then be 22 July 2020. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   Apart from that, Chair, it will only be the 
cosmetic change to the supplementary affidavit 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Where at paragraph 9.4 the last line 
...[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
where 
do 
we 
find 
the 
supplementary affidavit? 
MS GIGABA:   [No audible reply] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
The 
supplementary 
affidavit, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 158 of 269 
 
Chairperson, is contained at page 1027.8.   
MS GIGABA:   The supplementary affidavit is at 1027.8. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have got it.  Okay where do make 
the corrections? 
MS GIGABA:   Paragraph 9.4, Chair.  The last line of the 
paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:   9.4.  Yes? 
MS GIGABA:   It says to “his commission” when it is 
supposed to be to “this commission”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Okay.  Yes? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   That is it.  Those are the only pages, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
MS GIGABA:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I think those are the dates that 
are important.  But of course, once you do a supplementary 
affidavit, you may do a third one as well.  Okay alright.  
Mr Myburgh. 
EXAMINATION BY ADV MYBURGH SC (CONTINUES):   
Yes, thank you.  Ms Gigaba, could I take you, please, to 
page 1027.8 your supplementary affidavit. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You confirm that we are going to be 
using Transnet Bundle 7? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ms Gigaba, could you please go to 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 159 of 269 
 
your supplementary affidavit towards the end of Exhibit 26 
at page 1027.8? 
MS GIGABA:   [No audible reply] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It will be amongst the last ten pages 
or so of that bundle. 
MS GIGABA:   In this bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   1027.8. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think someone must assist her. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At 1027.8, are you there? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You find the supplementary affidavit 
of yours.  If I could take you, please, to 1027.18? 
MS GIGABA:   [No audible reply] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will see that it ends there and it 
includes an annexure. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   1027.19, the letter from your 
attorney, through to 1027.22.  Do you see that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If I could ask you, please, to go back 
to page 1027.18?  Do you confirm that you deposed to this 
affidavit on the 18 t h of May 2021? 
MS GIGABA:   [No audible reply] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you confirm that? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 160 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You confirm the truth and accuracy 
of this affidavit? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson, I would ask that you 
admit 
this 
affidavit 
of 
Ms 
Gigaba, 
dated 
the 
18 t h of May 2012, commencing at Transnet Bundle 7, page 
1027.8 as Exhibit BB-26.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Ms Norma Mngoma 
Gigaba that starts at page 1027.8 is admitted and then 
10 
would be marked as Exhibit BB-26.4. 
AFFIDAVIT OF MS GIGABA IS ADMITTED AND MARKED 
AS EXHIBIT BB-26.4 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ms Gigaba, I am going to take you 
through this affidavit before we turn to – me putting to you 
Mr Gigaba’s version.  You say at paragraph 2 that: 
“Having held consultations with the evidence 
leaders and/or further consultations with my 
legal team prior to my appearance at the 
Commission scheduled for 26 April, it became 
20 
necessary that I filed a supplementary affidavit 
for 
the 
following 
reasons 
which 
I 
must 
highlight, are not exhausted...” 
 
You say at 2.1: 
“To clarify the aspects of my affidavit which 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 161 of 269 
 
has previously served before this Commission 
and on which the Commission led me on 
26 April 2021...” 
 
Do you confirm that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sub-2: 
“To highlight that when I deposed to the first 
affidavit, I was not given sufficient time to go 
through the affidavit before signing it. 
The affidavit was signed in the presence of my 
10 
previous counsel, who for security reasons, 
advised that I signed the affidavit immediately 
and that for security reasons we should not 
keep a copy thereof. 
The Commission had dropped off a hard copy 
with my counsel after they informed him they 
could email it to us...” 
 
You confirm that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And who is the previous counsel that 
20 
you are speaking of there? 
MS GIGABA:   It was Advocate ...[indistinct] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sub-3: 
“To provide context insofar as is necessary to 
distinguish between information contained in 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 162 of 269 
 
my affidavit allegedly being common cause or 
public 
knowledge 
which 
was 
not 
in 
my 
personal 
knowledge 
but 
that 
was 
instead 
provided 
by 
the 
Commission 
through 
its 
investigators...” 
 
You confirm that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sub-4: 
“To 
raise 
concern 
with 
the 
Commission’s 
decision to change evidence leaders when I 
10 
had at all times prepared and consulted with 
Advocate 
Paul 
Pretorius 
SC 
with 
the 
understanding that he would be leading my 
evidence and substituting him with Advocate 
Anton Myburgh SC who had, seemingly though 
no fault of his own, clearly not been given a 
proper handover report on our consultations, 
resulting in having to rehash the consultations 
I had with Pretorius SC. 
The result of this is that the concerns I 
20 
originally raised with Pretorius SC were not 
known to Myburgh SC to my determent. 
Even when similar concerns were raised with 
Myburgh Sc, they were not dealt with. 
Hence my continued concern with some parts 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 163 of 269 
 
of the affidavit...” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you deal with those 
concerns. 
“More 
specifically, 
the 
very 
fact 
that 
the 
affidavit contained information that I had no 
independent knowledge of and as a result 
created discomfort that I had addressed with 
Pretorius SC. 
10 
This situation added to the failure to make the 
necessary corrections to my affidavit, some of 
which were material...” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sub-6: 
“The issue of my security concerns had been 
furnished 
to 
the 
Commission 
through 
the 
evidence 
leaders 
who 
had 
undertaken 
to 
ensure that I would be provided with security. 
20 
However, 
and 
despite 
numerous 
promises, 
nothing had been done by this Commission in 
this regard which indicated total disregard to 
my safety concerns duly raised. 
Following 
my 
appearance 
before 
the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 164 of 269 
 
Commission on 26 April 2021, the Commission, 
through my attorney, inquired if I still needed 
security to be provided. 
I advised my attorney that I no longer need the 
security as I have already appeared before the 
Commission...” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just before you proceed, Mr Myburgh.  I 
just want to indicate that subsequent to Ms Gigaba’s 
10 
appearance last time and in the light of the issues she 
raised 
about 
the 
Commission 
not 
having 
attended 
adequately or may not at all, as far as she is concerned, to 
her security concerns.   
 
I specifically asked the Head of the Investigation 
Team, Mr Nombembe, to take steps to establish what 
needs to be done and whether Ms Gigaba still needs 
security so that her concerns could be addressed and dealt 
with.  I have been given a report but I do not think that 
what I have been given is final.   
20 
 
So I just want to indicate that after I have heard 
your 
concerns, 
I 
did 
give 
instructions 
that 
you 
be 
approached to establish exactly what can still be done in 
regard to your concerns.   
MS GIGABA:   Thank you, Chair. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 165 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Thank you.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  And at 2.7: 
“My affidavit had been leaked to the media and 
given to AJ Gupta without my knowledge, 
permission or the Commission informing me or 
my counsel. 
These developments further exacerbated the 
situation...: 
 
And 2.8: 
“The fact that a narrative has been created by 
10 
the Commission that I had, in fact, approached 
the Commission to give evidence when that 
was, in fact, not true...” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at 3: 
“I attached hereto the letter that I caused my 
attorneys 
of 
record 
to 
deliver 
to 
the 
Commission, highlighting the concerns that I 
have eluded to above, as Annexure NG-1...” 
20 
 
Now that is the letter that was read into the 
record previously and dealt with, correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at 4: 
“In submitting this affidavit, I should not to be 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 166 of 269 
 
understood to waive any of my legal rights 
which I hereby expressly reserve. 
I confirm that some of the concerns expressed 
herein and also raised by my during my oral 
testimony 
and 
partly 
addressed 
by 
the 
Chairperson...” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
“Insofar as my first affidavit filed with the 
10 
Commission is concerned, I wish to clarify the 
following paragraph as contained therein...” 
 
And then what you do is, you refer to paragraph 
6 of your original affidavit and perhaps we can – you can 
keep our finger there and then you can open your main 
affidavit which you will find towards the beginning of that 
affidavit at paragraph 6, you will see a page 1000.  The 
paragraph 
6 
is 
a 
table 
of 
Mr 
Gigaba’s 
ministerial 
appointments, correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, sir. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What you say at your paragraph 5.1 
of your correcting affidavits that: 
“The dates set out when Mr Malusi Gigaba 
held various positions in Cabinet. 
These dates are not within my independent 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 167 of 269 
 
and/or personal knowledge or recollection. 
They 
were, 
however, 
inserted 
from 
the 
information 
provided 
by 
the 
Commission 
through its investigators. 
Consequently, I cannot vouch for the veracity 
thereof...” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you deal with paragraph 10 in 
your correcting affidavit.  Paragraph 10 of your main 
10 
affidavit that deals with - at page 1001 deals with – one of 
Mr Gigaba’s sisters, Mr Gugu Gigaba and makes reference 
to the fact that she was employed at Transnet in a 
particular position, a Manager in the Project Management 
Office.  In paragraph 5.2 of your correcting affidavit you 
say: 
“The specific position of Ms Gugu Gigaba who 
is employed at Transnet is provided. 
This information was not within my personal 
knowledge and as a result I cannot vouch for 
20 
its veracity. 
I have been informed, however, by Advocate 
September that the information is subject of 
testimony before the Commission.” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 168 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you deal with paragraphs 19 
and 20.  This is something that you have testified to before 
the Chairperson.  Paragraphs 19 and 20 of your main 
affidavit at page 1003 deal with the Waterkloof issue, 
correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What you say in paragraph 5.3 of 
your correcting affidavit is that: 
“An impression has been created from the 
10 
reading of these two paragraphs that I went to 
the Waterkloof Airport twice a few days before 
the wedding and on the day of the wedding. 
The correct sequence is that I did not go to 
Waterkloof again on the day of the wedding but 
had been there only once a day or two before 
the wedding...” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you deal with paragraph 30.2 
20 
of your main affidavit and this relates to the India trip and 
the date of it.  It is something that you have also dealt with 
in your evidence previously.  You say at paragraph 5.4 of 
your correcting affidavit: 
“During 
my 
consultations 
with 
evidence 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 169 of 269 
 
leaders, I could not vouch for the accuracy of 
the date in the absence of my passport as far 
as the India trip was concerned. 
It has since been brought to my attention that 
according to Mr Gigaba, this trip, which is 
common cause, took place in 2015 which date 
I cannot dispute. 
I travelled with Mr Gigaba to India only on one 
occasion...” 
 
I think you have dealt with that before.  So you 
10 
want to correct the 2010 to 2015? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you go on to deal with 
paragraph 39 of your main affidavit.  You say: 
“On 26 May, Mr Gigaba was transferred back 
to the Department of Home Affairs...” 
 
So 
this 
is 
another 
date 
of 
ministerial 
appointment? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say at your paragraph 5.5 of 
20 
your correcting affidavit, that this was not within your 
personal knowledge.  It is a repetition of the point 
previously made, correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you deal with paragraph 44 of 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 170 of 269 
 
you main affidavit at page 1009.  It says: 
“It is publicly know that Mr Gigaba, during his 
term 
as 
Minister 
of 
Home 
Affairs, 
had 
approved early naturalisation with members of 
the Gupta family...” 
 
In your correcting affidavit at paragraph 5.6, you 
say: 
“The information contained in this paragraph 
was not within my independent and personal 
knowledge...” 
10 
 
You cannot vouch for it.   
“The information has been provided by the 
Commission through investigators...” 
 
Do you confirm that?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the last correction that you 
want to make relates to paragraph 55.2 and 55.2 you will 
find at page 1012 where you say: 
“On several occasions, I had also personally 
observed Mr Gigaba transferring money from 
20 
his brown and black leather bags into his 
brown leather personal carry bag...” 
 
You attached some of the examples.  And then it 
goes on to say: 
“He would later use the cash from his personal 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 171 of 269 
 
carry 
bag 
to 
pay 
for 
our 
meals 
at 
restaurants...” 
 
Now the correction that you wish to make, you 
find, it is a paragraph numbered 5.1 at the top of page 
1027.13. 
“Having read this paragraph, it is clear that the 
information I provided was not adequately 
and/or properly captured, to the effect that I 
had indeed seen the bag being carried out of 
the Gupta’s residence several times but I had 
10 
only seen Mr Gigaba transfer cash from the 
bag to his carry bag only once...” 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is the point that you want to 
make? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So those then are your concerns and 
your corrections? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, on the balance of this affidavit, 
20 
you go on to deal with a different issue and perhaps I can 
pick up at paragraph 8 at page 1027.13.   
“The submissions and/or suggestions made by 
Mr Solomons ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, what page Mr Myburgh? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 172 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Page 1027.13, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
“The submissions and/or suggestions made by 
Mr Solomon SC on behalf of Mr Gigaba in his 
address to the Commission that I cannot be a 
reliable witness as I am an unhappy and/or 
bitter spouse going through a divorce and that 
as a result, my evidence were only serve my 
bitter purpose to seek to get to Mr Gigaba...” 
10 
 
And you say at paragraph 9: 
“This narrative and/or suggestion cannot be 
further from the truth. 
I wish to demonstrate this point by providing a 
chronology of events...” 
 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could you take us through that 
chronology of events, please? 
MS GIGABA:   So must I read it from 9.1? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You can read it or you can narrate it 
for us. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay.  So what happened in 2020 earlier – 
last year, I went to Mr Gigaba.  I told him that I want to – I 
want a divorce, which then he said why I want a divorce.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 173 of 269 
 
So I explained the reasons why I wanted the divorce.  So I 
have my personal reasons why I was not happy in the 
marriage and I think he was comfortable with us to get a 
divorce and also it was good for our kid to grow up in a 
positive environment.   
 
So then he said he does not – he is not ready for 
a divorce because he was busy preparing for the State 
Capture and also he was busy doing his submissions for 
his PhD and thirdly he said he was not ready for a divorce 
at all because he had a lot of distractions because he had 
10 
to focus on preparing for the state capture.  So then he 
agreed ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Because he had to focus on? 
MS GIGABA:   Preparing for the state capture. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS GIGABA:   So then he agreed to – he asked me give 
him time and I agreed to that.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes? 
MS GIGABA:   So then we continue that.  So he came 
again to me, I think it was later in the middle of the year 
20 
also last year.  He asked me – he was like there was 
someone at home who is an expert in IT.  He was asking 
for my gadgets, my cell phones.  Someone is wiping the 
information for us.  So I asked:  Why is someone wiping 
the information for us?   
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 174 of 269 
 
 
So then he made an example.  Because he said 
he was about to finish to wrap up his evidence to the state 
capture 
but 
now 
he 
is 
worried 
that 
based 
on 
the 
information that I have.  So he made an example about 
Brian Molefe.  So he said to me:  It is because you were – 
as a family we are close to Guy(?).  So that is why it was 
easy maybe for him make an example about Guy.   
 
So he said to me there was a time – there was 
an investigation about Brian Molefe.  He said he went to 
the 
Gupta 
house 
– 
and 
then 
when 
there 
was 
an 
10 
investigation, the investigation showed that he went to the 
President(?) compounds(?) more than two or three times.  
So he said he does not want that to happen to him because 
he want to say he was there two or three times.   
 
So I said to him:  Why do you not tell the truth?  
Why do you not go to the Commission and give the truth so 
that you do not have to say things and cover them up?  He 
said he does not want to.  So I said:  Okay.  Unfortunately, 
I will not be able to give you my devices.  Because for me I 
do not understand why he does not want to tell the truth.  I 
20 
even reminded him because I remember in Parliament, I 
think it was in 2017 because he resigned in 2018.   
 
I think it was EFF, they asked him how many times 
he has been there.  He said he does not call but two or 
three times.  And I remember him on that – I remember 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 175 of 269 
 
then the evening I was asking him:  Why you said you were 
there three times?  Because we were always ...[indistinct – 
word cut] time, so he did not want to answer me on that 
day.  So when he said the person was there to delete then 
I said I do not want to do that and then it ended there on 
that day, I did not give him my gadget and then – so I think 
a few weeks on the …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Please would you speak into the 
microphone so I can hear you? 
MS GIGABA:   Sorry.  So then I refused to give him my 
10 
gadgets because for me I felt like why he must delete the 
information?   So I thought it was easier for him to come to 
the Commission to tell the truth so that we do not have to 
come up and come up.  And also, I asked him the other 
thing, I was like why we cannot divorce just because you 
are going to the Commission because I did understand how 
I get involved with the Commission because Commission 
has never called me – there is nothing that involves me 
with any [indistinct] or with his work because I have never 
worked for government.   
20 
 
So then he explained that if we divorce he is going 
to – we are going to lose a spousal privilege, so he want to 
go to the Commission while he was still married.  So that 
brought to confusion to me but I said to him I do not want 
to give my gadget and it ended there.  And he was a bit 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 176 of 269 
 
annoyed.  So he went back – so that expert was in his 
study room, so I think they spoke, the guy left. 
 
A week or two weeks later that is where everything 
started and then it was the arrest, where I got arrested.  
So the Hawks came to our home because I sent a 
Whatsapp to Malusi’s friend.  So Malusi called me at home, 
he said the police are calling me, so I went downstairs at 
home and they said they want to all gadgets.  So I asked 
them why you want all my gadgets?  They said they want 
all my gadgets because I sent a Whatsapp message to 
10 
Malusi’s friend and then I said okay, I was carrying a 
phone but not this one, the one before this upgrade.  So I 
said to them okay, here is the phone that I used but I 
deleted the message.  So they said they need to take the 
phone, I said there is no problem but this is the phone that 
I use, you can take it.  They said no, we want all your 
gadgets and we need to go with you upstairs because we 
know that all your gadgets are upstairs.  So I said okay, I 
am coming back.  They said no, I am not allowed to go on 
my own, they had to come with me. 
20 
 
So ion the time we all went – before we go upstairs 
then I said I want to go to the bathroom and then they 
refused, they said I am not allowed to go on my own.  Then 
I begged them that can I go to the bathroom?  So then one 
police – I do not know, must I mention their names or I 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 177 of 269 
 
must not?  I can?  I do not know must I mention their 
names or not? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I do not have any difficulty but, Ms 
Gigaba, perhaps you could just speak to your affidavit? 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you do not mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS 
GIGABA: 
 
 
So 
what 
happened 
then 
I 
went 
…[intervenes] 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So what paragraph are you on now? 
MS GIGABA:   Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What paragraph are you dealing with 
now? 
MS GIGABA:   I am 9.4. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   9.4? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, continue? 
MS GIGABA:   Okay.  So I went …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
one 
of 
the 
police 
officers 
20 
…[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   I am reading that but it is like I prefer to 
talk because everything that I am saying is what is here, 
that I am to read? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine, you – I think what Mr 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 178 of 269 
 
Myburgh – he just wants to know how much you have 
covered. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes.  Okay, ja, I am …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is not saying do not speak. 
MS GIGABA:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can speak and …[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   So what happened, Sir, they went upstairs 
with me.  My kids were there with me, so we all went 
upstairs.  Then we went to my bedroom.  So then they said 
they want my iPad.  So then I said I have not used my iPad 
10 
for two years because I used to use where I used to work.  
So then they said they want it and they also told that they 
want my laptop.  Then I gave them my laptop.  And then 
they asked me where is my Huawei phone?  I was just 
shocked because I did not tell them that I have a Huawei 
phone.  So they told me where is my Huawei phone?  So 
then I went with them in my walking in closet which – that 
is my bedroom, then you go in closer to the bedroom.  So 
the police came with me, then I took the Huawei phone, 
then I gave it to them.  So they took all my phones and all 
20 
of this, we went downstairs. 
 
So when we were downstairs they asked me to put 
my phones at the centre of the table.  They said they have 
to check all my gadgets, they have to leave with them.  So 
then I asked them why all my gadgets need to be taken for 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 179 of 269 
 
a Whatsapp message and I am not denying that I sent a 
message and here is the phone that I used so why all the 
gadgets and especially the laptop?  And I even told them 
that I was using my laptop for school because I was writing 
exams at that time so can they have it – so they refused, 
they said they have to take everything.   
 
Then I asked them can I call a lawyer?  They said I 
am not allowed to call a lawyer.  Then I said I know that 
right, it is in every person in South Africa, you have a right 
to call a lawyer.  They said that right only remains with 
10 
SAPS, not with the Hawks, they are the Hawks, so I do not 
have that right, so which they refused for me to call the 
lawyer because I wanted to call the lawyer to ask  why my 
gadgets were taken by the Hawks. 
 
So after that they asked me – so one of them were 
sitting on my right hand side, other one was sitting on my 
left side, in my left hand side, and then they – so this one 
on the right she said to me I need to put all my passwords 
and my pins and they want to make sure that my gadgets 
are working and firstly, we had an argument because I said 
20 
no, why I have to give you my gadgets because if you are 
doing an investigation you can take the gadgets because I 
work in the IT industry, you can take the gadgets, you put 
them on the machine, you can able to download everything, 
I do not have to give you my password and my pins.  So 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 180 of 269 
 
they said I need to cooperate with them because if I do not 
I am going to be arrested by that time. 
 
So I still wanted to argue with them but I look at my 
son, my son was behind me, because he was crying, I look 
at him then I was like let me just not fight because I do not 
want my son to see this, let me just give them my gadgets.   
 
So then we started – I give them my pass code, 
which they put, they wanted my pin, they put them, we 
went through each and every gadget, they wanted to make 
sure, they wrote on the paper, all my pins and everything 
10 
and then after that they took all my gadgets, five of them, 
they put them in the plastic and then – so after that they 
said oh, we are here, we heard there was a scratching of 
the car in the house.  So the minute they say that, they 
said oh, we need to take the gadgets we are investigating 
something in the house so we are going.  So which they 
left with my gadgets on the day, all of them.   
 
Then after that I asked the helper to me the phone, 
I called a friend of mine who is a lawyer, I told him the 
whole story said no, it is a lie, Hawks and SAPS everyone 
20 
in the country, you have a right to call the lawyer and also 
they are not supposed to take my gadgets just because I 
sent a Whatsapp or even if there was a scratched car at 
home and that – it was that they left. 
 
I went to Malusi upstairs, he was sitting upstairs, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 181 of 269 
 
then I told him that these people they took my phone, why 
they are taking my gadgets?   Malusi said to me just let the 
police do their job.  I was like why the police are doing 
their job, why all that because I was just confused, what 
have I done wrong and they left with my gadgets. 
 
The whole week – so the whole week I kept on 
asking him because I was writing exams and that time we 
were on I think level 4, level 3, I was doing online clusters 
and I need to submit my exams and then I had nothing to 
use and I could not go to study at my friends place 
10 
because that time we were not allowed to visit.   But 
Malusi kept on telling me that no, the police are working, 
they will bring back my stuff. 
 
And then the week ended, the second week I went 
to – I called a friend of mine again, I asked her can you 
please get me a lawyer, I want o open a case because my 
gadgets are not back yet and I do not understand, Malusi 
keep on saying no, they are coming back.  So then he said 
he is going to call the General – I think the Brigadier, 
which is Brigadier Ngwenya, those police who came they 
20 
are reporting to him.  Malusi said he is going to call him to 
bring back my gadgets and then I asked him two hours 
later, I said what did he say?  So he said no, he cannot 
call him, you need to go meet him because the Intelligence 
is linked to them and their phone. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 182 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And ultimately when did they bring them 
back or did they not bring them back? 
MS GIGABA:   My gadgets were brought back, they did not 
– they only brought back my gadgets after I was arrested, 
that was two weeks later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when they came back was the 
information that – was the information still there that 
…[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   A lot of information was not on my gadgets.  
So the kind of information that was deleted on my gadgets 
10 
– because the day I got arrested I said to Malusi in the 
morning if the police are not here today to bring my 
gadgets because I have been waiting for you, I went to see 
a lawyer and my lawyer- we are going to go open the case.  
If they are not here by 2 p.m. I am opening a case and you 
will explain that because I had everything that now this 
was unlawful, was not supposed to happen. 
 
So on that date we waited, Malusi said no, they are 
on the way, then he said I am going to help you with my 
own computer.  So Malusi was typing my assignment, then 
20 
I was writing my other assignment, so which was two 
assignments I was doing at the same time because I was a 
bit behind but the school understood.  So what happened 
on that day, while I was waiting for them to bring my 
gadgets came in the room, he said the police are here 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 183 of 269 
 
looking for you.  I jumped quickly and I was so excited, I 
thought they were bringing my gadgets.  So when I got 
there they said you are under arrest, we need to arrest 
now.  I said what have I done.  They said you are under 
arrest and then I asked them that can I go change?  So 
they said I am not allowed to go alone, so they went with 
me, then I changed then I got arrested on that day.  And 
then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that was not the day they brought 
back your gadgets? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And how long after did they bring back 
your …[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   They were brought back three days later on 
Tuesday because I got arrested on Friday, the 31 July.  So 
I could not get a bail on the day because when the Hawks 
arrested me they switch off their phones and also they 
were nowhere to be found and they left the police station 
with the docket. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Once the gadgets were bad were you 
20 
able to establish whether the kind of information that you 
say Mr Gigaba had said he wanted to be deleted was still 
there or not? 
MS GIGABA:   Because – so I went on my phone on 
Tuesday after appearing in court on Monday, so on 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 184 of 269 
 
Tuesday we went to fetch my gadgets at the police station.  
Then I started opening all of them. Then what I found out, 
everything Malusi, when he explained, when he said what 
we need to delete everything that related to the Guptas 
and to the trips that we had taken as a family, to the car 
that was bought by the Guptas.  So then I started paging to 
check.  So they did not delete everything, all my data, but 
what was deleted, it is all our trips that we did to Dubai 
that the Guptas paid for us and it was all the pictures of 
the car that was given as a gift to him and also it was a 
10 
picture that I took in Sun City at their wedding, at the 
Gupta wedding.  So most of – all the information it was 
related to that.  So everything was deleted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  So to carry on with 
the chronology, at paragraph 9.5 you say that: 
“Following this, in or about August 2020, I learnt 
from the newspapers the announcement of divorce 
proceedings being instituted by Mr Gigaba.  The 
summons was only served on me in September 
20 
2020.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“What I want to say that only on 17 December 2020 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 185 of 269 
 
did I conduct a television interview with the eNCA 
after which I was immediately contacted by the 
Commission on 18 December 2010.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So do I understand correctly from 
what you have told the Chairperson that you were arrested 
on the 31 July 2020, is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 9.7, continuing with the 
10 
chronology, you say: 
“In 
or 
about 
January 
2021 
discussions 
on 
settlement ensured between me and Mr Gigaba, as 
is normal in divorce matters and with the principal 
aim of avoiding a long and protracted process of 
divorce.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You go on to say that: 
“This is when the allegations of supposed extortion 
20 
starting flying around.  I must indicate that I am 
totally astonished at the utter suggestion that I 
would seek to blackmail or extort Mr Gigaba in any 
force of settlement in respect of the divorce or into 
any form.  As a matter of fact I remained shocked 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 186 of 269 
 
as to what it is I would be seeking to achieve by 
such conduct.  I say this for the following reasons: 
1. The house we live in is a rented house.” 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“2. 
We 
are 
married 
out 
of 
community-of-
property.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“3. 
The other house that Mr Gigaba owns, there 
is still a huge amount owed to the bank in 
respect of the bond.” 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“4 
The entire furniture in the house that we live 
in belongs to me.” 
Is that correct? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC: 
“5. 
I am no state or have any intention to fight 
with Mr Gigaba as we have two minor 
children together whom I had even proposed 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 187 of 269 
 
to leave with Mr Gigaba to avoid any further 
confrontation and dispute related to our 
divorce and so as to expedite it.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And: 
“6. 
As confirmed in a letter from my attorneys to 
the 
Commission 
there 
are 
no 
ongoing 
settlement discussions between the parties.  
It is therefore not clear what I stand to gain 
10 
by assisting the Commission.” 
Do you confirm all of that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is true. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you go on to say: 
“I ought to highlight that the proposal I was making 
to Mr Gigaba was that we should agree on the issue 
so that we can both move on with our respective 
lives.  Indeed the settlement discussions which 
were even escalated to our respective attorneys 
yielded no fruits and were accordingly abandoned.” 
20 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you go on to deal with the 
High Court proceedings in respect of your arrest.  You say: 
“On 11 February 2021 the High Court in the matter 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 188 of 269 
 
pertaining to my unlawful arrest by the Hawks, 
handed down judgment in my favour.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at 11: 
“On 6 March 2021 I failed an affidavit with the 
Commission 
which 
forms 
the 
basis 
of 
this 
supplementary affidavit.” 
That is your main affidavit, is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“And on the 26 March the NPA withdrew criminal 
charges against me which were related to my 
unlawful and malicious arrest at the instance of Mr 
Gigaba and is friend.” 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And at paragraph 10 you say: 
“I lay out the above chronology to demonstrate to 
this Commission that the suggestion that I was a 
20 
bitter spouse attempting to get to Mr Gigaba 
through this Commission is not only malicious in the 
very least but is misleading on the real issues 
before this Commission.” 
Do you confirm that? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 189 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 11: 
“The suggestion by Mr Gigaba that his application 
was made so that he can shield our children from 
our squabbles before court flies on the face of 
truth.  After all, it is not Mr Gigaba who was the 
complainant 
in 
the 
criminal 
case 
against 
me.  
Where, one would ask, was the consideration at the 
time to shield our minor children from the numerous 
appearances 
I 
was 
forced 
to 
make 
in 
the 
10 
Magistrate’s Court before the withdrawal of the 
charge which appearances were solely occasioned 
by him.” 
So there you are talking about, as I understand it, your 
unlawful arrest. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what you had to go through in 
the process. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At 12: 
20 
“I need to clarify that when I originally sought 
divorce 
from 
Mr 
Gigaba 
it 
was 
never 
out 
of 
bitterness hence my agreement to not proceed with 
same at the time after he had requested me not to.  
To suggest this now, conveniently so, is in my 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 190 of 269 
 
respectful view quite absurd in the very least.” 
And then you conclude: 
“As repeatedly explained in the media and in my 
testimony, 
my 
sole 
reason 
for 
assisting 
the 
Commission is the performance of my civic duties 
as a citizen of South Africa who is willing to provide 
any information to which I may be privy and which 
can rid our society of the cancer of corruption, 
would like my children to grow up in a corrupt-free 
society.  I bear no grudges against anyone and I 
10 
have long forgiven those who wronged me.  They 
will be judged not by me but by God.” 
Do you confirm that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you have anything you wish to 
add to this affidavit? 
MS GIGABA:   I am fine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Now, Ms Gigaba, I am going 
to come back at the end of your evidence this evening to 
some of the things that you say at the beginning of the 
20 
affidavit in relation to the Commission.  I will also in the 
process take you through an affidavit that has been filed 
and deposed to Sakhile Masuku, who you find right at the 
end of your exhibit but for now what I want to do is to take 
you through Mr Gigaba’s evidence and put it to you and 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 191 of 269 
 
ask for your comment.   
 
Chairperson, what we have done, perhaps in a 
slightly unorthodox way, we have got two affidavits.  I have 
asked my secretary to cut and paste them into a schedule.  
So what you will find on the left hand side is Ms Gigaba’s 
affidavit, and I will hand it up now, and on the right hand 
side Mr Gigaba’s affidavit.  It is a much easier way of 
finding 
what 
is 
in 
dispute 
and 
getting 
Ms 
Gigaba’s 
comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, not that is fine. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But I do not know if it has to be 
given any particular number, it is just an aid to presenting 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When I refer to paragraph numbers it 
is of course to the numbers as you see there in the 
respective affidavits. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not know – as far as I am 
concerned it does not have to be admitted, as such. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it is fine as a matter of convenience. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  So Chairperson, if I could just 
then confirm for the record that on the left hand side there 
is a reproduction of Ms Gigaba’s main affidavit, that is the 
one that that you find commencing at page 999. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 192 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   On the right hand side is a 
reproduction of Mr Gigaba’s affidavit and that is the 
affidavit that he filed in support of his application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Which was indexed as SEQ18. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Of 2021.  Ms Gigaba, you have a 
copy of this schedule, do you? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes I do. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  I want to start off by taking 
you please to paragraph 13 of your affidavit and that you 
see at page 4 of the schedule.  Are you there? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what you say at paragraph 13 is 
that about a month or two before Mr Gigaba took up the 
position of Minister of DPE he told you that he had been 
told of that move by Ajay Gupta.  Do you recall giving that 
evidence? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now what Mr …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I note, Mr Myburgh, that in the document 
it says about two to three months rather than one or two. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, I beg your pardon, two to 
three months before.  Thank you, Chairperson.  So you 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 193 of 269 
 
recall giving that evidence? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 35, this is then on the 
right hand side, Mr Gigaba says: 
“The 
contents 
of 
this 
paragraph 
are 
pure 
unsubstantiated speculation and are inserted to 
embarrass and prejudice me.” 
And then he goes on to set out his version where he says 
that he was told on the 31 October by the President that he 
was going to be appointed as the Minister DPE and sworn 
10 
in the next day.  In short what he says is I got no advance 
notice, I did not know of this before and what you are 
saying is unsubstantiated speculation.  Do you want to 
comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   So it is not true that he did not know, he 
only heard on the day.  He told me two to three months 
before and also – because he was very excited about the 
position.  I asked him what does it mean to be a Minister of 
DPE because that kind of portfolio I was not familiar with.  
So then he explained to me that DPE means Public 
20 
Enterprises and then he explained to me that he is going to 
be overseeing all the SOEs.  He explained with so much of 
excitement.  So I think to - three and half to three months 
before he got his appointment, so it is not true what he is 
saying that he knew only on that day. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 194 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I take you to paragraph 14 of 
your affidavit?  You say there that: 
“Mr Gigaba’s visits to his advisers became more 
regular when he came the Minister of the DPE, 
often more than once a week.  When I quested him 
as to whether these were his official advisers he 
then told me that the Guptas were his unofficial 
advisers who would advise him in respect of 
decisions to be made at work and in return he 
assisted them with certain things.” 
10 
Mr Gigaba’s response says: 
“The 
contents 
here 
are 
again 
a 
deliberate 
fabrication not based on fact.  At this point in time I 
had known Nomachule for approximately a year.  
We were not even living together and she would 
only on occasion come and visit me at my home and 
we would go out socially.  It is absurd to think in 
these 
circumstances 
I 
would 
have 
treated 
Nomachule almost as an adviser of mine keeping 
her abreast of my movements as a Minister.” 
20 
And then he goes on to say at 42: 
“As a Minister DPE I was entitled to two advisers.  I 
also had top management of the department to 
advise me on matters.  In these circumstances why 
on earth would I have required the Guptas to be my 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 195 of 269 
 
special advisers?” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   It was not true that I was not staying in 
Pretoria at that time, I moved to Pretoria when I was 
pregnant and when Malusi became the Minister of Public 
Enterprises we were already staying together and when it 
comes to this thing of special advisers, it was him who told 
me that the Guptas were his special advisers and I 
remember in the beginning I used to get confused when he 
talks 
about 
special 
advisers, 
who 
are 
the 
advisers, 
10 
because sometimes he will say I am seeing my advisers 
and then I see Thami Msomi, something he was saying I 
am seeing my advisers, I am going to Jo’burg and I knew 
that Thami was staying in Pretoria, then I would like who 
are the advisers that you are talking about?   So every 
time when he will talk I will always want him to make it 
clear who is he talking about.  So it is not true that he 
never had one. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at paragraph 15 you say in 
your affidavit: 
20 
“In 2011 during his tenure as Minister of the DPE I 
became unhappy with the little that Mr Gigaba was 
spending with our children because of his frequent 
evening visits to his advisers.  Mr Gigaba told me 
that it was important for him to meet his advisers, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 196 of 269 
 
he told me that he would need to take work 
decisions on the day after his visits to them, he told 
me that they are responsible for the decisions at 
work.  He explained to me that as things were 
happening at work he needed to report to his 
advisers.” 
Now again Mr Gigaba denies this and I just want to draw 
your attention please to paragraph 45 of his affidavit where 
he says: 
“To suggest that Nomachule became unhappy with 
10 
the little that Mr Gigaba was spending with our 
children because of his frequent evening visits to 
his advisers when we only had one child who was a 
newborn demonstrates the lengths she is prepared 
to go to mislead.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   It is irrelevant that he is arguing about the 
children, it is mistake that I said our children, I said our 
child because Malusi was hardly at home, most of the time 
when he arrived from Cape Town he will just go – he will 
20 
say now I am rushing to the [indistinct] all the time and 
then he knew that our son was very sick at the time, I 
needed him to be at home.  So this is not true. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Do you accept that should 
have read child and not children? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 197 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, we had one child in 2011. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then I would like your comment 
on the last sentence of his paragraph 45: 
“I also posed the question how would she have 
knowledge of these alleged visits?” 
How did you have knowledge of the alleged visits? 
MS GIGABA:   Because he told me.  So he is the one who 
used to tell me that where is he going and he will explain 
when I asked him where are you going, who are you 
meeting then he used to explain it to me. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.  And then your paragraph 16, 
this is where you deal with the frequency with which Mr 
Gigaba visited the Guptas and you explain the frequency 
when parliament was sitting and then the frequency when 
in recess.  Mr Gigaba at paragraph 48 says: 
“This is a total fabrication, it is not based on any 
personal knowledge on the part of Nomachule.  It 
beggars belief that every time I went to parliament I 
would first rush off to meet the Guptas and then on 
my return report back to them.” 
20 
How did you know, on your version, how often Mr Gigaba 
was going to the Guptas? 
MS GIGABA:   In my knowledge he used to go there a lot.  
It is not true that he went there maybe one time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   My question is how did you know? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 198 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:   He told me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I see.  What would he typically tell 
you. 
MS GIGABA:   He will tell me that he is going to see his 
advisors or he will say he is going to see AJ and there 
were times where he will go there with his bodyguards 
without me and there were times he will ask me to go with 
him.  So we were forever – most of the time we were 
forever there.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When we deal with... [intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Are you able to give an 
indication of about how many times he may have gone 
there with you over the period, leaving out occasions when 
he told you that he had been there but you were to rely on 
his word, you were not there to see whether he was indeed 
there.  So but the times when you were there with him at 
the Gupta residence, are you able to say – given an 
indication? 
MS GIGABA:   I can say an estimation because I do not 
know exactly the number, but I know it is more than 20 
20 
times.  It is a lie that it was four or three times, because 
we used to go there when Malusi had meetings, then I 
would 
sit 
and 
wait 
for 
him 
to 
finish 
meetings 
and 
sometimes we will go there for lunch where we would just 
sit with AJ with their son and also with the wife. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 199 of 269 
 
There will be times where we will just go, because 
Diwali – only on one Diwali.  So when Malusi is saying we 
used to go there for events we only attended to events in 
the 10 years that I am with him.  So most of the time it was 
– it is either lunch or his meetings, but we used to go there 
very often together. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So and that would span from when to 
when in terms of years when you say about 20 times?  That 
is from 20 what, 2011, 2013, 2014 up to when? 
MS GIGABA:   So from 2011 I did not go there a lot myself 
10 
because I had a little baby as well as 2012 I did not go that 
much, so but he used to go.  Then sometimes we will go 
with the child when they want to see the child. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your first time that you went there would 
have been which year? 
MS GIGABA:   I mean, this was 2011 when AJ wanted to 
see my son. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And the last time when 
you went there would be? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not remember when was it, but it was 
20 
when Malusi was taken back to Home Affairs.  By that time 
they were not that close anymore. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you cannot remember which year, 
but whatever year it was, it was the year when he was 
[indistinct] back to Home Affairs. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 200 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And when you say 20 
times, about 20 times, I accept that you are estimating. 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, I am not saying exactly it was 20.  I 
think it was more than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if somebody said no, maybe 10 
times would that... [intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   No, 10 times it is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   10 times it is not. 
MS GIGABA:   It is 10 times less, ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is more than that. 
MS GIGABA:   It is more than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So even if you are mistaken about 20 
times, it cannot be 10 times or less. 
MS GIGABA:   It cannot be 10 times.  It is either from 20 
upwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   Because we were frequently there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Now let us deal with 
20 
paragraphs 17 and 18 of your affidavit.  Chairperson, the 
reason for the grey shading here is you will see that 
Mr Gigaba responds to a series of paragraphs and so when 
the grey shading is repeated it is the same answer, but it is 
in relation to a different one of those paragraphs. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 201 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So to summarise your paragraphs 17 
and 18, you say that I first met his advisors and learnt of 
the identity during 2011.  I think you have just said that to 
the Chairperson.  When Mr Gigaba still held the position of 
DPE and you go on to mention that during late 2011 
Mr Gigaba told you that his advisors wanted to meet you 
and your eldest son who had been born in June that year 
and you go on to explain that you then attended upon the 
Gupta residence, that you met with AJ Gupta, his wife and 
10 
their son and that AJ Gupta gifted your son a gold 
jewellery necklace. 
And then at 17.2 by way of summary you say in 
2012 you visited the Gupta residence on several occasions 
and at sub 3: 
“After I met the Guptas Mr Gigaba would tell me 
that he is either going to meet my advisors or AJ.” 
And then at 18 you say: 
“A few months after my second son was born, that 
being in December 2012, I visited the Guptas in 
20 
their 
residence 
upon 
invitation 
of 
Mr Gigaba, 
informing that the Guptas would like to meet our 
second child.” 
Do you confirm that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, it is correct. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 202 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, Mr Gigaba says: 
“This is a total untruth.  Why would the Guptas 
insist on meeting a new born child?  I do however 
recall that our eldest son after his birth received a 
gold necklace as a gift from AJ Gupta.” 
Do you want to respond to the denial that you and 
Mr Gigaba took your eldest son to meet AJ Gupta? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not understand why he is denying that, 
because when we got there AJ was so excited to see him.  
The minute he held our son he gave him the gift.  It was in 
10 
a box, then he took it out, he put it into my son and then 
Malusi took it out, then he put it back on the box and he 
carried it.  So if they are not that close, why would AJ want 
to gift our son with a necklace, because he does not even 
know it is a boy or girl if he does not know. 
So I think this is a lie.  So I do not even understand 
why he would, because they gave him the necklace and 
they wanted to see him when he was still small and I was 
asking why they want to see our children – our child.  But 
that he was denying it, but it is true, so it happened. 
20 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
  
I 
would 
ask 
you 
to 
go 
to 
paragraph 51 of Mr Gigaba’s response or affidavit.  He 
says: 
 
“I do not believe... 
And this goes to the Chairperson’s questioning of you a 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 203 of 269 
 
little earlier. 
“I do not believe that Nomachule met the Guptas on 
more than four occasions when we attended social 
functions such as the Sun City wedding, Diwali 
celebrations 
and 
a 
cultural 
luncheon 
at 
their 
invitation.  Any other suggestion on her part are 
total untruths.” 
So he is putting it at you having met them four times.  
These were social occasions or functions.  One, Sun City 
wedding, two, Diwali and he also lists a luncheon.  Do you 
10 
want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   I remember in my statement what is not true 
we never attended so many events there.  Most of when we 
went there it was meetings and also I only attended one 
Diwali at the Guptas’ house and I only attended one event.  
So it was not like we will go there because of events.   
There were less events in my knowledge.  So most 
of the time when we were there it was meetings between 
Malusi and AJ and sometimes it will be his advisors will be 
there and Malusi will be taken in a room.  That is what 
20 
used to happen and I still remain by my statement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at paragraph 54 he says: 
 
“I deny frequent visits with the Guptas or indeed 
discussing such visits with Nomachule.” 
Do you have anything to add to that? 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 204 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:   Also I still remain by my statement.  I do not 
understand why Malusi is saying we did not frequent visit 
there because we used to go.  But not only he used to go 
there by me alone, there were times where he will go with 
his protectors.  There was even time when he would not go 
with the whole protection cars, because he had two cars.   
Sometimes he will ask one of the bodyguards 
because he was close to one of them, he will ask him, 
Chief, can you please take me there.  And I remember most 
of the time when that bodyguard used to come he will say, 
10 
okay, I want to sign first at the gate and Malusi will call 
him, rush him not to sign because he says you need to 
rush, there is something they need to fix with AJ.  So they 
will just go. 
 
So when they come back, then the bodyguard will 
want to go – there is a house, a small house that was 
closer to our house where there is Police and then he will 
like – I want to go there, because when I arrive I did not 
sign.  Then Malusi is like, no Chief, go, we will sort that 
out and then the bodyguard will leave.   
20 
So it was if I can count his with the bodyguard, 
because sometimes he will go one bodyguard or he will go 
with a whole entourage and we will go all of us, that is so 
many times.  So it is not true that Malusi was there two or 
three times. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 205 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, that is not what he is saying, Ms 
Gigaba.  He is saying you met the Guptas four times. 
MS GIGABA:   That is not true. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have told DCJ that you went 
there more than 20 times. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You have also – we know you went 
to the Sun City wedding.  You have said you went to a 
Diwali celebration.  Did you also attend a cultural luncheon 
at the Guptas? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   I do not know what is cultural luncheon. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Lunch.  Did you go to a lunch at the 
Guptas? 
MS GIGABA:   But not like a cultural thing.  We will have 
lunch as us, AJ and his wife and my son and their son, but 
it was not like a cultural thing. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.  So if you can go to 
paragraph 19 then of your affidavit.  This is where you deal 
with your visit to the Waterkloof Air force Base.  Now at 
paragraphs 19 and 20 we know that you have corrected.  
20 
You make the point that you went there a day or two before 
the wedding and then on the day of the wedding you went 
to Sun City.  But in relation to your attendance at 
Waterkloof 
at 
paragraph 55 
on 
the 
right 
hand 
side, 
Mr Gigaba says: 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 206 of 269 
 
“The contents hereof are denied.  Nomachule is 
deliberately trying to link me to the infamous 
Waterkloof Base landing.  Not a single person or 
report 
has 
linked 
me 
to 
the 
Waterkloof 
Base 
landing.  I had nothing to do with the landing at the 
Waterkloof Base.  I had no knowledge of these 
visitors from India who were attending the wedding.  
I also had no authority over the Waterkloof Air force 
Base.  The suggestion is simply outrageous and 
demonstrates the lengths to which Nomachule is 
10 
prepared to go.” 
What is your comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   This one I still remain by my statement 
which Malusi is not telling the truth.  Myself and our son 
that evening when their – what is it – their aircraft landed, 
so Malusi said to me at home let us go there, he has been 
asked.  So I did not ask who asked him to go receive the 
people.  So he will ask can you please go with me and we 
went there. 
 
So what happened, myself and our son, the older 
20 
one, we sat in the room and then Malusi went out to 
receive the Gupta people coming in for the wedding.  So it 
was not only us, because outside there were a lot of Metro 
Police cars who were coming to receive them as well, but 
they were outside.  So me and my son remain inside.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 207 of 269 
 
Malusi went out.  I did not know what he did on them.  So 
they landed and they were taken by cars. 
 
So when they were leaving, then Malusi we went to 
our car going home and there were a lot of Metro Police 
like escorting the Gupta cars leaving and then we went 
home.  So for me it does not even make sense why he want 
to protect the Guptas because we were there.  I do not 
even know why he wants to protect that, why he say it was 
a lie, because we did it.  We were there.  We received 
them. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, paragraph 56 on the right hand 
side, Mr Gigaba responds to your version of the wedding 
and the removal of the henna pattern, etcetera.  He says 
this 
is 
nonsense 
and 
in 
the 
last 
sentence 
of 
that 
paragraph 56 he says: 
 
“I refused the invitation to stay over at Sun City.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   He did not refuse.  He forced us to leave, 
because they booked us the house.  So on the following 
day I did not know that we are going to go to the wedding.  
20 
I did not know that also we were invited on the wedding.  
So on the wedding day I was at work.  Malusi called me 
that I had to accompany him to go to Sun City. 
So then I said to him, no, he must leave me, I 
cannot go because I have not done my hair, everything.  I 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 208 of 269 
 
just cannot go to the wedding.  I do not even have an 
outfit.  Then he was like no, we need to go, let us go.  So 
please come back home. 
So then I left work.  I think it was around 13:00, 
then I went home.  Then I packed whatever I had.  Then he 
said we are going to sleep over.  We will come back the 
following day.  So when we arrived in Sun City there were 
a lot of people who were there for the wedding and the 
other people were coming from India.  Then AJ was busy 
introducing us to those people, but it was like everyone 
10 
was mingling. 
And then I saw people doing like a henna, because 
I have never done that before.  So I joined.  I said to him I 
am coming back.  So I did the drawing of the henna and 
then by 21:00, 22:00 we went to a room.  Malusi said he is 
tired.  Then we wanted to go rest in the room because we 
were supposed to sleep there going back. 
I think by 12:00 midnight Malusi said we need to 
leave and also he said he received a call, he was shouting 
at me like why I posted the henna on Facebook.  I said I 
20 
did not know that I should not have posted it and then he 
said I must go on my Facebook and delete the henna, 
because now there is a lot of noise about us attending the 
wedding. 
So I went on my Facebook, I deleted the henna.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 209 of 269 
 
Then after that Malusi said let us take our bags, we need 
to go back home, we are not sleeping.  So it is not true 
that he refused to stay in Sun City.  He was forced by that, 
then we had to leave.  So we drove back at night with the 
bodyguards, came back to Pretoria. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just to pick up on that, at 
paragraph 58 of his affidavit Mr Gigaba said: 
“I deny that I asked her to remove the photo of the 
henna pattern on her hand off Facebook.  Why 
would I have asked her to remove it when our 
10 
attendance at the wedding was all over television 
and social media.  The fact that I attended there 
would have been documented.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   Malusi was not aware that our attendance 
was going to be on the news and there will be noise about 
it.  He did not know.  So when that happened he panicked, 
then he said I must delete it and then also he said let us 
go home. 
So if the way he is saying like he knew that 
20 
everything will be documented, so why we packed our 
clothes and why the room was booked, then all of a sudden 
why we have to drive in the middle of the night going back 
home.  So he was not aware that such a thing will happen. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  If we go to your 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 210 of 269 
 
paragraph 22, that is where you described what happened, 
the procedure that was followed when you visited the 
Gupta residence.  You talked about turning in your cell 
phone.  You talked about a briefing by Mr Gupta and then 
meetings being held in an adjacent room.  I just want to 
ask you to comment on paragraph 60.  Mr Gigaba says: 
 
“I deny that we were requested to hand over cell 
phones.  It is absurd to suggest that one would be 
requested to hand over cell phones when attending 
a 
private 
event 
and 
even 
more 
absurd 
that 
10 
Nomachule’s cell phone was simply returned to her 
when she got bored.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   So also that is not true and I even asked 
him so many times why we had to leave our cell phones, 
because there is a – when you come in there was a table, I 
think two tables before you go proceed to a big living room 
where they used to leave me and AJ where he used to 
come and brief Malusi there before they go to another room 
that was opposite where he used to leave me. 
20 
So before when we go in they used to ask us to 
leave our phones.  And then the other day I asked him why 
they always take my phone because the whole hour – 
because those meetings used to last like an hour and half 
and then I am sitting there by myself and Malusi is there in 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 211 of 269 
 
the meeting and I am bored.  So I asked him why our 
phones.  So he said there was confidential information 
which we are not allowed to have our phones with us. 
But most of the time I used to go, maybe five 
minutes later I used to go take my phone and sit down with 
it and Malusi never liked those things.  So it is a lie when 
he said our cell phones were not taken.  It is him who 
knows what was confidential, but I did not know what was 
confidential.  But that is not true.  And also I do not even 
understand why he keep on protecting or covering the 
10 
Guptas, 
because 
that 
was 
the 
procedure 
that 
was 
happening there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 61, the second 
sentence he says: 
 
“It is a total fabrication to suggest that I was then 
ushered into a private meeting room after being 
briefed by Mr AJ Gupta.” 
What do you say to that?  So he denies that he was 
ushered into a private meeting room after being briefed by 
Mr AJ Gupta. 
20 
MS GIGABA:   So also this is not true.  So every time we 
used to arrive and it happens most of the time we go there.  
So when we go there is someone who will take us outside 
and then they will ask us to leave our phones, then they 
will take us in a room.  So maybe like five minutes or so 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 212 of 269 
 
then AJ used to come and greet us, maybe just like make a 
few little jokes or sometimes we will wait for tea or 
something and then AJ will sit next to Malusi while I am 
there and then he will brief him about something about 
what that meeting. 
So there are times where Tami [?] would be there, 
which 
works 
in 
his 
office 
or 
sometimes 
Siyabonga 
Mahlangu will be there also and they will be waiting with 
him and they will go with Malusi into a room.  So I do not 
understand why he is saying that never happened, because 
10 
we never been received by AJ from the door.  We were 
always received by other people and AJ will always come 
while we are sitting and AJ will brief Malusi so that he 
know what the meeting is about and they were taken in. 
So that was the normal procedure, unless it is not a 
meeting, it is a lunch, we go, we are chilling, we are sitting 
there, then they would not take him to a meeting.  So that 
was the normal procedure in that home. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He says at paragraph 62: 
 
“I deny that on these occasions Mr Mahlangu and 
20 
Mr Msomi were present and would attend meetings 
with me.” 
What do you say to that? 
MS GIGABA:   They were there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Then if I can take you to 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 213 of 269 
 
paragraph 25 and this again deals with the briefing by 
Mr AJ Gupta of Mr Gigaba and you set out in paragraph 25 
the 
various 
things 
that 
you 
overheard 
during 
those 
briefings. 
 
What 
Mr Gigaba 
says 
in 
response 
at 
paragraph 63 is that:  
“The contents hereof are emphatically denied.  Her 
version that on the one hand there were these 
clandestine meetings where cell phones had to be 
handed over and yet on the other prior to the 
meeting commencing Nomachule was privy to an 
10 
entire briefing session where the purpose of the 
meeting was disclosed in her presence is so 
improbable as to warrant outright rejection.” 
What do you say to that?  So he rejects outright your 
version that there were these briefing sessions in your 
presence. 
MS GIGABA:   AJ used to brief Malusi in front of me and 
then they will go there.  So the entire meeting never 
happened in front of me because AJ used to take him 
inside that room where they used to have meetings. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He says at paragraph 65 that: 
“A lot of what is described here are matters that 
have been in the media for a number of years and 
would account for Nomachule’s knowledge thereof.  
I deny that during my 10 years as Minister of DPE I 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 214 of 269 
 
ever 
intended 
or 
indeed 
travelled 
to 
India...” 
etcetera. 
What do you say about the contention that what you say he 
was briefed about were things that had been in the media 
for many years?  You are drawing on the media to make 
this up. 
MS GIGABA:   I do not even understand why he will talk 
about the media, because at our home Malusi did not even 
allow us to watch the news most of the time or also maybe 
read the newspapers as well.  So everything that I said it 
10 
is something that I have seen or that is something that he 
told me.  So I would never go to the media and go collect 
information about him.  What I have given here it is 
something that I have seen and something that I heard 
from him that he told me.   
 
When it comes to the India trip, India trip happened 
when Malusi was taken back to Home Affairs, but I know a 
couple of times when AJ will tell Malusi when he was still 
with DPE he will say you need to go meet those people and 
also I want to know what the feedback between the SAA 
20 
and sometimes they will argue. 
Malusi say – I remember Malusi saying to him I 
cannot go with a State visit to go meet those people 
because AJ wanted them to cancel the airline, the SAA 
airline and put the Mumbai airline.  And Malusi said he 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 215 of 269 
 
cannot go on his own.  He need to justify the trip.  And 
then AJ will be like no, you can go with the SAA.  Then 
Malusi was like, he cannot do that because he need to 
justify the trip.  
 
So they used to have like a back and forth how 
Malusi will go to Mumbai doing that airline and sometimes 
they will have a back and forth with him, it is him and also 
with Dudu Myeni.  So there were discussions most of the 
time where they will talk about that before the trip and then 
Malusi was taken back to Home Affairs before he travelled 
10 
to India.  But the trip happened when he was at Home 
Affairs he went to India. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say he did not want you to watch 
the news on television or read the newspapers at home? 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, most of the time beside his work 
purpose, our marriage were more exposed to a lot of 
scandals which sometimes if I come I tell him that, Malusi, 
I saw this maybe in the paper, what is happening.  Because 
most of the time when something would be on the paper 
Malusi would never tell me.  So I will hear maybe when 
20 
people are sending me messages oh, sorry about what 
happened. 
Because Malusi will do the whole statement in 
public without even telling me what is happening.  So I will 
see things when it is already trending, because he never 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 216 of 269 
 
told me what was happening.  So because of that he 
wanted us not to read papers so that we avoid of seeing 
things that are being said about us.  Because since we got 
married in 2014 like our family has been in papers for his 
scandals most of the time.  So then he did not want us to 
read newspapers.  So it is just so untrue for him that I got 
that from outside. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what would happen?  Because he 
would need to watch news or read newspapers.  Did he not 
watch news as far as you knew in the house? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Most of the time I will watch news when 
Malusi is in Cape Town, because it was not most of the 
time Malusi was at home.  Because from Tuesday to 
Thursday he was in Cape Town, then I will be alone, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  At paragraph 26 of your 
affidavit you said that at some stage Mr Gigaba told me 
that AJ Gupta wanted to get rid of Mr Dames and you say 
that you asked Mr Gigaba why and he said that the Guptas 
did not like him because there are things that he was 
20 
supposed to do but did not do.  Mr Gigaba responds at 
paragraph 70 by saying: 
 
“This is again a total fabrication.  I deny the 
discussion which Nomachule alleges that I had with 
her concerning Dames’ employment.  I emphasise 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 217 of 269 
 
that I did not discuss government business with her.  
Furthermore her version cannot be accepted as 
true.  I never had any discussion with AJ Gupta 
concerning Mr Dames who at a point in time was the 
CEO of Eskom.  I have made a submission in this 
regard to the Commission.” 
What do you have to say to that? 
MS GIGABA:   Also this is not true on his side, because I 
remember AJ saying to Malusi he need to put pressure on 
Brian Dames so that Brian Dames must resign – can resign 
10 
and Malusi what I remember, Malusi was very fond of Brian 
Dames, even myself.  We like him at home because he was 
such a nice guy, very chilled, although I do not know his 
work that much because I was not following his work. 
But the Guptas did not like Brian and Malusi liked 
Brian and every time when they used to talk Malusi and AJ, 
then Malusi were like why they do not want, then AJ will 
tell Malusi that no, there are certain things that he is not 
doing.  And also I asked him why they do not like him, 
because to me he appears as a nice guy, as much I did not 
20 
know his job. 
Malusi said that there were things that he was not 
doing and AJ they wanted him to do and AJ was asking 
Malusi to put pressure on Brian so that Brian can resign 
and leave Eskom.  And in a couple of months it happened, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 218 of 269 
 
because I remember Malusi told me that Brian was leaving 
and it was sad.  And I knew he did not like it, but they put 
pressure on him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I take you to paragraph 28 
dealing with meetings at our home.  You said that during 
2013 Mr AJ Gupta met with Mr Gigaba at our then official 
residence.  You saw him there at most twice.  Meetings 
took place in an underground room or bunker.  And this is 
emphatically denied.  Do you want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   So this one is – he can call it whatever he 
10 
calls that room, but it is the only room that you take the 
stairs then you go downstairs, because all our rooms in the 
State house they are on top which is on the top surface 
and that room it goes down and it hold Malusi’s safety and 
also has where Malusi usually holds his meeting. 
So when AJ he came at our home two times and I 
remember because when Malusi say I must come and say 
hi to him, then I wanted to offer him something to eat and 
he refused.  Then I said to Malusi on the second time, 
because also he refused to eat, I was like I just do not like 
20 
this thing of AJ he does not eat here, but when we go to 
their house they always even when you say we do not like 
it, because most of the time they like vegetarian food and I 
do not like vegetarian food, so they will say no, try this, try 
this and Malusi was like no, you can even when you do not 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 219 of 269 
 
like it just try.  But when he came to our house he did not 
even want to try. 
So I remember having that conversation with him 
why AJ does not want to eat when he comes to our house, 
but when we go to their house then we have to eat their 
food.  So it is a lie when Malusi said AJ never came to our 
house.  He came twice. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At 29 you then go on to narrate what 
Mr Gigaba told you they were meeting about, Transnet 
tenders and an Eskom project that was giving him a 
10 
headache.  Mr Gigaba responds at paragraph 73 by saying: 
 
“The 
contents 
hereof 
are 
again 
a 
total 
fabrication. 
 
I have 
stated 
above 
that 
I 
had 
absolutely nothing to do with tenders and SOEs are 
removed 
from 
procurement 
and 
supply 
chain 
processes and their departments let alone in the 
SOE’s.  I therefore deny any discussion about a 
headache 
concerning 
an 
Eskom 
project 
with 
Nomachule.” 
Do you want to comment at all, or stand by what you have 
20 
said? 
MS GIGABA:   I stand by what I said, especially when I say 
it gives me a headache. There was this project called 
Kusile, it was at Eskom, and I remember most of the time 
that project at Kusile used to give Malusi a lot of time, then 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 220 of 269 
 
he will go discuss things with Ajay, and I will be there as 
well when they were talking but he was saying like I do not 
know what was so - he was given a lot of time about Kusile 
Project. 
And I even remember when Malusi left, that project 
was not completed, but I even remember Malusi went and 
visit that project with his team at Eskom.  So I knew 
because I was there when they were talking.  So when he 
is answering this, his just like giving, like a general that 
Ministers are not allowed, but him he was involved. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, can I take you back to what you 
say in paragraph 28, you say that the meetings between Mr 
Gigaba and Mr Ajay Gupta took place in an underground 
room of bunker at our home.  I see that in paragraph 72 of 
his affidavit.  He says: 
“I denied that there was any bank or underground 
room at my official residence, this is indicative 
speculation.” 
How can there be this dispute between the two of you 
about whether or not there is a room underground? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Maybe he can call it with his own way, but 
that house is still there because it was a State house, it is 
still there.  So he can call it the way he want to call it.  I 
call it underground because all of our rooms, they are on 
top. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 221 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   But there is one room that if you take the 
stairs you go down and when you go out, you go the pool, 
that was only that room and that was the room that Malusi 
use to hold meetings.  So if someone comes at home, 
upstairs you will not see Malusi who is he meeting with 
because that house is just – and that house is still there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That room is the only one that is at that 
level? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The others are on top? 
MS GIGABA:   The others are on top, all of them.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Then it is the only one just takes the stairs, 
you go down and then there is a balcony, then when you 
stand at the balcony, then you see the pool. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So - but is it on the same level as the 
ground level if you are outside of the house, or is it below 
20 
the ground level if you are outside the house. 
MS GIGABA:   Also how the house is built, so when you 
come in, if you walk in, you will not know that you can still 
go down.  So you will think you are just here and when you 
go further in the house, you can take the stairs on the 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 222 of 269 
 
other side of the house.  Then there’s other…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Other rooms. 
MS GIGABA:   Other rooms, but there are upstairs but 
there's on other wing of the house.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   So when you come in at home, you will not 
know that you can go down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The steps go down. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, but it was the only house, this is the 
way the house was built.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright Mr Myburgh.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, then at paragraph 30 
where you saying that Mr Gigaba invited staff from his 
office at the Department of Home Affairs to our residents 
prior to a trip to Mumbai and New Delhi, India and he 
denies that, have you got anything to add to that or do you 
stand by what you said? 
MS GIGABA:   So he did invite his staff and what 
happened – and what I said to him, because when he has 
these meetings with his staff, because when he has staff 
20 
meeting, he will have people from the Ministerial which is 
people that are close working with him and maybe he will 
have maybe one person or two people from the department 
because 
the 
Ministerial 
team 
are 
different 
from 
the 
department people.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 223 of 269 
 
 
So then what I said to him, I was like when you 
have these people, we do not run out because sometimes I 
do not know Malusi is going to host these people and then 
people they just come in the evenings.  Then now I have to 
make sure that I had to accommodate them.  
Then where Malusi started, so his PA used to come 
early and prepare for that.  Then he will order takeaways 
and on that room that I am taking about then because there 
was an eight seater table.  So then he will come an order 
and prepare so that everyone when they come they have 
10 
water, they have snacks and everything.  So they use to 
order takeaways because he never tells me prior to the 
meeting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I would like now to turn to your 
paragraph 30.2 and this is not something as I remember 
that we dealt with thoroughly in your initial evidence.  It is 
the India trip and that is because of the error in the date.  
Your, correcting affidavit, correct paragraph 30.2 by saying 
instead of during or about 2010 it is 2015. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“I accompanied Mr Gigaba, I will take you through 
this, and other government officials on a trip to 
Mumbai and New Delhi, India.  Before the trip I 
overheard Mr Gigaba complaining to Mr Ajay Gupta 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 224 of 269 
 
that he could not go on a trip to India because he 
was still at the Department of Home Affairs.” 
In 2015, Mr Gigaba was at the Department of Home Affairs. 
Is that correct?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So I think we have discussed in 
consultations that the word still need not be there. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“I overheard Mr Gigaba complaining, this is your 
10 
version, to Mr Ajay Gupta that he could not go on a 
trip to India because he was at the Department of 
Home Affairs.” 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“Therefore he could not justify a trip to discuss a 
new flight route between South Africa and India, 
which was a matter that fell under the DPE.” 
That was his previous portfolio. 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
“At a later stage, Mr Gigaba mentioned that he 
would create an official State visit to India whilst at 
the Department of Home Affairs so that he could 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 225 of 269 
 
meet the Indian nationals that Mr Ajay Gupta 
wanted him to meet in relation to the South 
Africa/Mumbai route.” 
Then you say at 30.3: 
“In India, Mr Gigaba and Mr Matsumi attended 
various meetings.  I did not see with whom they met 
as I was out shopping, when they attended the 
meetings.” 
Then at 30.4: 
“Mr Gigaba later told me in 2010, that the Gupta’s 
10 
wanted to introduce their own airline to service the 
Johannesburg Mumbai flight route and that the 
Gupta’s were demanding that he compel SAA to 
cancel their Johannesburg Mumbai route, Mr Gigaba 
did not support it.” 
Now when you say he later told me we dealing with 2015 in 
paragraph 30.2, when did he tell you this? 
MS GIGABA:   So the first time I heard about the Mumbai 
airline and the SAA airline, Malusi was at DPE at the time. 
So he used to talk about that, that they need to cancel SAA 
20 
airline and then they need to bring Mumbai airline and that 
is where most of Malusi’s arguments if I can put it that way 
with Ms Dudu Myeni it was more of that because they used 
to argue about it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, Ms Gigaba but I want us to 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 226 of 269 
 
deal with the correction that needs to be made to 30.4. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So it is not later, do I understand 
you to be saying that he told you this during his tenure as 
the Minister of DPE? 
MS GIGABA:   So when it comes to dates, I explained in 
our consultation about the year…[intervene] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just bear with me about trying to get 
rid of the dates, he told you whilst he was the Minister of 
the DPE, is that correct?  
10 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, let us go to his version, of 
course, he deals with the error in the date the 2010 he 
makes the point that there was a trip in 2015.  Then he 
says at 77: 
“During 
that 
trip 
I 
officially 
opened 
the 
Visa 
Facilitation 
Centre 
in 
New 
Delhi, 
reached 
an 
agreement with the Minister to open more Visa 
Facilitation 
Centres 
in 
order 
to 
expedite 
visa 
applications.” 
20 
He visited an E passport factory, met with the Minister of 
Home Affairs etcetera.  He says: 
“I had no discussion with Ajay Gupta about this trip. 
I also did not complain to Nomachule about any 
demands concerning the trip.” 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 227 of 269 
 
He says at 78; 
“The suggestion that Nomachule overheard me 
complaining to Ajay Gupta that I could not go on a 
trip to India, because I was still at the Department 
of Home Affairs is nonsensical.  As stated above, I 
did go on my second trip to India whilst I was the 
Minister 
of 
Home 
Affairs, 
this 
had 
absolutely 
nothing to do with the South African Mumbai route.  
It is ridiculous to suggest that I could not justify a 
trip to discuss a new flight route between South 
10 
Africa and India, which was a matter that fell 
outside my jurisdiction as Minister of Home Affairs 
but was under the DPE.” 
So the long and the short of it is he says that this trip had 
nothing to do with the South Africa Mumbai route, he went 
there and he performed the work of Minister of Home 
Affairs by visiting Visa Facilitation Centres, visiting an E 
passport factory, etcetera.  
MS GIGABA:   He did that, but he knew that he had to 
come up with something so that he can justify why he went 
20 
there and I remember, he went there with the team 
because we stayed maybe two or three days in New Delhi.  
Then a few days later, we moved to Mumbai, where we 
stayed at the hotel.  So when we were in Mumbai, then 
Malusi that is where he did his own meetings, because 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 228 of 269 
 
when we were in the room, he will say, eish, because he 
was tired, because when we were in New Delhi it was 
raining so hard, it was flooding and then Malusi was going 
with his team and then some of the meetings, I do not 
know, he did it alone, so I cannot say that.  
But when we were in Mumbai, then Malusi was tired 
and he was like, I need to go do this meetings Ajay 
arranged this, so he would leave the hotel, our room and 
go downstairs to meet the people that Ajay arranged for 
him to meet when we were in Mumbai.  
10 
So maybe he will not declare all the trips, but they 
were trips, there were meetings that he did that Ajay 
arranged for him, but he could not leave South Africa, only 
for those meetings.  So he had to take the whole 
department with him so that he can justify that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So which year are we talking about when 
that trip happened was in 2010? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   2015. 
MS GIGABA:   2015.  
CHAIRPERSON:   2015, okay so he had stopped being 
20 
Minister of Public Enterprises in 201 when the elections 
happened, and after that, he became the Minister of Home 
Affairs. 
MS GIGABA:   Yeah, he was taken back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 229 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, so let us go to paragraph 31, 
here you deal with prior knowledge of appointments and 
what you say is that: 
“After a new age breakfast session, Mr Gigaba told 
me that Mr Molefe was going to move from Transnet 
to Eskom.  I was told this before Mr Molefe was 
officially appointed to Eskom, etcetera.” 
And then, at 31.2 you said that: 
“Mr Gigaba told me that Mr Gama would be 
appointed 
as 
the 
chief 
executive 
officer 
of 
10 
Transnet.” 
In your evidence you corrected that to say that he would be 
taken back as the CEO of Transnet Freight Rail, do you 
remember that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at 31.3, you say or said 
that  
“Mr Gigaba also told me that he intended to speak 
to Mr Gama to appoint his sister, Ms Gugu Gigaba 
to Transnet.” 
20 
You say: 
“To the best of my knowledge Ms Gugu Gigaba was 
appointed and remains in the employ of Transnet.” 
And then 31.4 you said: 
“On many occasions, Mr Gigaba informed me that 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 230 of 269 
 
the Gupta’s knew and had told him about who would 
be moved from an appointed to SOE’s.” 
Now Mr Gigaba says at paragraph 81: 
“That this is a total fabrication, at the time when Mr 
Molefe became CEO of Eskom, and Mr Gama 
became the CEO of Transnet he had left the DPE.” 
You want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   But he knew before he became the CEO of 
Eskom, Malusi told me so he knew before. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then he says, at paragraph 83: 
10 
“I 
must 
immediately 
deny 
that 
I 
have 
told 
Nomachule that is a word I am missing there, 
intended to speak to Mr Gama to appoint my sister 
Ms Gugu Gigaba to Transnet.  My sister was 
appointed at Transnet long after I had left DPE after 
following due process and remains in their employ.” 
You want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, when Gugu was given a - Malusi said 
no you can take it then I will talk to Gama to - he will find 
something for you.  I did not say Malusi was DPE when she 
20 
started but what I know of Malusi spoke to Mr Gama to find 
work and also what I remember Gugu came to stay with us 
in Joburg before she even found a job.  So she came, I 
think he stayed with us for a month or two months or so, at 
our home before she even got a job at Transnet.  So when 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 231 of 269 
 
she left, KZN the job was not there yet, but Malusi said he 
must take - he must move her stuff, then he moved her 
things she came to stay with us at home before she started 
the job. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you just said that what you know, 
is that Mr Gigaba spoke to Mr Gama. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, that is what he said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that is actually not true, because 
you were not there when he spoke to him.  It is what he 
told you, is that right? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, it is - he told me that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then under the heading tensions 
arising at paragraph 32.  You said that: 
“As Mr Gigaba’s tenure as Minister at the DPE 
progressed, he often told me that the Gupta’s were 
putting pressure on him to take certain decisions 
with which he did not agree.” 
And 
you 
mentioned 
a 
number 
including 
Mr 
Gama’s, 
etcetera, and then he says at paragraph 85 in response: 
20 
“This is once again a total fabrication; I deny ever 
discussing being put under pressure by anyone 
concerning appointments.  As Minister of DPE it 
was my duty to defend the appointments that 
cabinet had made.  There was no one that could tell 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 232 of 269 
 
me who to appoint and who to dismiss.  I again 
deny the allegation that the Gupta’s were my 
advisors and accordingly, Nomachule is lying when 
she says that she raised this issue with me.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   So what he is saying that it is not true 
because Malusi told me these things, and I will never come 
up and give the word advisors to the Gupta’s.  So it is him 
who told me the Gupta’s are his advisors, I think the other 
day I even asked him why you call them advisors, and why 
10 
you always rush to go there and you go to work, you have 
to go to Cape Town.  
And I remember there was a time when Malusi was 
at DPE then Ajay will call Malusi and Malusi will ignore his 
calls and I asked him like what is wrong, why now you are 
ignoring 
- 
because 
in 
the 
beginning, 
when 
he 
was 
appointed he loved taking their calls, he loved us going 
there but later before he leave he did not have like a good 
relationship with them.  
Then I asked him what is wrong, then he said, they 
20 
putting pressure on him and there was a time where Ajay 
reminded 
Malusi, 
he 
said 
remember 
why 
you 
were 
appointed because Malusi will argue.  I remember the other 
time Ms Dudu Myeni did not like Kalawa he used to call 
Malusi and he will complain about him and Malusi loved 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 233 of 269 
 
Kalawa as a CEO during that time and Ajay also they did 
not like Kalawa and there was a lot of things between 
Eskom, Transnet where Ajay they would want Malusi to do 
certain things, and Malusi did not want to and then Ajay 
one day, he told him that Malusi, he must remember why he 
was appointed to those post.  
So it is a lie when he says he never - he had a 
headache - later, before he left he was taken back, the 
relationship was not like it was in the beginning.  So what 
happened in the beginning he was excited, after a year 
10 
when he was at DPE Malusi wanted to run the department 
the way he wanted and Ajay they wanted him to run things 
the way they wanted and they had the conflicts most of the 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So did you get the impression that the 
conflicts between them that you are talking about was 
because Mr Gigaba was resisting Ajay Gupta’s attempts to 
get him to run the department the way he wanted, and not 
the way Mr Gigaba wanted? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, because I remember there was a time 
20 
when Malusi will be like, in the evening, he will come 
home, then he is tired and then he will say the reason he 
does not like the Gupta’s being involved in his job.  So he 
has a PA keeping his diary.  So according to him and his 
PA, he knows how his diary work and his Ministerial team, 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 234 of 269 
 
and he has some meetings with his Deputy and other 
people.  But now when Ajay calls, so Ajay will demand 
Malusi to just leave everything and then it puts Malusi 
under pressure because Malusi was complaining that it 
makes him look unprofessional because now he will ask his 
PA to cancel the meeting and maybe people they were 
coming somewhere to see him. 
So now it was just disorganising everything that is 
the other thing that he did not like and also what I have 
noticed, it was – Malusi like certain people like Brian 
10 
Dames, Monalusi Kalawa also he had a good relationship 
with Brian, we have become family all of us and even with 
Gama we attended their wedding.  
So certain people when they were moved during like 
sometimes restructuring Malusi did not like it because he 
always have a team - how he works with them and then 
now those people are being removed, so he did not like 
that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So in paragraph 33 you continued 
really 
with that theme, where you talked about the 
20 
relationship becoming strained.  Getting around Mr Dames, 
Mr Gigaba starting to avoid telephone calls, being called to 
the Gupta residents and the fact that Mr Gigaba told you 
that Ajay told him that if he wanted to run the DPE as he 
wished he would be moved back to the Department of 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 235 of 269 
 
Home Affairs and you conclude by saying: 
“I understand that Mr Ajay Gupta would often tell Mr 
Gigaba that he should remember why he was 
appointed at the DPE.” 
And response to that is: 
“This is once again a fabrication.” 
I think it is something that you have already addressed, is 
that correct?  You have addressed this issue. 
MS GIGABA:   I have addressed this and I remember in my 
statement.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you have anything to add?  
MS GIGABA:   Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you have anything to add in 
relation to that? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not understand why he is denying this 
whole thing because it was very stressful on him and also 
the stress - because I remember at that time, where he was 
so stressed when Ajay will want Malusi to do this and this 
he will – then there was a time when Malusi would go to 
Rosebank Hospital because he started having migraines 
20 
and lots of them where he would just go there and he 
needs to take injections for his migraines.  
So his work became like - he could not control - he 
did not have control of his work.  He wanted to work to do 
his work but he could not disagree with them because I 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 236 of 269 
 
remember the other time when he had a migraine then I 
even asked him, why do you not tell them that you do not 
want to do it?  Then he said he cannot.  So it came - he 
will go to the to the Saxonwold, the Gupta’s even when 
sometimes he did not want to, sometimes he will avoid his 
call. 
And there were times where Tami[?] will come at 
home we will tell him that Ajay says you are not answering 
the calls.  No, you must try, he needs to go and then he 
will do it but their relationship was not like when he was 
10 
appointed in the beginning.  So it changed a little bit 
because Malusi felt like they were interfering in his job. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right, if you can go to paragraph 34. 
You talk about Ms Myeni having facilitated your honeymoon 
trip and you say he would often meet with her at the 
Sheraton Hotel for lunch and thereafter would go to the 
Gupta residence.  He says at paragraph 89, that: 
“I only had one meeting with Ms Myeni at the 
Sheraton Hotel.” 
How do you know that he would often meet her at the 
20 
Sheraton Hotel for lunch? 
MS GIGABA:   Because I will go with him, so what happens 
Ms Myeni used to book a room at Sheraton Hotel, and 
myself and Malusi will go there then they will have a 
meeting, then I will sit there and sometimes we will have 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 237 of 269 
 
like - sometimes then he will ask me, how are the boys, are 
they growing, and then after then ii will sit and then they 
will talk in their own meeting.  So they will to book a room 
but Dudu use to book a room then Malusi will come in, then 
they will have a meeting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at the end of 89, the remainder 
of the allegations are denied.  So what that means is that 
Mr Gigaba is denying that Ms Myeni facilitated your 
honeymoon. 
Do you stand by your evidence in that regard? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I stand by my evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Sheraton Hotel is that the one in 
Pretoria? 
MS GIGABA:   The one in Pretoria. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at 35, you said: 
“At a later stage, Mr Gigaba informed that there was 
some disagreement between him and Ms Myeni 
about certain decisions pertaining to the direction 
of SAA which resulted in tensions between them.” 
20 
He says: 
“This is a total fabrication.” 
MS GIGABA:   Even as we stand right now, they do not  
get along, if they can do that they will be just pretending 
because I remember when Malusi was taken back at Home 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 238 of 269 
 
Affairs he was very angry, he felt like the President was 
influenced more by Dudu Myeni because Dudu Myeni also 
repeated the words that were said by Ajay, that if Malusi 
does not want to take instructions, he will be taken back 
and Malusi was like, he will never touch me, because in his 
head, he has that impression that he comes first to the 
President, all the other Ministers were just - so every time 
when maybe a reshuffle will happen Malusi was - he always 
thought he will never be you know, tasks or he will only - 
he will be like the first preference to be given.  
10 
So when Dudu Myeni and Ajay Gupta said Malusi 
will be taken back, so he said something like that will 
never happen.  So when it happened, he was very angry 
and he said he knows it was the influence from Dudu 
Myeni, she had the influence on the President to take him 
back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is now back to Home Affairs? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, because on the day, I remember when 
he came back at home, so he was called in the evening 
and he was told that his going to be taken back to Home 
20 
Affairs. So you are going to be no longer a Minister of 
DPE.  When he came back home, he was so angry, and he 
just went back to the bedroom.  
And then I said what happened, what did he say? I 
thought he was fired the way he was so devastated.  Then 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 239 of 269 
 
he said, no, they taking me back to Home Affairs.  So - and 
I knew it just because of Dudu Myeni and the Gupta’s and 
then I said why you did not tell them, why you did not tell 
the President?  He said I could not raise those things, 
because there were top six around there so I did not want 
to say those things.  Then I asked him what did the 
President say to you when he was taking you back, what 
was the reason?  Then he said, the President said Malusi 
need to tighten the borders. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 37 you said that: 
10 
“On Sundays Mr Gigaba and I would regularly have 
lunch in Sandton when driving to return home I 
would overhear Mr Gigaba’s telephone discussions 
with Ms Myeni.  He would sometimes share the 
detail with me and included in that was he did not 
understand why Ms Myeni had been appointed as 
the Chair of SAA because he did not believe she 
was competent.” 
And then you go on to say various other things but at 
paragraph 92, he says: 
20 
“This is once again a total fabrication.  I did not 
have any such discussions with Nomachule as 
stated in paragraph 37.1. In any event, why would I 
question 
Ms 
Myeni’s 
appointment 
as 
the 
Chairperson of the Board of SAA when it was in my 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 240 of 269 
 
capacity as the Minister of DPE who recommended 
her appointment to cabinet.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:   Also, what his…[intervene] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He is he saying I would not call her 
incompetent because I recommended her appointment. 
MS GIGABA:   So he used to say that a lot.  He used to 
say he does not understand why the President made Dudu 
Myeni the Chairperson of SAA because Malusi felt like 
Dudu Myeni did not understand the job and also he was 
10 
interfering in the SAA Board.  He even mentioned that 
sometimes he will go attend the meetings, the Board and 
he will take some of the information and give it to uBaba[?] 
before it was given by people who need to give uBaba[?] 
the information.  
And also there was a lot of – they did not get along 
most of the time, Malusi and Dudu and Malusi used to 
question, he was like I do not like the way she works she 
does not understand the job.  I do not understand why the 
President appointed her.  So that is him, he use to say that 
20 
to me.  
CHAIRPERSON:   You just used the word uBaba[?], who 
are you referring to? 
MS GIGABA:   That is him, he use to call the President like 
that.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 241 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 38, you say that: 
“Ms Myeni told Mr Gigaba that if he do not do as he 
was told he would go back to the Department of 
Home Affairs.” 
He says at paragraph 95: 
“There was a rumour to this effect and this is 
presumably Nomachule’s source of information, I 
deny having discussed any of this with her.” 
What do you say to that? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   I do not know the rumour and I do not know 
anyone in this house knows that kind of rumour, I only 
know this thing from him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And how did you know this? 
MS GIGABA:   Because he told me.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  Paragraph 40 dealing with Mr 
Gigaba’s return to the Department of Home Affairs you said: 
“Mr Gigaba did not believe that the former 
President would transfer him back to the 
Department of Home Affairs because he 
20 
believed that they shared a very close 
relationship.” 
 
I think this is something you have already expanded 
upon.  At paragraph 97 Mr Gigaba says: 
“I do not even know how to respond to this it 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 242 of 269 
 
is simply ludicrous.” 
 
Got anything to add to that? 
MS GIGABA:  Because he does not know how to respond of 
what he should do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then at paragraph 41 you say it: 
“That Mr Gigaba therefore appeared very 
shocked and hurt when his transfer was 
announced after the 2014 elections.” 
 
And you explain that the former President told Mr 
Gigaba in front of the ANC Top 6 leaders the reason he was 
10 
being moved back and Mr Gigaba did not believe it etcetera.  
And at paragraph 98 Mr Gigaba’s response was: 
“This is again a total fabrication and pure 
unfounded speculation.  I do not know when 
it is that I appeared shocked. Furthermore, 
one is never appointed in front of the ANC 
Top 6 this never happened.  This goes to 
show the extent to which she is prepared to 
sink in order to perpetuate a false narrative.” 
 
Do you wish to comment on that? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  That is what he told me because I asked him 
why did he not ask the President why he was removing him 
from – into Home Affairs that is what he said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then we get the Gupta’s application 
for South African citizenship.  Now again I do not think this 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 243 of 269 
 
is something from what I can remember that you dealt with in 
your evidence.  I just want to in any detail I just want to take 
you through these paragraphs.  During – at 42. 
“During 
Mr 
Gigaba’s 
term 
of 
office 
as 
Minister of the Department of Home Affairs 
he informed me that he was assisting some 
of the Gupta family members to obtain 
citizenship in South Africa.  He said that the 
Gupta’s were conducting business in South 
Africa and they needed their – and that they 
10 
needed their family then living in India to be 
in South Africa.” 
 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You confirm that? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes he told me that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At 43. 
“One day in 2015 Mr Gigaba came home with 
a 
blank 
official 
documents 
in 
a 
brown 
envelope which he informed me the Gupta’s 
20 
needed to sign.  I went with him to the Gupta 
residence and on arrival Mr Ajay Gupta 
greeted us.  Mr Gigaba went with Mr Ajay 
Gupta into a separate room carrying the 
brown – same brown envelope.  When we left 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 244 of 269 
 
the Gupta residence to go home Mr Gigaba 
carried the same brown envelope with him.  
The next morning Mr Gigaba called me to ask 
about 
the 
whereabouts 
of 
the 
brown 
envelope.  He asked me to look for the brown 
envelope at home.  Later that same day he 
called again to inform that he had found the 
brown envelope in the boot of the car.” 
 
So what Mr Gigaba says is at 99. 
“This is once again a total fabrication.  This 
10 
like all the other contents of the affidavit 
seemed to have been stitched together by 
Nomachule from various media reports over 
the years concerning myself.” 
 
What do you say to that? 
MS GIGABA:  I am not sure why he keep on protecting them 
because everything you said something like he told me is 
something that I have seen.  So that incident it happened at 
home when he came back at the Gupta’s house with that 
envelope.  
20 
And also I remember when the media used to have 
like – they used to comment about the Gupta’s in the country 
why they only build – and Malusi used to be on their side 
even like the way he is on their side right now.  He used to 
say he does not understand why people are always asking 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 245 of 269 
 
the presence of the Gupta’s in South Africa because they are 
bringing the business in South Africa.   
So he used to name which I do not recall which are 
those businesses that they used to bring but he used to say 
the Gupta’s are bringing business in the country.  He does 
not 
understand 
how 
South 
African’s 
think. 
 
So 
that 
happened.  So I even asked him on the day then I was like 
what is that?  He said no they are documents because they 
need to bring some of their family members so he was 
helping them.   
10 
So when he came back the documents were in the 
boot and he forgot even myself I forgot.  So in the morning 
he was looking for them in his office asking everywhere then 
I said I do not remember where is it.  But he was like I can 
leave it at home but I do not remember.  
Then later he called when he was in the office he 
said no I found the document in the boot.  So that was – he 
was doing that. So he said he was helping them because 
they were bringing business in South Africa.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At paragraph 100 he emphatically 
20 
denied the contents and he says a suggestion of the brown 
envelope is a figment of your imagination.  You have 
addressed that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could we then go to paragraph 46.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 246 of 269 
 
Now this deals with Mr Gigaba’s appointment as the Minister 
of Finance.  You said at 46: 
“This 
change 
in 
Mr 
Gigaba’s 
portfolio 
appeared to upset him very much.  He 
informed me that the former President told 
him that he initially wanted to appointed Mr 
Molefe as the Minister of Finance finally 
decided to appoint him; Mr Gigaba at the 
request of other NEC members.” 
 
At paragraph 103. 
10 
“Mr 
Gigaba 
said 
this 
is 
again 
a 
total 
fabrication.  Why would one be upset on – on 
being appointed a Minister of Finance?”  
Etcetera.  What do you have to say to that? 
MS GIGABA:  So he was not upset that he was a Minister of 
Finance he was upset the fact that the President when he 
told him that he is going to become a Minister of Finance.  
So he said the President was acting like it is coming from his 
heart and Malusi deep down he said he knows that the 
President did not want him to become a Minister of Finance.  
20 
He wanted Brian Molefe to become a Minister of Finance.  
So – so he was like I just do not even understand why he 
acts like he is giving me that portfolio because he did not 
want me.  So I do not know who suggested that Malusi must 
become the Minister of Finance.  And I remember the time 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 247 of 269 
 
Brian was already in Cape Town.  He was staying in the – 
there was a residence for Parliamentarians yes at that time.  
So Malusi was like I know why Brian was in the Parliament it 
is because he was preparing for his appointment as the 
Minister of Finance. So when the President appointed him he 
was like he thinks I do not know that I was not his first 
preference. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gigaba says in that paragraph 103 
that he never mentioned Mr Molefe’s name to you. 
MS GIGABA:  Do you want me to say something on that? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes can you address that? 
MS GIGABA:  Oh okay.  Like… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Are you sure that he mentioned Mr 
Molefe’s name to you? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes he said that.  He said the President 
wanted Brian to be the Minister of Finance not him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that is in fact as I understand your 
evidence please correct me if I am wrong that is what upset 
him that he was effectively the second choice or the fall back 
choice. 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then can I please take you to 
paragraph 49 under the heading Gifts.  Paragraph 49 you 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 248 of 269 
 
deal with the fact that Mr Ajay Gupta gave Mr Gigaba a 
BMW. 
MS GIGABA:  Ye. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And the simple or short response to 
that is the contents hereof are denied.  Do you confirm the 
contents of your paragraph 49? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes I know because I drove that car almost a 
year and – but what I remember when that car we need to 
get the – the renewal of the disc – I think it was a year 
almost like two years when I was driving that car.   
10 
So I remember when that car needs to go to service 
or maybe wanted to get a disc and even the time when I was 
I delivered that car so his friend Malusi Matosi 00:08:58 
friends who used to do that for him especially there is this 
one friend was focussed on this car.  So who used to call me 
then we call each other Malungu because he was dark like 
Malusi so it was me way of teasing him.  So he will call me 
Malungu where are you?  Then I am like no I will tell him 
where I am and like when are you coming to Sandton or can I 
meet you I want to give you the disc.   
20 
Or sometimes he would like no I want to check the 
car when is it due for service.  So Joe used to do that for 
him.  So that was his friend. Even the day I took the car to 
drop it off when he did not come back so I was in a road 
block and the Metro Police officer said to me – do you are 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 249 of 269 
 
you aware that your lights is not working at the front?  Then I 
said I did not know.  Then he said come out and look.  Then I 
looked at the car because this was a bit in the evening.   
So when I got home I told Malusi that I am going to 
take the car to fix the lights in the morning because the 
police said that.  So in the morning Malusi was no do not 
take the car I already called my friend, take the car and drop 
it off with him so then the protectors will fetch you come 
back.   
Then I was like no but there is so many BMW’s 
10 
around where we stay in Pretoria why must I take the car all 
the way to Sandton then he was like no I want Joe to do it.  
So that was his friend.  So he wanted his friend to do it 
because most of everything that happens at our house in 
terms of the car – because Malusi does – never had a car in 
his name.  So his friends do this – those things for him.  So 
we do not take cars to service.  So I only do that when I 
have got my own car. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How long did you drive this BMW for? 
MS GIGABA:  I drove it I think a year and a half or almost 
20 
two years. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  My colleague points out to me if I 
could take you back to paragraphs 42 and 43 that – I think I 
mentioned to you that I do not think that you dealt with this 
in your initial evidence.  What has been pointed out to me 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 250 of 269 
 
that 
these 
paragraphs 
under 
the 
heading 
Gupta’s 
Applications for South African Citizenship that was one of 
the things that you said needed to be re-crafted. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I see it is not something that you have 
addressed in your correcting affidavit. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Do you – do you then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburgh have you moved 
away from the BMW? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I have – sorry I have gone 
backwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you go back. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I have gone backward.  Do you 
want to ask something about the BMW? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ja.  On the BMW unless you are 
still going to go back there ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No, no – please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes   You say you kept that car – you 
drove that car for about a year and a half? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  And then when I drop it off I drop it off at 
his friend’s place.  But I do not know why I took pictures of it 
when I was standing there at his place in Sandton and then 
when the Hawks took my gadgets so those are the kind of 
the pictures also that were deleted. All the pictures of that 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 251 of 269 
 
car are deleted on my phone 
CHAIRPERSON:  And would there be – I guess there would 
be friends and other people who knew the car when you were 
driving it. 
MS GIGABA:  Ja there were people who know that I was 
driving the car. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And did you say it was registered in 
your name or was it not last time? 
MS GIGABA:  It was in my name but very short it was 
changed out of my name then it was registered on his 
10 
friend’s name.  So when I was looking for it now I contacted 
the licence department so they told me that the soon the 
change of ownership of the car moves from the – this owner 
to another owner then everything just changed automatically 
to go another person.  So – because it was his friend. I do 
not know why Malusi changed the car from me to his friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When did you get to know that – that part? 
MS GIGABA:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When did you get to know that the car was 
registered in his friend’s name at some stage? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Oh no he did not – I think a few months I was 
driving the car Malusi told me that he wants the car to be 
registered under his friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so he – that was done while you were 
still using it. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 252 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:  Yes and I asked him why so he said because 
the time – because his divorce dragged for too long.  So he 
said he does not want that car to be there because he was 
married in community of property so he wants – he does not 
want the car to be taken away from him so let us put it on his 
friend.  So then he did it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I just wanted to take you back to 
paragraphs 42 and 43.  When you initially gave evidence you 
indicated that these paragraphs would have to be re-crafted.  
10 
But I have noted from your correcting affidavit that you do 
not deal with them.  Do you confirm then the accuracy of 
paragraphs 42 and 43?  This is your version. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes this is my version.  The only part that I 
was correcting on the old affidavit it was the word saying 
Malusi approved the neutralisation of the Gupta’s. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  Only that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is paragraph 44. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But you happy with 42 and 43. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  Then could I take you please to 
paragraph 50.  I just wanted to ask you this. You say at 
paragraph 50 that: 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 253 of 269 
 
“That we invited both the former President 
and the Gupta’s.” 
 
Who – who required them to be invited?  Was that 
your decision or? 
MS GIGABA:  No Malusi was inviting his own people – I was 
inviting my own people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So who invited the President and the 
Gupta’s? 
MS GIGABA:  It is him because those are his people not me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja.  And he says at paragraph 107: 
10 
“I furnished names of certain people I wish to 
invite including cabinet ministers and the 
like.  I do not recall all the people invited nor 
those that chose not to attend.” 
 
I think what is inferred here is he is saying he cannot 
recall whether the President and the Gupta’s were invited. 
MS GIGABA:  I know that the President was invited.  The 
reason I remember that it is because when we were in 
Durban two days 
before my 
wedding 
we 
were doing 
rehearsals and then they told us that the security people 
20 
they need to come and do sweeping so we need to move 
away from the venue and then they did that – even the 
following day they did that.  So when he did not come so I 
asked Malusi why the President did not come to the wedding 
because there were a lot of preparations for him to come. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 254 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then at your paragraph 51 you deal 
with the costs of the wedding and the gift by the Gupta’s, 
payment for the honeymoon in Dubai.  Mr Gigaba says at 
paragraph 101: 
“I deny that there was any wedding gift of 
cash from the Gupta’s or payment towards a 
honeymoon in Dubai.” 
 
Do you have comment on that? 
MS GIGABA:  On that one the reason I know that they gave 
him money I asked him like – because you were so close – 
10 
because during – in 2014 Malusi and the Gupta’s were very 
close.  So it was very shocking to me that people that are so 
close that they have like a very close relationship they are 
not attending your wedding.   So I asked him why they did 
not attend the wedding then he said they said they are going 
to give him a gift – cash money as the compensation of them 
not attending the wedding.  So I knew that the Gupta’s were 
not coming to the wedding and they were going to give him 
cash.  The only person I did not know that he was not 
coming until the wedding day it was the President. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Then if I could take you please 
to paragraph 54.  Now this is the paragraph where you 
explain that at the Gupta residence – this is the handover of 
money.  You say that Mr Gigaba would call one of his CPO’s 
to bring his leather bag – it was in the boot – it would be put 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 255 of 269 
 
at the front door – he would collect it.  Mr Gigaba would 
carry it to a private meeting room.  A short while later he 
would emerge with the bag – carry it out to the residence for 
the CPO to place in the boot.  I recall that Mr Gigaba had 
two of these leather bags.  You attach similar examples in 
photographs.  And then in 55 you go on to say that you 
subsequently came to learn that these bags had bundles of 
cash in.   
 
Now what Mr Gigaba says at paragraph 110 is that 
this is a blatant untruth and he says: 
10 
“I refer to a transcript of an ENCA interview 
given by Nomachule on 17 December copy of 
which is attached is KMG3 112.  As appears 
there from she stated that she had never 
seen me receive any cash physically and 
further that she had no evidence of me 
having received such cash.  However she 
now claims she saw me with a sports bag or 
some leather bag the evidence of which is 
drawn from internet sources.” 
20 
 
Now perhaps I could just take you to another file of 
documents.  I assume you have it in front of you.  It is 
SEQ18.  In other words that is – that is Mr Gigaba’s 
application.  SEQ18.  Alright we do not seem to have that 
Chairperson.  That is of course where Mr Gigaba’s affidavit 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 256 of 269 
 
is bundled. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It should have been here. But anyway if 
you are able to (talking over one another) 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is not a – it is not a particular 
problem.  Perhaps what I could do and of course I will raise 
this with Mr Gigaba as well and I will make sure that we have 
his affidavit here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But I just want to – to read to you a 
portion of the transcript.  This is KMG3 it is the transcript of 
10 
the ENCA interview. And this is at the foot of page 70 of 
SEQ8 of 2021.  You will recall Ms Gigaba this was worked 
through in consultation with you. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It records you as having said this: 
“Even for our wedding – our honeymoon so 
there was always there to help financially 
like all the time.” 
 
And then you said this the last five lines: 
“Although I was not there when they give the 
20 
money but I will see when we leave because 
every time when we go there he used to 
carry a bag and they will give him money.  
And we get home he will take the money and 
put it in a safe and pack it.  So yes it was 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 257 of 269 
 
there.” 
 
So what do you say to Mr Gigaba’s contention at 
paragraph 112 that: 
“She stated that she never saw me receive 
any cash physically and further that she had 
no evidence of having received such cash 
however she now claims.” 
 
What do you say to that? 
MS GIGABA:  So I will explain as the way I explained in the 
beginning.  So … 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry – this is about what you said. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  During the ENCA interview. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What you said is: 
“Although I was not there when they give the 
money but I will see him when we leave.  
Because every time we go there he used to 
carry a bag and they will give him money.” 
 
What do you say to Mr Gigaba’s version that you 
20 
effectively did not say that? 
MS GIGABA:  He did not say that?  You saying that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gigaba says that you said during 
the ENCA interview that you had never seen him receive any 
cash. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 258 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:  Because I said on the interview that I saw 
Malusi taking money at home and it was the same bag that 
he came with it at the Gupta house. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you – did you ever see him receive 
cash from the Gupta’s? 
MS GIGABA:  I have never seen them giving him money and 
that is what I said it in the interview. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MS GIGABA:  But what you – used to happen when we – 
10 
when we arrive Malusi will not take his bag with him inside.  
So then we will leave our phones.  Then some – when you 
were about to leave Malusi will come – go take his phone 
and call one of his protectors – protectors he will say Chief 
please bring my bag. So the protector will bring the bag.  
Malusi will go in with the bag and when we leave Malusi will 
take the bag with him.   
So that time I did not know what was inside – what 
was happening but one – there was this one day we were at 
home and we came from the Gupta’ house and then quickly 
20 
when I get home Malusi went to his study.  Then I quickly 
went to check the child.  When I got there the nanny was 
telling me that the child is sick.   
So I checked the temperature.  Then I felt the 
temperature was too high.  Then I rushed to him.  When I 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 259 of 269 
 
was there I saw him packing the money and then I was like – 
so I was shocked when I saw a lot of money.  Malusi was 
packing it because his safe was open.  Then I asked him I 
was like where do you get a lot of money – why so much 
money?   
Then – then he shouted at me. He was like why I did 
not knock. I did not understand why I have to knock at home 
at our own home.  Then he kept on shouting like why you did 
not knock when you come in – in the house.  Then I was like 
the child is sick.  Where do you get this money?  Why this 
10 
money then he was like I got it from the Gupta’s.  Because it 
was the same bag.   
Then I was like why the Gupta’s are giving you so 
much money?  He said it was for the elections.  So he is 
going to take it and he give it to – to the Treasury of the 
ANC. Then I was like what is it for?   
Then he said there are things that they need to do.  
Sometimes they buy t-shirts.  So he explained like that.  But 
I did not know how – I even – I remember when I asked it 
was like so why are have to raise this money yourself?  Then 
20 
he said like this is the nature of the ANC as the head of 
elections you used to raise money.  So the money for the 
elections.  And then after that he said he is coming.  He 
could – need to pack the money then I left. Then after that 
we take the child to the hospital. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 260 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry Ms Gigaba.   
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Just so that we understand.  
MS GIGABA:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You did not see Mr Gigaba. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Get money physically get money/ 
MS GIGABA:  From the Gupta compound. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  From the Gupta’s.  As I understand it 
you describe what happened. 
10 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then you describe at paragraph 55 
you say: 
“I 
subsequently 
learnt 
that 
the 
bags 
contained bundled of cash.” 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And there you explain the shopping in 
Sandton City alright. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you at – on another occasion 
20 
speak about the unpacking of the money into a safe, is that 
correct? 
MS GIGABA:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right. 
MS GIGABA:  Also when this incident happened in Sandton 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 261 of 269 
 
it was not only me alone.  His body guards also were there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry I just want you to confirm.   
MS GIGABA:  Yes I confirm. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That you did not see him. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Receive money.  You did not see 
money being put into the bag. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At the Gupta residence. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How did you come to learn that he 
received money from the Gupta’s? 
MS GIGABA:  The one that I saw him packing at home from 
the bag that he came out with from the Gupta house. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  He said to me he was – he got that money 
from the Gupta’s. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  And I asked him what was it for.  He said it 
was for elections. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes you have explained that. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And how else?  Where there other 
occasions that you came to learn. 
MS GIGABA:  We were in Sandton. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 262 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  In Sandton. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what happened in Sandton? 
MS GIGABA:  So we were coming from the Gupta’s house.  
It was me, him and his protectors so then the money – there 
was a bag in the boot.  So when Malusi came at the front 
because they used to open both of us – Malusi was on the 
outside – I was on the other side.  Then Malusi went in the 
boot and then he opened the big bag.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
10 
MS GIGABA:  That is the – the bag was coming from the 
Gupta’s house and then he took the money he put it – and 
his body guards were there also.  It was not only me.  And it 
was this stash of cash. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At 55.1 you say: 
“There were several occasions when Mr 
Gigaba and I would go to Sandton City 
immediately 
after 
visiting 
the 
Gupta 
residence.” 
 
Is that right? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   
“At Sandton City and in my full view Mr 
Gigaba would take bundles of cash out of the 
same leather bag that he had brought from 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 263 of 269 
 
the Gupta residence.” 
 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:  No.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.   
MS GIGABA:  So what used to happen. It will be a big bag. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  Okay Chairperson.  So it used to be a big bag 
that it will come out of the Gupta house then it will go in the 
boot.  So the two instances I remember at home Malusi was 
packing the money from that big bag that was coming from 
10 
the Gupta house and he confirmed to me that he was given 
that money by Ajay for the elections.  The second time it was 
in Sandton.  So he took the money from the big bag to a 
small bag.  So wherever he goes Malusi used to have like a 
sling bag that is small.  So he did not take that whole entire 
big bag.  He took the money – he put it on the small bag and 
then he took some of it he gave to his protector.  He said he 
must go and pay for his suits.  And sometimes when we are 
in Sandton we will go have lunch and then he will ask his 
body guard please go pay for my suits.  So used to go pay 
20 
for the suits.  So most of the time the money will already on 
his name bag which means he will put at home before he 
comes.  Not like all the time he would do the transfer from 
this bag. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Let me put the question another way. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 264 of 269 
 
MS GIGABA:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How many times were you together 
with Mr Gigaba in Sandton City after a visit to the Gupta 
residence?  How many times? 
MS GIGABA:  That I saw the money from the big bag 
transferred. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  It was once. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And how many times were you with Mr 
Gigaba when he bought suits? 
10 
MS GIGABA:  It was a couple of times. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And where did the money come from 
for the suits? 
MS GIGABA:  From his small bag. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  The sling bag that he used to carry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  And where did the money come 
from in that bag? 
MS GIGABA:  He only – the bag that he used to carry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes but where did he get the money 
20 
from? 
MS GIGABA:  That is what I am saying.  It was not all time 
he would transfer the money from the big bag because 
sometimes we will leave from Pretoria to Sandton.  It was 
not all the time we will leave from the Gupta compound.  
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 265 of 269 
 
Because sometimes we will just leave from home going to 
Sandton.  Malusi will say let us go have lunch in Sandton or 
sometimes we will go do our facials in Sandton.  So when we 
do that he would already have the money in the bag.  
 
I do not understand – do you understand me? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I understand.  So – so you say  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  DCJ I am told that we have to adjourn 
very urgently.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is apparently a protector related 
10 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am told five minutes break.  Let me 
– let us adjourn and let me hear what it is about.  Let us 
adjourn for five minutes and then I will come back.  We 
adjourn.   
HEARING RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  With – with Ms Gigaba about an hour.  
Okay.  I have been informed that there are security reasons 
for us to adjourn.  So I know that we were going to hear her 
evidence and then Mr Pita’s evidence.  So we are going to 
20 
adjourn.  I am sorry about that it is a situation beyond 
everyone’s control.  And then we will just have to arrange – 
if we are left with an hour with her I wonder whether we 
could do that hour tomorrow if she is available in the 
morning before we start with Mr Pita. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 266 of 269 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And perhaps we could do that remotely 
DCJ if that would be better. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – I think that we should be able to – 
we should still be able to come here. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unless we are advised differently.  I think 
we should still be able to. Ms Gigaba would you be available 
tomorrow morning?  How is your situation?  I am sorry your – 
your mic.  Just switch on your mic. 
MS GIGABA:  It depends if my … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your legal attorney. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes is available – she is available.  If she is 
available I will come. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  What is your situation like? 
ADV QOFA SC:  Chairperson depending on the allocations of 
time I think maybe if we and I would understand for the hour 
that we would be able to finish. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
ADV QOFA SC:   The suggestion Chairperson was that we 
will finish – we need another hour. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV QOFA SC:   So I was trying to understand whether the 
time we need for tomorrow will be the hour that (talking over 
one another) 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 267 of 269 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it would be an hour. 
ADV QOFA SC:   And maybe if I may ask Chairperson what 
time in the morning are we looking at so that I would have to 
reshuffle immediately. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think with regard to Mr Gigaba we wanted 
to start at nine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We wanted to start at nine tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  With Mr Gigaba.  I think we probably 
need to get an early – as early a start as possible DCJ. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Tomorrow morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Whatever you have – you consider 
appropriate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  With us sitting until as late as I 
thought we would this evening I was tempted to think well 
maybe ten o’clock instead of nine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But maybe we should stick to nine and use 
20 
that nine to ten for her evidence and then we can take it 
from there and hear Mr Gigaba. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Gigaba’s evidence after that.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then I will – I will rearrange things 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 268 of 269 
 
with Mr Pita. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With Mr Pita ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay so is that fine you would be 
here?  She says she is available if it is just an hour. 
 Yeah I (inaudible).  I will come. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will come.  Okay thank you very much. 
 Thank you Chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  DCJ sorry could I just ask you one 
thing?  Tomorrow you – we have to stop as you will recall 
10 
with Mr Gigaba at four o’clock because his counsel has got 
for religious reasons.  If I – if Mr Pita is available tomorrow 
at four. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could we try and fit him in then? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja that is – that is fine.  We will try.  
How long do you think he would be? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No well I suppose that is not going to 
work.  Perhaps I could discuss that with you in chambers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja we can discuss that ja. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright thank you to everybody 
for making it possible for us to continue up now at least.  We 
are going to adjourn then and we will continue tomorrow.   
We adjourn. 
20 MAY 2021 – DAY 399 
 
Page 269 of 269 
 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 21 MAY 2021 
